+++
title = "Cephalopod intelligence in action?"

+++
This footage of a mimic octopus raises the issue of cephalopod
intelligence which we have discussed in the past. Here the mimic octopus
is shown impersonating a flat solefish, a lionfish and a sea-snake all
of which are highly toxic animals that are avoided by potential octopus
predators. The octopus was also observed sitting on sand mounds with all
its arms raised above the body and held in a zig-zag fashion. This is
again suspected to be an imitation of the anemone *Megalactis* which
have toxic nematocysts on their arms. Beyond this dynamic mimicry of
various toxic animals the octopus also uses the usual camouflage trick
of mimicking the environment to blend into it. The mimic octopus might
also imitate large jellyfishes which are similarly toxic by dangling
their arms downwards. This octopus *Thaumoctopus mimicus* along with the
similar looking *Wunderpus photogenicus* were relatively recently
published by Norman et al from the Indo-Malayan seas (1998 and 2006
respectively). The issue is whether the behavior of the mimic octopus is
learned and whether it is deliberate. The second question appears to
have been addressed by Norman et al, who suggest that multiple
individuals display the same type of mimicry in similar situations. For
example the imitations in the above footage were observed in multiple
cases and both the sexes – the snake mimicry was only deployed against
damselfishes. While the environmental mimicry for camouflage is rather
common in cephalopods only the squid *Sepiotheutis sepioidea* has been
known to imitate both the environmental objects and other animals like
the parrotfish. Evidence for the behavior being learned is apparently
implicitly disregarded by Norman et al.

This dynamic polymorphic visual mimicry is reminiscent of the dynamic
vocal mimicry by the racket-tailed drongo *Dicrurus paradiseus,* which
was first noted by the legendary English forestman Jim Corbett. These
birds rove in mixed species bird flocks in the Indian subcontinent. In
observations carried out in Lanka it was noticed that in addition to
their own alarm calls, they also frequently used the alarm and mobbing
calls of other species as well as the calls of predators like Blue
magpie, the Crested serpent eagle and even cats. Here it is believed
that the drongo amplifies the alarm effect in mixed species flocks or
even threatens potential predators imitating calls of other predators.
The drongo is also known to be more efficient in foraging food in
association with other species of birds. Hence, its mimicry of contact
calls and songs of other species of the flocks appears to help in
drawing them to the vicinity to nucleate a flock around the drongos. The
evidence in the drongos suggests that they learn these songs and calls
dynamically and use them as per the situation. Corbett also noted that
the drongos imitate the cheetal deer. It is not clear what function this
imitation plays.

In this context it would be of interest to discover if the octopi can
learn mimicry at all. From a neurobiological stand point if this
behavioral learning is indeed possible in the octopi it would be of
profound significance – i.e. does the learning involved the cephalic
ganglia or does it entirely go via the tentacular ganglial system\!
