+++
title = "nAstika notes-2"

+++
Some enquirers had asked about the classification of nAstika tantra-s of
the bauddha variety. Hence, we shall briefly discuss this, while
mentioning the caveat that there are many classifications, just as in
the case of Astika systems. I must also stress that the literature of
the tAthAgata tantra-s is vast and much of it is beyond my very limited
education and it is being presented here only for comparative purposes
to study the evolution of Astika practice.

Usually, tradition holds that the bauddha tantra-s have 4 divisions:
kriyA-charyA-yoga-yoginI. This division is good enough to describe the
basic evolutionary scenario but has been further expanded to account for
the diversity lying in between the groups.

**-the kriyA tantra-s**: These comprise remarkable material that any
student of the mantra shAstra should examine because they preserve
several aspects of the early development of the tAntrika mantra system.
In a sense they may be seen as evolutes of the Astika mantra systems,
such as those presented in the parishiShThas of the atharva veda, the
auxiliary sAmavedic literature (we will discuss the kaumara elements in
this at some point) and the medical texts like the kashyapa tantra. Some
well-known tantra-s of this layer of the tantra-s are:  
*mahAmegha sUtra; Aryama\~njushrI-mUla kalpa; subAhu-paripR^ichCha
sUtra; susiddhi; sAmAnya-vidhInAm-guhya; dhyAnottara;
aparimitaayur-j\~nAna-hR^idaya dhAraNI; sitAtapatrA vidyA-rAj\~nI*  
We have evidence that these were the first to be translated into chIna
bhAShA. One of them, the mahAmegha sUtra, is known from a Chinese
translation from before 439 CE. This gives a general marker for the age
of these tantra-s. The Aryama\~njushrI-mUla kalpa is somewhat distinct
from the rest and along with the mahAmayurI-vidyA-rAj\~nI might
represent early influx of the kaumara material in the nAstika realm. The
mahAmegha sUtra has rain-making rituals that invoke various nAga-s and
could be seen as an evolute of the old Astika sarpa-bali ritual. In the
later surviving practice there seem to be 3 major kula-s of kriyA
sAdhana-s: 1) the tathAgata kula with mahApratisarA and the 5 devI-s,
the nAstika pratya\~NgirA vidyA, i.e. sitAtapatrA vidyA-rAj\~nI,
mArIchi; 2) the padma kula centered on jetAri amitAyus as expounded in
the aparimitaayur-j\~nAna-hR^idaya dhAraNI; 3) the vajra kula which is
centered on vajrapANi bhutaDAmara and vajravidAraNa. The former has
links with the Astika bhUtaDAmara tantra, as we have briefly discussed
before on these pages. Other kula-s are mentioned in the kriyA
literature but some of them do not seem to have survived. The tantrika
material in the suvarNa-prabhAsa, such as the mantra-s and the ritual
for the worship of sarasvatI, also belong to the kriyA layer. Some of
the kriyA material is related to early siddhi-acquiring rites. Some of
these are taught by individuals other than the sugata. For example, the
susiddhi and subAhu-paripR^ichCha sUtra are teachings of individuals
named susiddhi and subAhu – both have a major focus on abhichAra rites.
Given that even the historical tathAgata was supposed to be a
mantra-vAdin performing abhichAra rites and displaying siddhi-s this
material is probably in continuity with the early interest in abhichara
among the bauddha-s.

**-charyA tantra-s**: These are supposedly tantra-s relating to
observances, unlike the kriyA group which is described as prescribing
ritual action. However, it is hard to draw a clear line between the two.
Nevertheless, this group contains texts such as:  
*mahAvairochanAbhisaMbodhi; Arya-aShTa-devI-dhAraNI; vajrapANyabhisheka;
achala tantra.*   
One of the key deities of this group of tantra-s (as in the first of the
above) is mahAvairochana, who may also be called jina or nAtha. He is
depicted with knotted hair bearing a jewel on the crest. He is golden or
yellow with colored rays emanating from him and is seated on a lotus. He
holds a peculiar mudra and is shown meditating on the shUnyatA in the
middle of the great maNDala. In the mahAvairochana-centric charyA
material there are several tAthagata deities some of which are
associated with kula-s of goddesses. These are arranged thus around the
central deity: 1) The circle of 4 parama-buddha-s in 4 petals of an
eight-petalled lotus (ratnasaMbhava, amoghasiddhi, akShobhaya and
amitAbha). 2) These are associated with the bhagavatI praj\~nApAramitA
who is the east of the next circle. 3) In the west is achala (later
chaNDamahAroShaNa). 4) In the north is avalokiteshvara with his kula of
goddesses: tArA, bhrukuTI, yashodharA and pANDaravAsinI. 5) In the south
is vajrapANi with his kula of goddesses: mAmakI, vajrasUchI and
vajrashR^i\~NkalA. 6) Below these is the circle of shAkya muni with the
10 vaidika devatA-s and skanda condescendingly placed in their bauddha
directions. 7) shAkyamuni has two kula-s of goddess buddhalochanA,
vidyorNA and aparAjitA comprise the first; kAlarAtri, nirR^iti,
pR^ithivI and sarasvatI make the second; 8) Below this level is the
circle of kumAra ma\~njushrI with his attendant jAlinIprabha in the
east, sarva-nirvANa-viShkambhin in the south; kShitigarbha in the north
and AkAshagarbha in the west. 9) Of them ma\~njushrI alone has a kula of
devI-s: keshinI, upakeshinI, chitrA, vasumatI and AkarShaNI.  
There are more complex expansions of this basic structure dealt with in
detail in the mahAvairochanAbhisaMbodhi, but we simply describe the
above as the core template. In the other charyA tantra-s deities like
vajrapANi or achala are central in place of vairochana.

We have some evidence that these tantra-s followed the early kriyA group
and appear to marked the beginning of the emphasis on the special dIkSha
into complex maNDala-s. They appear to have been transmitted among
others by the great kShatriya mantravAdin shubhakara-siMha of oDDiyAna
to the chIna-s and other prAchya-s who joined the nAstika-mata. The
tradition of the Tibetan lamas states that the two Indian authorities on
the kriyA and charyA classes of tantras are the mantravAdin-s
buddhaguhya and varabodhi, masters of abhichAra and siddhi-s, who were
apparently revered in jambudvIpa like sUrya and soma.

–**The yoga tantra-s** appear to have made their advent with the
*sarva-tathAgata-tattva-saMgraha*. The noted Acharya buddhaguhya wrote a
commentary on the system expounded by this tantra titled the
tantrAvatAra. The main maNDala of this system is the vajradhAtu-maNDala
with vairochana at its center just as in the case of the
vairochanAbhisaMbodhi. A version of this text with illustrations of the
mantra-devatA-s was produced by the great shubhakara-siMha and
transmitted to the chIna-s. This system formalized a series of
associations of the five parama-buddha-s: vairochana’s consort became
vajradhAteshvarI and his bIja mantra was OM; akShobhya’s consort became
lochanA and his bIja mantra was hUM; ratnasaMbhava’s consort became
mAmakI and his bIja mantra was traM; amitAbha’s consort became
pANDaravAsinI and his bIja mantra was hrIH; amoghasiddhi’s consort
became tArA and his bIja mantra was AH. This tantra was soon followed by
several other yoga tantra-s such as:  
* sarva-durgati-parishodhana; sarva-rahasya; ma\~njushrI-nAma-saMgIti;
vajrashekhara-mahAguhya.*  
In the vajrashekhara the deity vajradhara assumes prominence as a sixth
Adi-buddha who emanates the remaining five, whereas in the nAma-saMgIti
the deity ma\~njushrI makes a reappearance. The paNDita vilAsavajra
composed a commentary on the nAma-saMgIti which was also an important
tantra of this class. Amongst the yoga tantra-s, the nAma-saMgIti
appears to occupy an important place in terms of being the link between
the older bauddha tantra and the great developments that were to soon
emerge. The nAma-saMgIti teaches several distinct maNDala-s: 1) the
maNDala of the 4-faced dharma-dhAtu-vagIshvara or ma\~njugoSha. The
faces of ma\~njugoSha, here, are suffused with the sentiment of
shR^i\~NgAra, the first hint of the future developments towards the
incorporation of the yoga of maithuna. Interestingly, this maNDala also
tries to completely incorporate the Astika devatA samUha by placing them
as a peripheral outermost ring. Here are also placed the pA\~ncharAtra
vyUha-s of vAsudeva headed by balabhadra. 2) The vajradhAtu-maNDala with
vairochana in the center, but in the tradition of this tantra he is
identified with the 3-headed ma\~njushrI. 3) The maNDala of
a-ra-pa-cha-na sadyonubhAva who is accompanied by the male attendants
jAlinIprabha and chandraprabha and the female attendants keshinI and
upakeshinI. 4) The maNDala of trailokyavijaya, which features the
primary deity vajrahuMkAra or trailokyavijaya, who, through lateral
interaction with the shaiva world, developed into the deity
vajrabhairava, who was to emerge as a major deity in the tantra-s that
were to follow. 5) The maNDala of vAdisiMha or ma\~njushrI as
vajratIkShNa. Here the ma\~njushrI is single-faced and two-armed. The
Tibetan tradition of this ma\~njushrI depicts him in the company of devI
sarasvatI. 6) The maNDala of vAdirAj in which ma\~njushrI is accompanied
by two deities sudhana-kumAra and the ferocious yamArI. He is the
mantra-devatA of the famous nAstika mantra: OM
dharma-dhAtu-vAgIshvara-muH svAhA || 7) The maNDala of ma\~njuvajra,
where the ma\~njushrI is with three heads. This ma\~njushrI embraces a 3
headed praj\~nA, which again points to the beginning of the yAmala of
the deity and the praj\~nA which were to become dominant very soon. He
is shown associated with 10 ferocious deities who surround him on the
vertices of an octagonal bipyramid arrangement.

As the nAma-saMgIti was already distinct in its system from the other
yoga-tantra-s, some teachers like vilAsavajra called it a mahA-yoga
tantra, and placed along with it in this category new tantra-s that
emerged after the yoga class. These new tantra-s were eventually termed
the higher tantra-s or the yogottara tantra-s, superseding the older
yoga tantra-s. Another peculiar tantra that arose around the same time
as the yogottara tantra-s was the
*sarva-buddha-samAyoga-DAkinI-jAla-shambara*. This text had the central
deities of the maNDala as emanations of the buddha-s engaged in actual
maithuna with their praj\~nA-s and surrounded by a kula of DAkinI-s.
This tantra was to be the precursor of the final group of tantra-s the
yoginI tantra-s. I am of the opinion that a version of this text and
examples of the yogottara tantra-s (see below) were in place by 650 CE.

**-yogottara tantra-s**: Examples of these tantra-s are-  
*guhyasamAja; vajramahAbhairava; mAyAjAla; vajrakumAra;
kR^iShNayamArI.*  
These tantra-s are prototyped by the guhyasamAja and the central deities
of the maNDala-s are considered emanations of akShobhya. While Tibetan
tradition tends to associate the saMpuTa tantra with the yoginI
tantra-s, the saMpuTa instead appears to have a relationship with the
guhyasamAja, which it presupposes and should in reality be in the
yogottara class. This group of tantra-s are a high-point of bauddha yoga
and mantra practice and can be discussed briefly by considering the most
remarkable guhyasamAja. Studying the guhyasamAja is also important for
an Astika mantravAdin because it contains the key to the bauddha
challenge against both the philosophical positions as well as the mantra
deployment found amongst the Astika-s. The guhyasamAja opens with the
celebrated nidAna, which in a single cryptic statement sums up the
secret yoga practice and philosophy of the yogottara tantra. The nidAna
runs thus:  
evam mayA shrutam | ekasmin samaye bhagavAn
sarva-tathAgata-kAya-vAk-chitta-hR^idaya-vajra-yoShid-bhageShu vijahAra
||  
Literally this would translate thus: Thus I have heard; once upon time
the bhagavAn had penetrated the bhaga\[-s\] of the damsels \[who are\]
the \[vajra\] body, the speech, mind, heart and \[phallus\] of all
tathAgata-s. The reference to the maithuna of the buddha with the ladies
of the kula is at the surface an explicit indicator of shR^i\~NgAra
being the upAya of becoming a siddha. However, the 40 syllables of the
above nidAna are also a mnemonic for the initial letters of 40 kArikA-s
of guhyasamAja:  
e | vam | ma | yA | shru| tam e | ka | smin | sa | ma | ye | bha | ga |
vAn | sa | rva | ta| thA | ga| ta | kA | ya | vAk | chit| ta | hR^i | da
| ya | va | jra | yo | Shid | bha| ge | Shu | vi| ja | hA | ra ||  
Thus, they are in sense reminiscent of the saMvartAmaNDala sUtra-s with
which the Astika kubjikA tantra-s, like kubjikA-mata or ShaTsAhasra
saMhitA, open. The kArikA-s themselves are not explicitly provided in
the tantra itself; however, they occur in separate works like the
pradIpoddyotana and the vajramAlA tantraM (known only in Tibetan
translation). Separate explanations, which are different from the
mnemonic expansion of the nidAna, are also given in the exegesis of
paNDita vilAsavajra. Thus, in addition to the literal sense, the nidAna
can be interpreted severally within the bauddha way of mantra-s. We
shall not go into all the kArikA-s here because they are an enormously
complicated text, requiring deep study. It goes into heart of the
philosophical system of these nAstika-s as well as their challenges to
the Astika-s \[On a historical note, a big question, which is still not
completely solved is: Did sha\~Nkara bhagavatpAda and his successors
take on the attack from these bauddha-s and whether it was in someway
related to the symbiosis between the Astika kulA tAntrika-s and the
sha\~NkarAdvaitin-s\].  
The first kArikA:  
e : ekAro.api satI praj\~nA virAmAdi-kShaNAtmikA | etan-mUlaM
vinirdiShTaM parij\~nAnaM bhava-traye || (For this kArikA, I am using
the text edited and emended by late Alex Wayman, the great American
scholar)  
It might be roughly rendered thus (With a text like this one cannot be
too sure one captures the nuances correctly): ‘e’ is verily the lady
praj\~nA (the nAstika equivalent of shakti or dUtI) having the nature
\[or of the form\] of the instant of the pause and the like \[virAma=the
consonantal end like k or g without a vowel\]; this root is pointed out
as \[said to be\] the experience \[perception\] in the three worlds.

This is better understood by considering it in the context of the
fundamentals of the mantra-shAstra expounded in the saMpuTa tantra. One
way of understanding the first kArikA is that the root cause of the
experience of the worlds is due that great lady, the goddess of the
system (sparshavajrA), who is the experiential goddess of akShobhya
\[The Rubin museum in navyarkapura in krau\~nchadvIpa has an
extraordinary painting of akShobhya conjoined with sparshavajrA that is
worth seeing\]. She is depicted as the vowel ‘e’, which in the brAhmi
script (or nAgarI) has the shape of the yonI by which she is symbolized.
Of course, this is also the symbolism behind ‘e’ in shrIvidyA’s first
kUTa. The virAma kShaNa appears to indicate that instant of the
consonantal pause, or the hiatus where the “pure experience” is
manifest. A full explanation for this not easy to render in words
because it requires, in addition to a knowledge of texts of the Indic
tradition, a certain gnosis shared only by mantra-shAstra insiders.

Multiple maNDala-s are laid out in the guhyasamAja tantra, e.g.
akShobhya, kumAra ma\~njushrI and lokeshvara. The most notable of these
in extant practice is that of akShobhya, which is comprised of 32
deities – 9 female (the yoShit-s) and 23 male. The central deity is the
tathAgata akShobhya who is described in the first chapter of the
guhyasamAja as being emanated by mahAvajradhara. He is 3-headed, with
black, white and red faces. He holds in his hands: vajra, chakra and
padma(right); bell,chintAmaNi and sword(left). He embraces sparshavajrA,
also three-headed, and they kiss each other via their central head. In
the heart of akShobhya is seated a deity called the j\~nAna-sattva (not
included in the 32) and he embraces a red praj\~nA. In the heart of
j\~nAna-sattva is found the bIja hUM in a black color. In the heart of
sparshavajrA is found the bIja khaM.

Finally, we find that in the yogottara tantra-s the nAstika-s become
extremely aggressive in organizing abhichAra rituals in support of the
buddha-sainya and to destroy the Astika mantra-vAdin-s. This goes in
parallel with the doha-s of the nAstika-s like talika-pAda, the fallen
brAhmaNa, who condemns the worship of prajApati, rudra and viShNu and
other deva-s. The most important of these prayoga-s in the guhyasamAja
is the vajra-stambhana, which is actually a deadly mAraNa prayoga. It
claims that it can succeed even if an Astika mantravAdin paralyzed the
buddha-sainya with his own prayoga. Here the nAstika invokes vajradhara
to paralyze of all Astika and jaina Acharya-s by imagining vajradhara
and his attendants at the point of a 3-pronged vajra placed on the head
of the enemy like a mountain to crush him. Similarly, the
vajramahAbhairava tantra of this category also pays considerable
attention to abhichAra rituals using the 10-syllabled secret mantra of
the bhairava. This tantra has been lost in its saMskR^ita original and
is not available to us for study, but translations of the text in
Tibetan and Mongolian are available (translated from them by B.Siklos)
and describes the buffalo-headed deity vajrabhairava as a manifestation
of ma\~njushrI. The abhichAra rites here include those such as mAraNa
prayoga with a yantra placed between two kapAla-s, and another involving
poisoning of the victim using dhattUra.

**-yogini tantra-s:**  
These represent the last phase of the evolut-s: 1) A close imitation of
the bhairava tantra-s of the shaiva-mantra mArga and 2) In the opposite
direction a virulent anti-Astika streak, mainly directed at shiva, but
also viShNu, brahmA, indra, manmatha and others. We get the sense of the
nAstika-s as our rebellious and bellicose child wanting to overthrow the
parent, yet unable to break free from the pervasive parental bond and
dominance. This element is seen throughout the evolution of the
nAstika-s but the “tension” is most apparent in the evolution of the
yoga tantra-s and their successors, the yoginI tantra-s. As we noted
before the Astika devatA-s are accommodated as a peripheral component of
the maNDala-s of the charyA tantra-s. In the yoga/yogottara tantra-s the
counter-currents heat up: The bauddha-s created myths of destruction and
transformation of the Astika devatA-s \[we have described some of these
on these pages before\] but simply cannot give their identification with
the Astika devatA-s. This is best illustrated by a statement in the
yogottara tantra, the guhysamAja:  
*kAya-vajro bhavet brahmA vAgvajras tu maheshvaraH | chitta-vajra-dharo
rAjA saiva viShNur maharddhikaH ||* GST 17.19 \[I have emended
chitta-vakra in the va\~Nga paNDita Benoytosh Bhattacharya’s edition to
the obvious chitta-vajra \]  
Here the “vajrification” process involves vajrapANi who is mentioned as
becoming brahmA through the vajra body, maheshvara through the vajra
speech and viShNu of great opulence through the vajra mind \[Note a
similar vajrification we described earlier on these pages in the
chANDamahAroShaNa tantra of the yoginI group\].

It was within this matrix that a minor deity of the crematorium,heruka,
rose to be the center of the yoginI tantra-s. His beginnings are
suggested by the Astika kAlikA purANa (63.135-137.5):  
*shmashAnaM herukAkhyaM cha raktavarNaM bhaya\~NkaraM |
asi-charma-dharaM raudraM bhu\~njAnaM manujAmiSham || tisR^ibhir
muNDa-mAlAbhir galad-raktAbhi rAjitam|
agni-nirdagdha-vigalad-danta-preto-paristhitam || pUjayech-chintanenaiva
shastra-vAhana-bhUShaNaM |*   
Here, in the kAlika purANa, heruka is described as a deity in the
shmashAna who is of blood-red complexion, frightful and fierce, holding
a sword and shield and eating human flesh. He is mentioned as being
decked with 3 garlands of severed heads with dripping gore. He is
mentally worshiped in the crematorium upon a burning corpse. The kAlikA
purANa 67.69 states that heruka was also worshiped in a li\~Nga in a
shmashAna at kAmAkhya. I was informed by the vaiShNava that in the
original sarva-buddha-samAyoga-DAkinI-jAla-shambara, which is a
precursor of the yoginI-tantra category, heruka is described as a
similar shmashAna deity who fights against mAra-s and such demons. In
the core yoga tantra, the sarva-tathAgata-tattva-saMgraha, we note that
an elaborate myth is created to describe the subjugation of rudra by
using anti-maheshvara mantrAstra-s like “OM sumbha nisumbha hUM” or “OM
nisumbha vajra hUM” (clearly the bauddha-s are adopting Astika asura-s
as elements of their mantra-s; we have described some of this before).
This myth was combined with heruka to create a new story in which heruka
specifically emerges as an emanation of vajradhara as an imitation or
reflection of shiva, while being his nemesis. Though akShobhya is
admitted as the “head tathAgata” of the yoginI tantra-s in continuation
with the yogottara tantra-s, it was deities in this heruka form and
their wives, the yoginI-s, who were to emerge as the central focus of
this system. The heruka form in the foundational myth of these tantra-s
is depicted as fighting shiva who is at the head of a retinue of 62
beings: 24 bhairava; 24 yoginI-s, wives of the bhairava-s; 4
multi-colored umA-s; the 8 mAtR^ikA-s; umA-devI; shiva. The 24
bhairava-s are depicted as being in the 24 great shiva-sthala-s, which
are subsequently conquered by the heruka and his forces for the
bauddha-mata. The 24 sthala-s are:  
4 pITha-s: 1) oDDiyAna; 2) jAlandhara; 3) pullIyamalaya (here a Tamil
word is used: most likely the rudra temple in chidambaram) 4)
arbuda-parvata (the temple on mount Abu in Rajasthan)  
4 upa-pITha-s: 5) kapAlishvara on the godAvarI; 6) rAmeshvara; 7)
devIkoTa (most likely the city in Bengal ruined by the Moslems); 8)
mAlava  
2 kShetra-s: 9)kAmAkhya; 10) oDra; 2 upakShetra-s: 11) trishAkuni;12)
ayodhyA (koshala)  
2 Chandoha-s: 13) kali\~Nga; 14) lampAka; 2 upach-Chandoha-s: 15)
kA\~nchipuri; 16) kailAsa (himAlayA)  
2 melApaka-s 17) pretapuri (Tibetan sources state that this is Tibet);
18) gR^ihadevatA;  
2 upa-melApaka-s: 19) saurAShTra; 20) suvarNadvIpa (generally taken as
Indonesia)  
2 shmashAna-s: 21) nAgara; 22) sindhu; 2-upashmashAna-s: 23) maru; 24)
kulatA  
In each of these spots there are supposed to be svayambhu-li\~Nga-s in
which the bhairava-s are venerated. To take them out, vajradhara
emanated 62 beings headed by heruka and his consorts, including
mahAsukhadevI-s to counter the umA-s and samayadevI-s to counter the
mAtR^ikA-s. They started behaving like maheshvara and his gaNa-s,
wearing tiger-skins, osseous ornaments, imbibing blood and holding
gaNa-chakra-s in crematoria. Then they absorbed the consciousness of
rudra and his gaNa-s, so that rudra would become the tathAgata of ash in
the future, and sat on the preta-s of their counterparts and removed the
duality between them. The 24 bhairava-s are usually stationed in 3
circles of 8 each around the central deity of the heruka maNDala-s.
Likewise, they may also be surrounded by 8 DAkinI-s corresponding to the
8 mAtR^ikA-s. Thus, from relatively transparent myth preserved by the
Tibetan Lamas we can see that the bauddha-s appropriated bhairavAchAra
whole scale via the medium of the heruka deities of the yoga tantra-s.

The heruka-s and their corresponding yoginI-s of the yoginI tantra-s
assumed several distinct forms which resulted in the proliferation of
several distinct forms of these tantra-s:  
chakrasamvara with vajravArAhI – chakrasamvara-tantraM  
hevajra with nairAtmyA – hevajra tantraM  
chaNDamahAroShaNa with vajrI – chaNDamahAroShaNa tantraM  
buddhakapAla with chitrasenA – buddhakapAla tantraM  
kAlachakra with vishvamAtR^I – kAlachakra tantraM  
mahAmAyAhva with buddhaDAkinI – seen in sAdhana-mAlA

Additionally, the vibhava of viShNu, hayagrIva, who was already
incorporated into the bauddha maNDala-s in charyA layer, came of his own
as a heruka figure: hayagrIva with his yoginI who is either mArIchI or
vajravArAhI. However, the root yoginI tantra of hayagrIva appears to
have been lost (though there are clear allusions to it in Tibetan
sources) and his sAdhana-s appear in the sAdhana mAla.

The eight yoginI-s who in the heruka myth are supposed to counteract the
8 mAt^ikA-s of rudra’s assembly and surround the central heruka figure
also might differ from maNDala to maNDala. This arrangement also might
not be something new to the yoginI tantra-s. In an earlier period they
(as saptamAtR^ikA-s) were incorporated into a maNDala from an obscure
kriyA tantra, the vidyottama-tantra. Here the tathAgata, calls the
Astika goddesses rAkShasI-s and asks them to be a part of his maNDala,
surrounding the bodhisattva vajrapANi. They are to be worshipped on the
day before a full-moon with mada, mAMsa and rakta by a bauddha
mantra-vAdin in order to attain extraordinary siddhi-s. However, in the
yoginI tantra layer they are no longer the sapta-matR^ikA-s called
rAkShasI-s by the buddha but accommodated for the siddhi-giving rituals.
Instead, they come of their own as major goddess, just as the
aShTa-yoginI-s and their derivatives of the kaula system among the
Astika-s. Thus, we encounter octagonal assemblages such as:  
Clockwise from 6 o’clock position (south) surrounding hevajra: chaurI,
chaNDAlI, vetAlI, DombinI, ghasmarI, pukkasI, gaurI and shabarI.  
Clockwise from 6 o’clock position (south) surrounding buddhakapAla:
kAminI, AkAshavAsinI, pAtAlavAsinI, pitAmbarA, saubhadrA, sauNDinI,
chitrasenA and chaturbhujA.  
As the yoginI-tantra-s developed we find that the yoginI-s (i.e. the
female consort of the central heruka and their female retinues) assume
prominence and take a life of their own as the sole deities of their
maNDala-s. Thus, these maNDala-s become ekavIrA or with the goddess
alone at the center. This evolution may mainly be traced through the
“explanatory” tantra-s that sprung out of the chakrasaMvara substratum
and include the following main tantra-s:  
*abhidhAnottara; vajraDAka; saMvarodaya; DAkArNava; yoginI-saMchAra;
chatur-yoginI-saMpuTa; herukAbhyudaya.*  
Of these tantra-s the major move towards the ekavIrA maNDala-s are seen
in yoginI-saMchara and chatur-yoginI-saMpuTa and feature the mighty
goddess vajravArAhI. In addition, tArA, a female deity of the charyA
tantra layer (in all likelihood she had a charyA tantra of her own but I
am not aware of one surviving in Sanskrit), started rising tremendously
in parallel with the yoginI tantra developments and broke free as an
ekavIrA deity of her own. She moved away from her charyA beginning and
via lateral interactions with her Astika form and the yoginI-tantra-s
and kaula tantra-s(Astika) started acquiring a distinct system of her
own. Along with her, her attendant ekajaTA also rose to prominence.

The Astika interactions in the yoginI-tantra layer are pretty clear and
we shall only very briefly touch on them here. The development within
the shaiva system, where the female deity acquires prominence in the
kubjikA, trika, kAlI, and tripurA systems, was mirrored in the bauddha
system with the rise of vajra-vArAhI. The yoginI tantra’s foundations
seem to be clearly direct lateral transfers of the shaiva bhairava
tantra-s and this interaction continued through the kaula developments.
The yoginI tantra-s also appear to have been influenced by
pA\~ncharAtra, especially the north-eastern flavors of it: The
incorporation of hayagrIva as heruka is one element of this. It is
especially correlates with his form as the devatA of the hayagrIvAstra
mantra-s, which might be amongst most powerful of the Astika astra
mantra-s. The hevajra tantra also appears to have incorporated the
nR^isiMha of the 8-headed type into its 8-headed hevajra vidyA. As we
alluded to earlier, saura elements appear to have been incorporated too.
The kAlachakra tantra is the clearest example of this, where the initial
sections on calendars seem to come from the Astika saura version. As we
speculated before chaNDamahAroShaNa might have also shown saura
syncretism.

Towards the end of the yoginI-tantra period a new geopolitical scenario
was facing the dharma – the catastrophic whirlwind of the Meccan demons.
The marUnmatta-s and their turuShka followers had already smashed many
of the centers of the nAstika-mata and it was much worse than iconoclasm
of their sthaviravAdin cousins from shrI-lankA and sindhu who were also
demolishing the temples of hevajra in Bodhgaya. Their only hope was
reuniting with the parent. I am not sure if this was the cause (I
suspect it was so), but we anyhow see certain late syncretic
bauddha-Astika systems. From the viewpoint of the yoginI-tantra-s the
most important of these was the system of ChinnamastA, wherein both the
Astika and nAstika forms are well-mixed through reciprocal lateral
influences. A similar phenomenon also began within the independent tArA
system as mahAchina-krama-tArA was incorporated in the Astika system.
The last of the core yoginI tantra-s was the kAlachakra tantra which is
written in good saMskR^ita and is a very comprehensive system. It
appears to represent the pinnacle of the bauddha yoginI system, and was
probably composed by a well-educated brAhmaNa. After this period we
mainly see compilation of mantra manuals, which were usually termed the
sAdhana mAlA-s. They contain series of sAdhana-s irrespective of the
layer of the tantra they belong to, but mainly the yoga, yogottara and
yoginI layers. By the time of the kAlachakra we note that the bauddha-s
have realized the evils of the marUnmatta-s and pretAchArin-s and are
already hoping for the coming of kalkin, who along with the Astika
deities will destroy these plagues of the world.
