+++
title = "Asia and geopolitics"

+++
The mettle of any nation or for that matter any individual is tested in
war or strife. That is why we are inspired by the image of the
soma-drinking thunderer:  
“AshuH shishAno vR^iShabho na bhImo ghanAghanaH kShobhaNash
charShaNInAm|  
saMkrandano.animiSha ekavIraH shataM senA ajayat sAkam indraH ||”  
But the modern Indian “elites” appears to have lost the ardor of their
ancestors even as they stopped their rites to the lord of the gods.  
Years ago the third hero was up to date with all the geopolitics of the
age and he would inform us of loka-vyavahAra with brimming interest. I
used to be amazed by how he gained this intricate and hard to find
information. In my own circles those who were geopolitically aware, were
a mere fraction of the third hero in their knowledge, with the exception
of ekanetra. Over the years I continued to maintain a healthy
geopolitical interest and furthered my analysis, but the third hero
declined to a state of childish imbecility. In a recent meeting he
displayed a level of ignorance way below everyone else in the quriltai –
almost bordering on that of a dAtra-mudgarau wielding JNU graduate. It
was this encounter that brought me to the unpleasant topic of the Asian
situation.

As we have seen before on these pages, we are pitted in the
civilizational clash with three major forces: 1) the pretAcharin-s
headed by the shveta-charman-s of the krau\~nchadvIpa and their
secularized parent population from Western Europe, also known as the
mlechCha-s. 2) The chIna-s guided by imperialist legalism which is
cloaked under socialism. 3) The turuShka-s also known as the
marUnmatta-s. Of these, our millennial enemies, the turuShka-s are
considerably weaker than the other two. Yet they have two advantages: 1)
of being lodged inside our own lands 2) of being able to sell themselves
to the chIna-s and the mlechCha-s to gain an advantage again.

If we look at recent history, the mlechCha-s have been greatly stretched
due to the disastrous advice given to the former mlechChAdhipati by the
neo-cons and the crooked faced upa-mlechChAdhipati. They launched a
futile invasion of Iraq with no notable gains and ignored Afghanistan
where their dear concubine TSP is having fun at their expense. While the
mlechCha-s have had great success in subverting the South Koreans to the
pretamata, they have hardly made any headway against the chIna-backed
North Koreans. While the mlechCha-s have succeeded in emasculating Japan
with two nuclear bombs and the subsequent formatting of their “hard
drives”, they have only strengthened the chIna-s. The chIna-s do not
have the limitations of Japan and have spent time to learn to play a
more cunning game. As they were beginning to assert themselves in the
1960s (including by savagely invading and grabbing our territory), the
Russians put them in place in brief encounter exactly 40 years ago. The
Russian drubbing of the chIna-s was something that the third hero had
ironically studied in great depth as a youth. We realized that this was
of great importance in providing us respite from the chIna-s. But the
chIna-s having learned their lesson tried to seek secret cooperation
with the mlechCha-s in undermining the Russians. The Russians by aiding
the Vietnamese punctured both the mlechCha-s and the chIna-s and poured
water on this alignment of vectors. However, the great war of gandhAra
allowed both the mlechCha-s and the chIna-s to screw the Russians by
using the turuShka-s as the proxy. As the Rus and mlechCha-s fought in
their epic struggle the chIna-s kept out and kept building their armory.
At the end of the shIta-yuddha the Russians had been routed and the
mlechCha-s had dismantled their empire. This made the chIna-s all the
more powerful and their aims were clearly to rival the victorious
mlechCha-s.

The operation of the chIna-s is understood poorly by most outsiders. The
old rAjan jAvAharlAl was an example of this. Starting with the notorious
Shi Huang Di of the Chin, they developed a system of cloaking the inner
political infrastructure of legalism with outer coats. These coats are
used both to fool their own people as well as outsiders depending on the
situation. This inner legalism-outer coat model also allowed the chIna-s
to imitate the dominant geo-cultural trends of the age while retaining
an inner control and identity via the legalist structure. Originally it
was the outer sheen of Confucianism coating legalism, while in the
Sui/Tang period the outer coat included the bauddha-mata while retaining
same the inner pattern. In more recent times this outer coat has
included socialism and more recently “Westernism”. This duality allows
the chIna-s to interact and participate successfully with the dominant
geo-cultural trend while retaining a certain inner identity. This inner
identity is also projected inside the sphere of the dominant
geo-cultural trend by careful image building. One striking example is
that of the British biochemist Joseph Needham who was attracted to the
chIna-s due to the shared common outer core of socialism. But he was
soon used by the chIna-s to project an enormously positive image of
their intellectual achievements to the world. While there is no question
of the genuine achievements of the chIna-s, it is clear that Needham has
exaggerated and over-attributed stuff to the chIna-s. Even today in the
US the government pays to have exhibitions and seminars on ancient chIna
medicine. In contrast, other civilizations with comparable achievements
are typically denigrated by the west and negatively portrayed. Another
aspect of this image building has been the acceptance of the chIna-s as
equals or superiors by the western system. This aspect is based on a
variety of factors such as: 1) the chIna-s exploiting the mlechCha
fascination for shveta-tvacha and presenting themselves as
shveta-charman-s too. 2) The chIna-s trying to project themselves as
having higher IQ than the mlechCha-s (something which feeds into
Galton’s early chIna fascination that has remained in the mlechCha
world). 3) Taking up mlechCha names and emulating aspects of mlechCha
culture to make the mlechCha-s feel comfortable with them. As a
consequence the mlechCha-s have gained respect for the chIna-s and have
a positively larger than life image of them. Finally, the mlechCha-s
have in quest of an unnecessarily lavish lifestyle shipped away much of
their production and debt to the chIna-s, creating a dependency. All
this image-building has made the chIna-s themselves feel a sense of
superiority and entitlement to world dominance.

Coming to the original chIna invasion of bhArata in the 1960s, we
observe the following: The chIna-s smashed the Hindu forces rather
swiftly and conquered our territory with impunity. In response all we
could do was to go crying to the mlechChAdhipati for help, remember, not
the Rus who were supposedly our friends. The mlechCha-s were hardly
going to help us for free and demanded that we hand over our shiras to
their turuShka friends in the north-west. In desperation, our defrauded
rAjan was willing to capitulate to the mlechCha demands in return for
aid against the chIna-s. The chIna-s swiftly realized the issue and
decided not to squander their territorial gains in further encounters,
decided to call off any further invasion and returned the Hindus whom
they had taken prisoner while occupying the newly captured territory.
Earlier, when the chIna-s conquered Tibet absolutely no one could do
anything to stop them. Today the mlechCha-s and bhArata-s humbly
acknowledge Tibet to be a part of the chIna empire. Certain key points
should be understood:

1\) While the mlechCha-s would give us some aid if chIna-s attack us
outright, it will be at the cost of emasculating us on the turuShka
front – they are really not interested in us getting strong.  
2\) The mlechCha-s really cannot do much by way of aid because: 2.1)
they have less familiarity than us in any of these regions. 2.2) They
are finding themselves stretched by their recent military adventures
(they could do nothing against Russia in Georgia). 2.3) They are
themselves held by the balls by the chIna-s due to the manufacturing and
debt issues. 2.4) A large faction amongst them prefers the chIna-s to us
due the above-described image building.  
3\) Like in the 1960s, our army is disastrously underprepared for a
great war. This has been admitted recently by the chiefs of staff of our
senA.

But why is this chIna-issue coming to the fore right now for bhArata? It
is clear that chIna-s are gearing up for their long cherished dream of
world domination. This plan includes multiple aspects: 1) The chIna-s
see the mlechCha-s as their ultimate rivals in world dominance to which
they feel entitled. 2) But through the 1990s and early 2000s the Hindus
actually grew in their capabilities despite the numerous pricks and cuts
from the turuShka-s. This created a local challenge for chIna-s. 3) Due
the peculiar vicissitudes of the yuga, the Hindus started sliding closer
to the mlechCha-s (Several Hindus too have a deep fascination and
attraction towards “westernism”). In the chIna eyes this westward slide
made the Hindus from a local challenge to a real cause of worry. From
the chIna angle other geopolitical points are also relevant. The
mlechCha-s have freed their Eastern front by emasculating Japan. They
have neutralized the mlechCha-s and others in Korea. They have
threatened the mlechCha-s enough to avoid them from intervening in
Taiwan. They have used the mlechCha-s and diplomacy to contain Russia.
So their arms are free to strike their only immediate concern in Asia –
bhArata. But at the same time their own conquered populations like the
Tibetans and Uighurs are in a state of unrest, they are having a surplus
of single males and internal issues to due the mismanagement by the
communist party and economic issues. The chIna-s sensed that due to a
napuMsaka ruler in bhArata, the Vatican subversionist and the general
sapping of the Hindu cultural ardor by mlechCha va\~nchaka-s the Hindus
have a vulnerability despite their economic successes. Further, they
have realized that the Indian monsoons have failed which has added
strain to the basic Indian infrastructure. The spreading H1N1 influenza
virus epidemic and the accompanying conspiracy theories spreading
through the Indian population are also seen as potentially demoralizing
factors that might tie down the Hindus. So they see this as an opportune
moment to tackle bhArata – it helps to both direct their stirring
people’s attention outwards and also to remove an obstacle in their
quest for world dominance. This is amply evident from the rhetoric and
saber-rattling recently emanating from the chIna-s. The Hindu generals
realized that unless the country awakens there would be no hope of
countering the chIna-s invading bhArata – hence their statements are no
surprise.

In an extreme scenario the chIna-s have multiple objectives in this
direction: 1) To gain territory by seizing Hindu lands with Eastern
Eurasian ethnic majority (Arunachal, Ladakh, Sikkim and parts of the
North East, as also probably taking Nepal and Bhutan). These regions can
be used to dump the excess Han males and make them take local females.
2) Demolish East and North Indian cities to curb any hope of Indian
economic competition with them. 3) To weaken the Hindu military in
Kashmir to allow the turuShka-s to do what they have not succeeded in
thus far. 4) To destabilize southern, central and eastern India via
internal socialist terrorists so that, on the whole, India becomes
unattractive to the west. This would neutralize any Indian competition
to the chIna quest for dominance.

The naive Hindu thinking has been that the nuclear deterrence would hold
chIna-s from doing any such thing. Some others felt that the chIna-s
would need to use nukes to achieve a successful dominance over India and
are unlikely to risk that. Yet others say that the chIna record has been
one of avoiding bringing major wars on themselves. However, I see that
situation as unique enough that they are likely to risk it, perhaps even
in this year itself. Whatever the case, I remain deeply concerned of the
possibility that the chIna-s could achieve many of the above objectives
without nukes entering in the equation – i.e. using conventional forces
backed by the internal socialist terrorists, just like the Khmer rouge
in Cambodia. One of the main reasons for this is not so much
technological superiority as the sheer numerical superiority that also
our undoing in the 1960s.  
Some very approximate numbers:  
chIna senA:2.25\*10^6; bhAratIya senA:1.3\*10^6  
chIna vimAna-s:2300; bhAratIya vimAna-s: 1300; while our LCA is still in
the works the chIna slave factories are producing numerous yuddha
vimAna-s of their own, even if they are of low quality.  
chIna nAva-s: 250; bhAratIya nAva-s:145; however we have an aircraft
carrier that they lack, but they are working on acquiring one. We have
also recently produced a nuclear submarine to counter the similar nAva
of the chIna-s.  
chIna astra-s: the Deng Fongs; bhAratIya astra-s: agni-V. While there
are astra-s which can reach chIna the true competitor for the Deng
Fongs, agni-V is yet to fly and go into mass production.  
chIna-ANavAstra-s: 100-400; bhAratIya AnavAstra-s: 100-300  
In terms of military logistics I fear that chIna-s might have
considerably more transport aircraft than us. In light of all this I
would not be surprised if we are in for an existential crisis from the
imperialism of our North Eastern bhai-s.
