+++
title = "In the genes"

+++
My mAtAshrI was reading out a piece of kAvya written by one of us. I
remarked it must be composed by the muni. But she claimed it was written
by me. This sort of puzzled me because I had no recollection of ever
having written it and it had so much lexical concordance with some of
the muni’s pieces. She pointed to an annotation made on it by you would
not believe whom (Did you guess it, since you read these pages) – this
made me feel a slightly embarrassed. But then it also marks the earliest
evidence of the journey, which was to culminate in some of the greatest
conquests thus far. Then I realized that the insipid versification and
utter failure at alliteration did point to me, rather than a real kavI
like the muni (He is a bharadvAja, while am a mere shaMyu :-)). Yet, the
similarity in our words and metaphors was striking –whether we wrote on
scientific or daiva themes. Then she read out a pA\~ncharAtric kAvya of
the muni which completed this convergence of metaphor. While not as
educated as me on the prayoga viShaya-s of this branch of the
mantra-shAstra, it became clear that our intuitive understanding of the
very heart of pA\~ncharAtric mantra-s was congruent. Interestingly, the
muni had also composed an elaborate shrIkula kAvya, which I seem to have
unfortunately lost. Here again in his poem I could feel the congruency
of the imagery of mantriNI, vArAhI, bAlA or the most high tripurA in his
words with that which only exists in my mind when enlivened by the said
devatA. It then struck me that in the days of my versification I never
shared it with the muni and I was not around when he began versifying.
Yet the convergences of content and mantra vision (or devatA vision as
the muni might tend to term it) that we realized post facto are quite
striking. It was then I realized this vector derives from the genes.
