+++
title = "A note on some recent work on Indianxa0genetics"

+++
Recently the English scientific tabloid published an article on the
genetic variation in Indians which has led to some excitement among the
Hindus. The reactions of what appears to be the majority of
internet-active Hindus were rather predictable and keeping in line with
their rather visible symptoms of emotionalism and feeble-mindedness. The
paper with 4 first authors lead by Reich does not present anything
fundamentally new with respect to the central problem at hand — namely
the genetic affinities of Hindus. However, it does reinforce what was
previously known and expected. We shall consider two things here: the
results and the spectrum of slow-witted Hindu reactions. The study
covers 25 Indian populations with 2-9 individuals sampled per
population. These include varNa populations such as kashmirian
brAhmaNa-s, vaishya-s of northern and southern India, shUdra-s of
southern India such as kamma-s and velama-s (could be fallen
kShatriya-s), north Indian kAyastha-s, several avarNa-s of northern and
southern India such as madiga, mala, lodi etc and niShAda-s and kirAta-s
(tribals) such as che\~nchus, bhilla-s, santhAl-s, Ao Naga, the
Andamanese and even African settlers such as siddi-s. This is the weak
part of the study – the sampled populations are very spotty, their
number relatively small and the number of sampled individuals in
population are small. The paper further makes errors in classifying the
castes according to non-existent schemes that are alien to the Hindu
concepts of jAti-s and varNa-s. The study however sampled 560,123
autosomal SNPs, which makes it larger than any other such study on
Hindus, and is the main strong point of this work. The work presents a
picture of Indian ancestry that largely confirms conclusions from
various previous studies but provides the weight of a genome-wide survey
of variation.

[![Indian\_genetic\_var](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3536/3982392709_78e99250fd.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3982392709/ "Indian_genetic_var by somasushma, on Flickr")  
The first two eigenvectors of the PCA analysis. Only select populations
are labeled and the estimated % of ancestral Western Eurasian ancestry
(ANI as per the authors) is given for some populations.

When presented in a principle component analysis with Chinese and
Europeans the Indians, the first and second eigenvectors separates the 3
populations. But most Indians show an interesting “^” distribution of
relationships to the other two populations falling along two lines
pointing towards Chinese and Europeans respectively. Along the line
pointing towards the Europeans are distributed the all varNa, most
avarNa and some niShAda populations. There is some correlation between
caste rank and north Indian location and the closeness to the Europeans.
Thus the kashmIrian brAhmaNa-s are closest to the Europeans in this
sample, followed, northern vaishya-s, kAyastha-s and south Indian
shUdra-s. Towards the other end of this line are south Indian avarNa-s,
northern and southern tribals such a bhilla and che\~nchu-s. Some
exception features are seen in the halakki tribal farmers of the karnATa
lands. About half the individuals are relatively close to Europeans
(roughly to the extant of southern shUdra-s), while the other half are
only as close as other tribals such as bhilla-s and che\~nchu-s are to
Europeans. Further, the southern vaishya is farther from the Europeans
than southern shUdra-s such as kamma-s or velama-s. On the other line,
very close to the Chinese are the Tibeto-Burman speaking Ao Naga and
Nyshi tribes. Closer to the main Indian populations, but on the “Chinese
line” are the Austro-Asiatic speaking santhAl and khAria. At the point
of intersection of the two lines are the kuruMba tribes. However, there
are others who are in the angle in between these two lines — these are
the tribes such as the sahAriya and tharu and the satnAmI people. When
the lATa sample from HapMap was added to the results of this work it was
found that a subset of them was located on the line pointing to the
Europeans, overlapping with north Indian vaishya and kashmIrian
brAhmaNa-s. However, another subset of lATa-s showed a peculiar descent
and could be the gurjara.

The former British spy Patterson and Price develop a method to analyze
the populations as a combination of tree-like branching from a common
ancestor and admixture. Based on this they model the evolution of Hindus
as one of admixture of an “Ancestral South Indian” population that is
closer to the Andamanese Onge and an “Ancestral North Indian” population
that is closer to Western Eurasian. While this is base model their own
data suggests that things were more complex. My interpretation of it is
thus: The term Ancestral South Indian is an unfortunate one because it
is clear they were all over India at one point, given that there is some
admixture of them even in the kashmIrian brAmaNa-s. So they are better
termed the proto-Indians. Their genetic contribution is particular
strong in the kurumba, the che\~nchu and bhilla tribes and several
southern avarNa populations. They are more distantly related to the
exclusion of all other groups to the Onge of the Andamans. So the
proto-Indians appear to represent a very early wave of Homo sapiens
emanating from Africa and moving into the sub-continent and all the way
to Andamans where they go isolated for at least 25,000 years. It would
be interesting in this context to investigate the vedda-s of shrI lankA.
At some point early Austro-Asiatic speakers appeared to have moved into
India from the East and admixed with the proto-Indians giving rise to
tribes such as Kharia and Santhal. Much latter the eastern
Tibeto-Burmans appear to have invaded in northeastern parts of the
country probably in several distinct waves. These together constitute
the line connecting the Indian populations with the Chinese. On the
other side as we have discussed here before multiple times Western
Eurasians started entering India through the northwest. There might have
some early invasions of this population that mated with the
proto-Indians contributing the Western Eurasian ancestry perhaps even in
the Neolithic. Archaeology suggests that the IVC/SSVC and associated
chalcolithic spread was one major contributor of Western Eurasian genes,
while linguistics points to the spread of Indo-Aryan languages and
culture as a major contributor. After the entry of the Western Eurasian
peoples, there appears to have been further admixture between them and
the already established Austro-Asiatic-proto-Indian tribal admixture
(e.g. in North Indian groups like saharia, tharu and satnAmI).

However, interestingly, the relationship between the archaeological
attested Western Eurasian intrusion (SSVC/IVC) and the linguistic one
(Indo-Aryan) still remains somewhat unclear. Nevertheless, the case for
the intrusion of western Eurasian genes is now rather strong based this
new data, along the lines of the arguments we have earlier presented
here (e.g. there is clearly no evidence for the proto-Indian population
to have dispersed into Western/Central Eurasia which would be required
for the “Out of India” theories). A study of Indo-Aryan tradition shows
that they clearly originated in northern climes outside India. This,
combined with the constantly streaming genetic data on Indians indicates
that most parsimoniously the Indo-Aryan language and tradition that
defines India (bhArata) was actually carried along with the “genes” by
the invading western Eurasian contribution to India. This puts to death
the Talagerian fantasies (shared by many confused Hindus) of out of
India movements of Indo-European. It also largely crushes the language
teacher model of certain indologists, like a notorious German from
Harvard, wherein the Indo-Aryan language but not genes are contributed
to the proto-Indians. The study of vedic argues against Dravidian being
a substratum to Old Indo-Aryan. The genetic data argues against
Austro-Asiatic having been a substratum. This incidentally kills another
hypothesis of the same Harvard Hindu hater. This leaves us with little
room with respect to the language of SSVC/IVC and associated
chalcolithic cultures — it was either indeed the distinctive language X
or Indo-Aryan. The Dravidians only much later entered the Indo-Aryan
cultural complex in Southern India as the wave of Aryanization spread
southwards.

Using their tree-admixture model simulations they obtain the following
results:  
80,000-60,000 yrs BP (4,000 gens) split between Sub-Saharan Africans and
Eurasians  
40,000-30,000 yrs BP (2,000 gens) split between Western and Eastern
Eurasians  
34,000-25,500 yrs BP (1,700 gens) proto-Indian-Andamanese Onge split.  
8000-6000 yrs BP (400 gens) split of Europeans and Adygei (time frame
for origination of IE?)  
4000-3000 yrs BP (200 gens) beginning of admixture between proto-Indians
and Western Eurasians — implies that the Aryan invasion happened
sometime before that.

Now let us look at some political aspects in the form of the reactions
to the paper. The most remarkable reaction was the set of interviews
given by the Indian authors of the paper. One of them remarked: “There
was no truth to the Aryan-Dravidian theory as they came hundreds or
thousands of years after the ancestral north and south Indians had
settled in India.”; “…genetics proves that castes grew directly out of
tribe-like organizations during the formation of the Indian society”.
Another remarked: “When you look at the origin of the Indian population,
the Onges in the Andaman Islands are dated to about 65,000 years ago,
and the European population is dated to 40,000 years ago. So the
question of Europeans coming to India does not arise. The ancestral
North Indians must have given rise to the European population.” Now one
wonders how they are saying something exactly opposite to what they say
in the paper. In the paper it is mentioned that the mlechCha Reich wrote
the paper, but how is it that the deshI authors who gave him the samples
kept quiet if they interpreted the result in a diametrically opposite
way\!

Next on some Indian internet fora that I visit I noticed that many had
gone berserk. There were the usual brahmadviS-s who were hurling venom
on the foreign and North Indian brAhmaNa-s forgetting all the while that
the paper had suggested that even they might be up to half Western
Eurasiatic in their origins. Yet other assorted Hindus well crying
conspiracy and invoking assorted specters ranging from Talageri to the
old dead Germans like mokShamUla to their modern counterparts haunting
the rooms of Harvard and Columbia. They insisted that the Aryan invasion
was dead and OIT was destined for a long life, not realizing that their
much cherished OIT had just been blown to smithereens. Others posing as
geneticists and statisticians claimed that they had already established
AIT to be false that this new data was of no consequence — little did
they realize that this new data was merely confirm what was already
clear from other analysis. Finally, in the British tabloid a geneticist
of Indian origin Aravinda Chakravarti was invited to write a commentary
on the article. Putting on the pretensions of a historian he wrote: “The
idea and shape of modern India was an invention of its twentieth-century
political leaders, who crafted citizenship defined by civic and
universalist, rather than ethnic or religious, criteria precisely
because that citizenship is so diverse.” Little did he realize that it
was hard to find a modicum of meaning in that sentence. The shape and
the idea of India modern or ancient was not an invention of its leaders.
They were merely lucky inheritors of a tradition forged upon a
distinctive geography by Indo-Aryan culture, by the vehicle of Sanskrit
and its vulgar prAkR^ita sisters. Then Chakarvarti goes on to quote
Nehru who talks of “invisible threads” holding together the wildly
diverse Indians. It is hardly surprising that to the progressive chAchA
these threads were invisible or perhaps he was just too coy like his
dynastic successors to state that this thread was the dharma. What the
genetics has shown is that there is another such thread binding a large
subset of the Hindus and this is one of shared genes. The Chakravarti
informs us that: “… Austro-Asiatic speakers arrived in India about
60,000 years ago. They were dispersed and driven into smaller enclaves
with the arrival of the Dravidian speakers around 3000 BCE. The latter
people were themselves driven south with the arrival of the
Indo-European speakers in about 1500BC.” One wonders what qualifies
Chakravarti to write such nonsensical commentaries in the tabloid. As a
geneticist he is certainly conversant of divergence rates. He probably
realizes that this also applies to languages. How come Austro-Asiatic
arriving at 60000 hardly shows the divergence commensurate with that
age. He bothers not to inform himself about the linguistic substratum in
old Indo-Aryan, the nature of Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian peoples and
even archaeology but dishes out the above statements like facts.

In conclusion, all we can do is to just repeat what we said earlier. The
Indian scientists, the Hindu thinkers and intellectuals appear to be
clueless about their own past and how to handle the picture emerging
from such studies. Denial and ignorance seem to be the only strategies
they have offered such far. Is it any surprise if the mlechCha-s overrun
the Hindus sheltered behind such defenses?
