+++
title = "prakIrNaviShayAH"

+++
The ever malignant viDbhuk decided to take advantage of the absence of
the sachiva who had gone to aid the 4th hero to attack the amAtya. We
intimated the amAtya of the clause in the dharmasUtra-s regarding
AtatAyin-s and that the time had come for observing it. The mantra of
vAmadeva gautama was uttered to invoke agni who is called rakShohA and
sent forth like a dart shot by sharva. And then the mighty thunderer,
the slayer of vR^itra was invoked to make the dasyu bend before the
Arya. The viDbhuk sent a cheTaka at the Amatya. It was like a collyrium
heap and gruesome with kusha-like hair sticking out from above the ears.
It attacked first at night when the amAtya as alone but the amAtya bold
defended against it despite the fear it raised. The amAtya quickly
realized what was happening and prepared the pratikriyA. The viDbhuk
sneakily sent out a tiraskarin to prevent the amAtya from seeing the
cheTaka. But luckily pre-warned by experience and aided by the vinAyaka
rite the amAtya remained unfazed. But upon the second coming of the
cheTaka the amAtya was prepared and unleashed the powerful
counter-attack with brahmaskanda. The cheTaka went up in vapor like a
missile of sAtyaki ending the somadatta-s. The yakShiNI netravatI showed
that the viDhuk was raging like duryodhana when the pAshupatAstra fell
on jayadratha on the 14th day.

We feared that kR^ishamukha might go to a fight with ST. But
kR^ishamukha was held up in a great series of yuddha-s of his own and
this did no happen (ST: I am sure he has quit the turf of asmAlloka and
he is unlikely to ever cross your path).
