+++
title = "Is dhattUra really mentioned in thexa0arthashAstra?"

+++
In the recent past people have generally believed that the arthashAstra
represents one of the earliest mentions of dhattUra (*Datura metel*)
that is believed to be of pre-Columbian New World origin. Is the mention
of the dhattUra in the AS for true? It supposedly comes in the section
on liquors and is believed to be mentioned in 2.25.33 along with a whole
range of other plants. These plants are supposed to be additives to
produce flavored drinks. The manuscripts used by Kangle in his edition
of the AS have the word pattUra and not dhattUra. One of his manuscripts
termed G1 has it as vattUra. Kangle notes that G1 was copied from a
source in the malayALaM script in which ‘va’ and ‘pa’ are close and can
be conflated (also seen in Tamil grantha e.g. avamAnaM for apamAnaM).
Hence, in all likelihood it was pattUra and not dhattUra. The general
belief is that pattUra is a distinct plant, namely *Achyranthes
triandra* or *Alternanthera* or generically some member of
Amaranthaceae. So it is unlikely that the toxic *Datura* was being added
into the liquor of the arthashAstra.

Likewise, I have not seen any evidence for the mention of this plant in
the two itihAsas or charaka, the earliest of the 3 great medical
saMhitA-s of the Hindus. While the domain of artha is apparently lacking
in unmatta, the kAmasUtra of vAtsyAyana does seem to have it. It is
mentioned in 7.1.25 as a component of a concoction that is applied on
the li\~Nga (dhattUraka-marica-pippalI-cUrNair madhu-mishrair
lipta-li\~Ngasya samprayogo vashI-karaNam). If there is any reality to
this claim it might be the supposed erogenic role of tropanes. Likewise,
both dhattUra and pattUra are apparently mentioned in the medical
saMhitA of sushruta. Thus, the kAmasUtra and the sushruta saMhitA happen
to be the earliest surviving texts with a mention of the dhattUra plant
in the old world. The absence of evidence is not necessarily evidence
for absence. However, it should be noted that the number of references
to dhattUra in the texts that temporally post-date these two texts only
increases. In the Astika and nAstika tantric literature (as noted in the
latter by the Eastern European scholar Siklos) the plant is very
prominent along with much older plants that are already found in the
atharvan literature (e.g. apAmArga). This might give us a means of
fixing temporal window of the introduction of dhattura to India. Of
course this later introduction would leave one uncertain about the
psychoactive substance used by the vedic muni psychonauts. In the RV
(10.136) the muni-s are mentioned as using a viSha (also possibly
AV-paippalAda 5.17.3 where the word unmatta is used in connection with
the muni), but in light of the above there are serious doubts if it is
dhattUra as otherwise assumed.
