+++
title = "nAstika-s before the tathAgata and thexa0nirgrantha"

+++
An essay by shrI sarvesha tivArI pointed me to some discussions that in
turn reminded me of a debate with my parents’ jaina neighbors on a visit
to bhArata long ago. He was narrating how vardhamAna was just the last
in a long line of nirgrantha-s who had existed yuga after yuga by the
side of the sinful vAsudeva-s such as kR^iShNa and rAma, and the
kR^ityA-s of their age such as draupadi and sItA. Even as these
vAsudeva-s and their prati-vAsudeva-s clashed in epic battle committing
much violence the nirgrantha-s of their age practiced and taught the
dharma of ahiMsa or the path of the jina beside them. However, none of
these great nirgrantha-s who preceded vardhamAna ever find a place in
the old itihAsa-purANa and are found only in the mangled versions of the
same presented by later jaina authors. To a certain degree the tathAgata
too similarly holds that his prior manifestations were around in the
time of the heroes of the itihAsa. In large part we can argue that this
is retrofitting, but did the two great nAstika-s really come out of
nowhere and that too almost at the same time? From textual analysis of
such nAstika purANa-s it is rather clear that most of the claims of the
nAstika-s in the pUrva yuga-s are retrofitting. These texts were
composed relatively late as reactions to the Astika works, rather than
being independent traditions of past events. On the other hand White
Indologists and their fellow travelers, who are eager to place
practically all Hindu texts after the arrival of the two nAstika-s,
compound the problem by emphatically declaring all signs of nAstika mata
to imply the systems of vardhamAna and siddhArtha, rather than their
precursors.

A jaina mantravAdin who was very generous to me with culinary and
intellectual hospitality took on this issue in a no holds bared
discussion. He was rather unique among the nAstika-s in being
well-conversant with Arya shAstra-s. He agreed that the purANa-s of the
nAstika were probably reactionary in nature but made the following
arguments to present his case for even earlier nAstika presence (along
with my (counter) arguments and other comments if any):  
1\) The RV speaks of muni-s who were vAtarashana (RV10.136.2):  
*munayo vAtarashanAH pishA\~NgA vasate malA  
* This implies muni-s “girdled with air” i.e. nirgrantha-s or those
wearing yellow rags – an image typical of Indo-Aryan ascetics of a later
time.  
\*I agree that these R^igvedic muni-s are indeed early ascetics;
however, rather than being jaina they are clearly proto-pAshupata-s
because they are described as drinking a narcotic oShadhi, the kunannamA
ground by vAyu from a vessel along with rudra (RV 10.136.7):

2\) The taittirIya Aranyaka further clarifies who these vAtarashana-s
are. In describing the mantra-s of the aruNaketuka chayana in which the
chiti is comprised of bricks in the form of vessels filled with water it
mentions the emanation of vipra-s from prajApati:  
*sa tapo.atapyata | sa tapas tapatvA sharIram adhUnata | tasya yan
mAMsam AsIt tato.aruNa ketavo vAtarashanA R^iShaya udatiShThan | ye
nakhAH te vaikhAnasAH | ye vAlAH te vAlakhilyAH | 1.23.91-92*  
When prajApati shook his body after performing tapasya from his flesh
arose R^iShi-s known as aruna-s, ketu-s and vAtarashana-s, from his
nails vaikhAnasa-s and from his hair(?) arose the vAlakhilya-s.  
\*Some take this not mean real R^iShi-s but astronomical entities:
aruNi-s and ketu-s are comets and likewise vAtarashana-s could be some
other phenomenon like meteors.  
3\) However, the TA further clarifies vAtarashana in TA 2.7.1 in the
context of providing a brAmaNa explanation for the kUShmANDa mantra-s:  
*vAtarashanA ha vA R^iShayaH shramaNA Urdhvamanthino babhUvuH |  
* The R^iShi-s are said to have sought the vAtarashana-s who were
shramaNa-s but they vanished and “entered” the kUShmANDa mantra-s. There
the R^iShi-s are said to have found them by means of their shraddha and
tapas.  
Now commentators like sha\~Nkara bhagavatpAda and sAyaNa imply shramaNa
to mean parivrAjaka. Additionally sAyaNa takes UrdhvamanthinaH to mean
UrdhvaretasaH. Our jaina scholar implied that all this means the
vAtarashana was a nagna, parivrAjaka and also a celibate (Urdhvaretas)
and hence it implied a jaina muni. Thus he argued that there is evidence
in the veda for the jaina system having existed side-by-side.  
\*But we must keep in mind that there is nothing specifically jaina
here. The Urdhvaretas is in fact entirely compatible with a pAshupata
(rudra the puruSha is described as Urdhvaretas himself in a pAshupata
mantra: R^itaM satyaM…). The vAtarashana-s of the tattirIya are clearly
teachers of Astika lore such as kUShmANDa ritual and are described as
seers of vaidika hymns (most likely the keshI-sUkta). We must also keep
in mind that the bR^ihadAraNyaka regards the shramaNa as an Astika,
rather than a nAstika ascetic. It is also not clear if the term
vAtarashana meant a nirgrantha as interpreted by many. Since the same
muni it the RV is described as being clad in yellow rags, it is
conceivable that he was not really a digaMbara. Rather, vAtarashana
might imply that he was just surrounded by vAta or simply wandering in
the open without a home to contain him.

As previously discussed, these references indicate that there is no
doubt about the presence of an ancient Indo-Aryan ascetic substratum
from which different forms of early Indo-Aryan Astika ascetic
traditions, such the pAshupata mata arose. There is no indication that
these traditions referred to in the veda are nAstika as the nirgrantha
mata.

However, other evidence does suggest a pre-vardhamAna and pre-siddhArtha
nAstika tradition. For this evidence we have to turn to an ancient
narrative preserved in the mAhAbharata in the speech of arjuna to
yudhiShThira (shAnti parvan, chapter 11).The tale narrated by arjuna is
referred to as an ancient itihAsa (*atraivodAharantImam itihAsaM
purAtanam*):  
Certain youth of good families before having attained adulthood
renounced their homes and families and departed to the forest to live
there as celibate ascetics abandoning vedic rites. indra out of
compassion for their wrong ways went up to them in the form of a golden
bird and pointed out their folly. He instructed them that the foremost
of the words are the mantra-s and it is the duty of brAhmaNa-s as the
first varNa to perform rites with mantra-s. Those who abandon the vedic
karman incur pApa. The true asceticism is not renunciation and life in
the forest but living in the midst of ones clansmen, performing vedic
rituals to the deva-s, manes and entertainment of guests with good
gifts. The ascetics having heard those words of shakra then gave up the
nAstika path and returned to their homes:  
*utsR^ijya nAstika gatiM gArhasthyaM dharmamAshritAH |  
* Here, it is clear that the ascetics were termed nAstika because they
were departing from the way of the veda. The narrative is clearly
archaic because its primary protagonist is indra and not any of the gods
who were ascendant later (as seen in other parts of the bhArata). It
teaches a distinct concept of the primacy of vedic ritualism which is
also central to the older system typical of the brAhmaNa-s and their
mImAMsa successors rather than a sectarian atimArga teaching typical of
other parts of the bhArata. Thus, this text might actually indicate the
early nAstika-s before the rise of the famous two. Now is there any
other evidence for these nAstika-s? Clearly they were contrasted with
the vaidika ritualism, and when we look for this feature we do not have
to go far – we are led to the upaniShad of the atharvan-s, the muNDaka.
This text is strikingly similar to the position that is exactly
antipodal to that taught in the Mbh by indra. The muNDaka denigrates
vedic ritual or karman and instead praises the insights of the forest
dwelling renunciate. But other parts of the muNDaka have elements of a
genuine atharvan text. So it is possible that this text actually
represents a production of an early nAstika who used an older atharvan
text to insert his heterodox material. Indeed, the muNDaka taken
together with the AkhyAna in the bhArata, shows that the early nAstika-s
arose within the Indo-Aryan ascetic matrix and specifically targeted the
performance of vedic rites. Now the muNDaka also illustrates how these
nAstika-s also followed what may be termed subversion from within, by
posing as the correct interpretations of vaidika tradition (this is
again hinted in the initial reply of the ascetics to indra in the
mahAbhArata narrative). Later on we see that siddArtha was following the
same dynamic – as we have described before he was posing as a true
inheritor and correct interpreter of the old path. The only difference
was that he used the vulgar language of the lay. Had he followed his
brAhmaNa advisers and redone his work in Chandas, then perhaps we may
have included the early bauddha as part of the Astika tradition. But
vardhamAna and maskarin goshAla were more radical – they simply pursued
the trend started by the muNDaka more vigorously to simply drop the
lip-service the shruti. So in a sense probably these famous nAstika-s at
beginning of the great nAstika phase of the dharma were remembering
these older dissenters within the old Indo-Aryan ascetic matrix when
they claimed that their precursors had existed in the purva yuga-s.

However, the great god might have not been as kind on other occasions.
There is an ancient sUkta of the bhArgava-s (indra juShasva … AV 2.5)
that is used in a permuted form during the great ritual of the
ShoDashin. In this it is said that indra slew the yatI just as he
crushed vR^itra. In his commentary sAyaNa explains that the yati-s are
the brood of the asura-s who are parivrAjaka-s. In the brAhmaNa-s we
repeatedly hear the tale of the yati-s being done over to the hyenas by
indra. Here sAyaNa describes them as being ya\~jnavirodhIjanAH. The
jaina scholar hazarded that these yati-s were the early nAstika-s. While
this is plausible the evidence is hardly strong – we are hardly given
the reason why the yati-s were fed to the hyenas. In the account in the
pa\~nchaviMsha and jaiminIya brAhmaNa-s, indra spares 3 of the yati-s
from being eaten. These he supports and they attain the gifts of
brAhmaNa, kshatriya and vaishya status by praising indra with 3 sAman-s
which are synonymized with them: rayovAja, pR^ithu-rashmI and
bR^ihadgiri. While the yati story is tantalizing if anything the
survivors are at least firmly within the vaidika fold rather than being
nAstika.

In conclusion we see that there were early dissenters among the
Indo-Aryan ascetics who might have deviated from the path of vedic
ritualism. These can indeed be seen as predecessors of the famous
nAstika-s as they shared some general features with them. However, it is
unlikely that they represented the specific traditions of the kshatriya
nAstika-s siddhArtha and vardhamAna or the enigmatic goshAla. As we have
seen earlier on these pages the primary rivals who were portrayed as
being “conquered” in the bauddha lore are the brAhmaNa-s who upheld
vaidika tradition. In this regard the last tirthankara is similar. His
primary converts are brAhmaNa-s – these are called gaNadhara-s. The
foremost amongst these was indrabhUti gautama of the a\~ngirasa lineage.
Only after the nirgrantha converts 10 brAhmaNa-s does he spread his
message more generally, using these initial converts as his messengers.
In the narrative of the conversion of indrabhUti it is said that he was
performing a great shrauta yAga. The deva-s were called for the soma
offering but he saw that instead of coming to him they went over to
attend a lecture by vardhamAna. Furious he challenged vardhamAna for a
debate but was defeated by the nagna and made a nAstika. This indrabhUti
rose considerably in importance in the jaina lore and was nearly deified
by the shvetAmbara-s. Further the jaina lore claims that when
sacrificial altars of the brAhmaNa-s were excavated below them were
found images of the nagna-s indicating their primacy over the vaidika
dharma. What these observations indicate is that even though there
earlier nAstika traditions they were quite weak even at the time of the
origin of the two nAstika-s. Thus, even though like to portray
themselves as having long independent history we see that they are
closely associated with their primary rivals – the mImAmsaka brAhmaNa-s.
