+++
title = "The story ofxa0Mn"

+++
We have referred to Mn under many disguises. He was and remains the
master of concealment and image-building but the muni had seen through
him early and summarily dismissed his disguises. The muni had formerly
made him the topic of his hilarious one-liners in his study of English
vocabulary. Why waste time on Mn one might ask? Well, in this declining
age of the kali we need to understand the causes of why our foundations
are being swept away. Importantly his tale offers an example of how
buddhi does not necessarily mean viveka – much like the old tale of the
brAhmaNa-s who brought the tiger back to life. Mn was enormously learned
and intelligent — before him all of us were like mere fools. Every
object of learning he mastered with ease and always knew more on any
subject than others around him. In the days of yore he applied himself
to the practice of Hindu ways. He identified himself as a Hindu and
performed his rituals regularly. He corrected the errors in our
understanding of the yajurvedic anunAsika which had come due to the
wrong instruction of the sachiva. The amAtya was awfully scared of his
great power of disguise and felt we might be fooled by it. But little
did the amAtya know that a fool we might have been, but not so great a
fool. As Mn grew older he became less of Hindu and he spoke dismissively
of the rituals of a brAhmaNa. But now he was an Indian nationalist. He
knew everything of geopolitics and how important it was for India to
curb TSP and TSB. He foresaw trouble in Nepal and the Taleban, and he
wanted India to conquer Shri Lanka\! He endlessly spoke of the weapon
systems of the Indian military and of missiles and nukes. Then Mn
reached the shores of the mlechChadesha a little after I had done the
same. He was now a big man in every sense of the word. He now said
different things. He now said TSPians are very good people and we must
not talk ill of them as they are our people. Amazingly, he had forgotten
every iota of geopolitics and asked us why we waste time on “politics”.
He constantly genuflected before powerful mlechCha-s and sang their tune
what ever it may be. If a mlechCha said something Mn would say it is
cool. He spoke of how a Hindu should not criticize Mohammedanism and
Isaism for it was a mean thing to criticize others religions while
praising ones own. His relatives warned him about the evils of the
religions of peace and love but Mn admonished them not to be mean. He
had forgotten his gotra — he even claimed he did not know what a gotra
meant. He had forgotten his veda and he claimed it was something the
pUjAri-s do in temples. No, Mn had not decreased even a delta x in his
intelligence, but in his viveka he had regressed beyond where he was as
child. He is not alone — as ekanetra and the va\~Nga paNDita noted so
many around us have gone the way of Mn.

People used think Mn was a non-conformist and I was conformist. But the
wise amAtya felt the reality was reverse. Indeed therein lies the answer
to mysteries such as Mn.
