+++
title = "The third enslavement?"

+++
The coming of the marUnmatta-s resulted in our first loss of freedom.
The leukotestate indologists and their xanthotestate fellow travelers
from the eastern fringe of the world told us that it was no enslavement
but a cultural enrichment (Hey, we at least get to call the zilebia and
the samosa India food). After the mlechCha-s had been packed out of our
land ending our 2nd physical enslavement, our eminent netAji-s, who were
usually prone to pulling Gandhis, at least tested ANavAstra-s. Most
mlechCha-s with whom I have spoken feel no remorse about the killing of
the 220000 prAchya-s (minimum) with their ANavAstra-s. In fact, some of
them expressed pride and all of them offered all kinds of self-serving
justifications. When asked about their well-documented plan to keep
dropping several ANavAstra-s on the prAchya-s the mlechCha-s tell us of
course they would have done it and there was nothing wrong in that plan.
At least the mauryan publicly recanted his killing of 100,000
kali\~Nga-s with mere shalya-s and showed remorse for the act for the
rest of his existence. It is for reasons such as this we describe the
mlechCha-s as barbarians. These same mlechCha-s endlessly pontificate to
us about giving up ANavAstra-s — verily only a fool who thinks himself
to be a paNDita will use this famous mlechCha-nyAya. But with the
turning wheel of the kali things has come to such pass that it appears
that we have verily become such fools. The truth is that some of our
ANavAstra-s might have been damp fizzes, much like the occasional wet
viSphoTaka we would experience in the dIpotsava-s of yore. But the
turbaned and shrouded napuMsaka-s who pass off as pUjya netAji-s these
days do not want the people to know any of this. Why is this the case?
After all now a days we have no kShatriya-s ruling us but a mere
gaNarAjaya where the klaibya nIlashirastrANa is elected by the masses.
So should the klaibya not do what the masses want? That would be the
case only if the masses really demand it. But what has happened is that
the masses have been put to sleep with krIDa and kAma that they no
longer bother if they really have an ANavAstra or not. To drive the nail
in to the coffin the paramapUjya netAji-s are repeatedly lying to the
people of bhArata claiming they have the astra. In the mean time they
are selling the rAShTra to those same mlechCha-s who have murdered
hundreds of thousands of people in a nimesha. Truly we are poised to
enter our 3rd enslavement — what does it matter if it is directly under
the mlechCha-s, their pretAchArin proxies or some regional opportunist
like the chIna-s or the marUnmatta-s. Even the woman, who in the Kazakh
entertainment unties the horse knot with her teeth, might feel safer
than this forsaken woman called bhAratI.
