+++
title = "An account from Lama tAranAthaâ€™s history"

+++
During the reign of pa\~nchamasiMha lived two brothers who were
AchArya-s of the tIrthika-a. One of them named dattAtreya was supposed
to teach the doctrine of samAdhi. The second named sha\~NkarAchArya was
a worshiper of mahAdeva. He chanted mantra-s on jar with a covered lid.
From the jar mahAdeva would emerge up to the neck and teach the art of
debate. In va\~Nga he entered into debates with the bauddha-s and
defeated them repeatedly. The bauddha scholars wanted to call in
dharmapAla, chandragomin or chandrakIrti to debate with sha\~Nkara, but
the local paNDita-s did not want their prestige to go down with
outsiders coming to save their face. They decided to take on sha\~Nkara
himself and were defeated by him in debate. As a result 25 bauddha
centers fell to the tIrthika and 500 bauddha-s gave up the saMgha to
become shaiva-s. Similarly, in oDivisha appeared a disciple of
sha\~Nkara called bhaTTAcharya. He had been made an expert in nyAya by
the daughter of brahmA. A bauddha AchArya kulishashreShTha approached
him in debate proud over his strength of grammar and logic. But he was
routed in the debate with bhaTTAcharya and as a result bauddha-s had to
forfeit their slaves to the tIrthika-s. The tIrthika-s now occupied the
temples of the bauddha-s. In the south were two mighty tIrthika
polemicists, the brAhmaNa named kumArlIla and kaNanAda (could it be
Tamilized corruption of gaNanAtha; the Tibetan is:
gzegs-ma-sgra-sgrorg). The latter was a shaiva (pAshupata) who observed
the govrata. In many debates in the south they routed the successors of
buddhapAlita, bhavya, dharmadAsa and dignAga. Similarly not one
belonging to the shrAvaka saMgha or a sthaviravAdin was able to stand
them in a debate. As a result many of the saMghA had to go over to the
tIrthika brAhmaNa-s and the latter robbed the saMgha of its property.
