+++
title = "Have the Hindus givenxa0up?"

+++
I did not want to write this and instead try to finish the train of
thought on avian imprinting. But a long conversation with a reader of
these ramblings :-) made me at least park a little note here. Long ago
we had remarked that the much maligned Hindutva was a real upwelling of
the civilizational consciousness of the bhArata-s, if at all there is
something like that. We were not original in proposing this idea, from
the incisive author VS Naipaul to the Aditya Prakshan vaishya
intellectuals like Ram Swarup and Sitaram Goel this notion was being
broadcast within the discerning circles. We immediately realized its
importance because the mlechCha-s were alarmed at this and took all the
steps to subvert it. In fact little did the average Hindus know that the
mlechCha civilization came into being after an enormously successful
subversion operation carried out by their founding fathers under the
aegis of Constantine, the son of an Italian barmaid living in Bithynia.
The parallel cannot be more complete – we got our own Italian barmaid
planted in indraprastha and her Catholic son groomed for the subversion
of bhArata. All this happened within a few years of the pipe dream of
the Hindu rule under the fake vAjapeyI going bust in the elections. The
BJP never recovered from this election and can hardly be considered a
Hindu hope. Despite the turuShka-s battering the Hindu nation, the
Hindus seem as dormant (or extinct?) as the Deccan lava. What has
happened to that much vaunted Hindutva? Not even a whimper … Is it dead?
If this is true the situation for bhArata is grim – even if we get a
great Julian, he might just be that – a Julian. My own feeling is that
the Hindutva movement does have an Achilles heel, and it is so bad that
it might not even be in a position to produce a hero like Julian. Why do
I say this –educated Hindus must read the remarkable works by the Greek
scholar Polymnia Athanassiadi, especially her biography of Julian.
Hindutva, after Savarkar onwards lacked an intellectual foundation.
Those who pointed this out were termed critics, who failed to appreciate
the enormous selfless action performed by the RSS. We do appreciate
their action, but a puruSha with only arms but no head is not a fully
functional puruSha, especially when the mlechCha subversionist inserts
his implants into the empty head. Sadly Hindu intellectuals are still
amateurishly grappling with AIT, flogging the osseous remains of bhaTTa
mokShamUla and repeating a shloka preserved in the bodhAyana shrauta
sUtra while patting their backs all the time. Is this brutum fulmen
going to help? Indeed this subversion is not unrelated to what we
learned from the subversion of the drongo by the koel or the cuckoo.

So what happened with Hindutva? Very early on the thinkers of the
Hindutva movement like Savarkar and even our coethnic VVS understood the
need to develop a reliable political front end that could participate in
elections, in addition to the daNDadhara-s and saMkula-yoddha-s in the
form of the RSS. However, this political front was never very attractive
to the masses: The Hindutva party (the mahAsabhA) wanted to support the
Britons so that the Hindus could gain military experience by fighting
the Nazi army in North Africa and Europe. A good strategic and
farsighted move, but a politically it was a sinker. It was the time when
the hero of the Anglosphere, but verily the Hitler for the Indians, the
disgusting, wretched Winston Churchill, was planning and enacting a
genocide on the Hindus. In this atmosphere there is hardly going to be
any political success for a party which actually espouses joining
Churchill’s war. In fact the perfidious Britons were planning to support
the Mohammedans as a “gift” for the Hindus helping them win the war
against their leukospheric cousins the Germans. All the way the
Anglosphere kept patting itself on the back for defeating Rommel in
Africa, without giving even an iota of credit for the Hindus who did the
critical fighting to win the war (A student of WWII would note that the
Americans were defeated by the Germans in Tunisia, but shortly there
after the Germans faced a crushing defeat at the hands of the Hindus
fighting under the British flag.). Thus, the first strategies of the
Hindutva party resulted in them getting screwed both ways – politically
in India, and strategically by the wily Britons. Not only that today the
Hindutva guys get smeared as Nazis (a German acquaintance of mine
actually regurgitated this propaganda to me. She had been fed that by a
bhraShTa brAhmaNa); despite helping the British defeat those same
Nazis\! Then came the muNDaka-hatyA, which gave a good excuse for their
political rivals to entirely evict Hindutva from the election scene.
Despite his strategic vision, Savarkar, it appears, was unable to
understand the average Hindu feelings and the means of channeling it in
political directions. In fact the farsighted Hindu politician SP
Mookerjee of va\~Nga left the Hindutva party in the aftermath of the
muNDaka-hatyA, splitting the support base. Mookerjee’s politically
motivated assassination abetted by the Gandhi-Nehru Congress further
weakened any hope for a useful political front being presented by
Hindutva. The lesson from this first chapter of Hindutva was the
inability to convert the upwelling of Hindu civilizational spirit into
successful political action.

Thus, having decapitated the Hindutva movement the Gandhi-Nehru Kangress
ruled the land for over 4 decades, all the while allowing the
prevarication of textbooks and educational policies, which all but
subverted the Hindu elite. In the mean time the successors of Mookerjee
tried to piece together the dredges of the original Hindutva party into
a political opposition for the Kangress. The linguistic regionalism and
dissipation of nationalism in the aftermath of svarAjya resulted in a
new selective pressure that selected politicians who were good at
wheeling-dealing rather than being leaders of men who could inspire the
masses and intellectuals alike. It is as result of such selective forces
that the octogenarian chief of the BJP and the even older false vAjapeyI
came to the fore. In the mean time the years of misrule under the
decaying Kangress and its secular successors and the proscription of
Hindu access to their ancient places of worship desecrated by
Mohammedans and Isaists built up Hindu misgivings. These feelings were
given a vent by the “soft Hindutva” leader PVN Rao from within the
Kangress fold. This unleashed a resurgent Hindu movement (alluded to
earlier), which was used by the BJP to come to power. It initially did
things right – it announced to our traditional rivals and enemies that
we were back in the game by re-testing the nuclear weapons and
long-range missiles. The mlechCha-s and the chIna-s were alarmed and
tried to curb us, but we continued largely unaffected. In the meantime
the BJP was faced with the expected aftermath of the nuclear tests, i.e.
Kargil and the Indian army emerged victorious saving the face of the
politicians. This put the Hindus in too strong a position for all its
three detractors, the mlechCha-s, the chIna-s and the turuShka-s to do
much. The mlechCha-s themselves were now being threatened by the
powerful chIna-s and their traditional allies, the turuShka-s, had
turned against the mlechCha-s. It was from this position of strength
that the Hindutva movement collapsed completely. While people like to
call us conspiracy theorists, we see this as a masterstroke of mlechCha
subversion. They undermined Hindutva at all levels and persistently –
most importantly they utilized the fact that the BJP politicians had
come through a selective pressure that made them ready to strike deals
rather than lead their people. So the BJP politicians were made to lose
focus on Hindutva and instead shift to behaving like a secular party
mouthing empty issues like “India shining”. Hindus are prone to fall
easily to praise and this worked well. In the meantime they worked on
their Isaist plants to take over the Kangress so that it would be a
party that responds to outsiders rather than Hindus. By subverting the
BJP they made the whole Hindutva movement lose its political edge again
and distracted the masses that fueled Hindutva towards secular pursuits
such as acquisition of wealth by providing services to the mlechCha-s.
Thus, the mlechCha-s have won a major battle in putting the cap on the
Hindus, without the Hindus even realizing it.

I have been talking with members of the neo-Hindu elite ranging from
shUdra-s to brAhmaNa-s. I have noticed that the Hindu civilizational
spirit remains strong in those who were always Hindu – perhaps the
shUdra-s are even more enterprising in this regard than the 1st and 2nd
varNa-s, and they may do well to learn from their compatriots of the 4th
varNa. What is more striking is that many who were secularists in the
1990s and early 2000s are now becoming more Hindu, probably as
consequence of the endless turuShka strikes rather than any cultural
renaissance. But now with the BJP smothered and secularized, the Hindus
do not have a political front end for the impending elections.
