+++
title = "Tianyuraptor, Hesperonychus and Anchiornis"

+++
[![Anchiornis](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3446/3954522095_97049f64fa.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3954522095/ "Anchiornis by somasushma, on Flickr")  
*Anchiornis*

The enormous diversity of small dinosaurs is only recently becoming
apparent. This is not surprising because birds, which are at the low end
of the dinosaurian size spectrum, show considerable diversity today. The
discovery of small dinosaurs has been hampered by the preservation bias,
but the Yixian formation in China and the careful work of researchers
like Longrich have helped in filling up parts of the lower end of the
size spectrum. The discovery of *Hesperonychus* in Canada followed by a
phylogenetic analysis defined a microraptorine clade comprised of the
Yixian formation forms *Microraptor*, *Graciliraptor*,
*Sinornithosaurus*, the Mongolian form *Shanag* and the North American
*Hesperonychus*. Over all this phylogeny extends and partially confirms
certain results of the earlier work of Turner et al. Other than the
basal *Mahakala* it shows several monophyletic dromaeosaurid clades: 1)
The Southern or Gondwanan clade including *Unenlagia, Rahonavis,
Buitreraptor* and *Austroraptor*; 2) The Microraptorines, 3)
Saurornitholestine clade of *Saurornitholestes*, *Atrociraptor* and
*Bambiraptor* which are currently limited to North America; 4) The
velociraptorine from Asia and 5) The Dromaeosaurines from North America.
The last two clades are equally related to *Deinonychus* and might merge
into a single dromaeosaur clade within which the relationships might
still be fluid. Thus the small microraptorines appear to have lasted at
least 45 million years from the Barremian age of the early Cretaceous
(both the Yixian formation microraptorines and the Mongolian *Shanag*)
right through the Campanian age of the late Cretaceous
(*Hesperonychus*). The dromaeosaurs appear to have attained world wide
distribution by the Cretaceous as suggested by the presence of the
Gondwanan and Asian lineages and fragmentary remains from Africa and
Europe whose affinities are still far from clear.

More recently another Yixian form was discovered, named *Tianyuraptor*
by Zheng et al. It is pretty different from all other microraptorines in
having considerably short arms (53% of leg length compared to the \>70%
of leg length in other dromaeosaurs). Thus, it is unlikely to have used
them in flight, though one cannot rule out their use in wing-assisted
incline running. It has a small, thin furcula which is again not
consistent with a flight role. Its legs are also unusually long due to a
proportionally much longer tibiotarsus and metatarsus than most other
members of the group. In a phylogenetic analysis its position was not
well-resolved as the chInAchArya-s have not done a proper job, unlike
Longrich. Yet there are some indications (like the texturing on the
maxilla) that it might have been a divergent version of the
microraptorine clade, although the majority rule tree favors it being
the most primitive of Laurasian dromaeosaurs other than the basal
*Mahakala*. What ever the case, the presence of short arms in it is of
interest because this feature seems to have emerged independently in the
Gondwanan clade in *Austroraptor*. If we look at the whole
avian-deinonychosaur (Paravian) clade we note that the troodontids also
evolved similar shortened arms independently from a more long-armed
flying ancestor as represented by the condition in *Archaeopteryx*. So
just as in the tyrannosaurs, even in the deinonychosaurs long and short
armed forms appear to have existed side by side.

The remarkable *Anchiornis* comes in to support this idea of repeated
convergent evolution of short arms and also provides some new details
regarding the biology of arm length in dinosaurs. Originally
*Anchiornis* was described as a basal bird, but a more complete skeleton
announced this week by Xu’s team suggests that it is a primitive
troodontid. A similar thing had happened with *Jinfengopteryx* that the
chIna-s thought to be a basal avialan. However, later analysis showed
that it was also a troodontid. *Anchiornis* is striking in many ways.
Firstly, it comes from the Tiaojishan formation which is a Jurassic age
Chinese formation that preserves feathers on fossils. It is dated to be
between 160-150 Mya and is apparently from the Oxfordian age of the
Jurassic. Thus, it is older than *Archaeopteryx* which is of the
Tithonian age, making it the oldest feathered fossil recovered to date.
Secondly, it is remarkable in its feather patterns, with a prominent
woodpecker-like feathered crest on the head, pennaceous feathers on both
the arms and hind limbs, and a long tail which additionally has dense
plumaceous feathers. Finally, unlike all other troodontids it has long
arms that are in relative length longer than all other troodontids and
also certain dromaeosaurs such as Microraptor. This establishes that the
ancestral paravians were indeed long-armed with the most primitive
members of the avialan, scansoriopterygid, dromaeosaur, and troodontid
clades being long-armed. As Anchiornis predates *Archaeopteryx*, it is
now clears the way for *Archaeopteryx* indeed being in the avialan clade
rather than a precursor of all paravians. It also suggests that the
explosive radiation of tetanurans happened before the late Jurassic with
all major coelurosaur clades being already established by then. Finally,
like *Microraptor*, *Anchiornis* has feathers on the legs, that too all
the way to the metatarsus. Leg feathers also appear on *Pedopenna* an
enigmatic paravian, and *Archaeopteryx* suggesting that the 4-winged
state was indeed the ancestral condition in the paravian clade. Thus, it
is quite possible that Chatterjee’s biplane model might have been a
widespread early paravian approach to flight.

Coming back to the long arms of *Anchiornis*, it would seem that this,
being the ancestral paravian condition, was associated with the
emergence of flight/gliding in this clade. However, can this
flight-based explanation account for the long-armed and short-armed
tyrannosaurs? The ancestral tetanuran appears to be apparently
relatively short-armed, so the arms clearly relatively lengthened in
tyrannosaurs at the base of the coelurosaur tree, before shortening
again in the *Raptorex*-classical tyrannosaur clade. Further, the
scansoriopterygid *Epidexipteryx* has long arms but apparently lacks
pennaceous feathers on arms instead having only hairy plumaceous
feathers. These observations do question the teleological link between
acquisition of flight and arm-lengthening \[Footnote 1\]. Other than in
tyrannosaurs and multiple occasions in deinonychosaurs, we also notice
arm-shortening in other coelurosaurs, namely the Alvarezsaurids. Even
outside of the tetanurans, their sister group in the averostran clade,
the ceratosaurs, show multiple relative arm-shortening events of their
moderately-sized arms. Such a transformation is well-known in the
Cretaceous abelisaurs like *Carnotaurus* and *Aucasaurus*. But more
recently Xu made a remarkable find of a toothless Jurassic ceratosaur,
*Limusaurus* that shows yet another case of major arm-length reduction
at an even earlier phase of this clade. This shows that arm-shortening
is a prevalent trend throughout the evolution of averostra, and to a
certain degree there is also the opposite trend of arm-lengthening. One
explanation for this phenomenon could be that on multiple occasions the
arms became short due to various distinctive feeding adaptations — e.g.
breaking wood-termite nests in alvarezsaurids, or head-first predation
in tyrannosaurs. While such adaptive forces definitely played a role it
is also possible that one of the developmental control genes in the arm
development pathway has an evolutionarily unstable regulatory element
that results in its repeated lowered expression and occasionally
increased expression and corresponding changes in the size of the arm
primordium. One possibility is that this regulatory element is a
repetitive one prone to deletions or duplications. Exploring this would
require some searching in the *Gallus* genome; I am just not yet
inclined to devote time to nor have a person to sacrifice in an attempt.
Whatever the case, arm-length variation is one of the most interesting
evolutionary problems in dinosaurian.

[![tianyuraptor2](https://i0.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2455/3955599851_3c975a8d89.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3955599851/ "tianyuraptor2 by somasushma, on Flickr")
*Tianyuraptor*

Footnote 1: A survey of relative arm lengths across coelurosaurs shows
that long arms are seen in basal tyrannosaurs, ornithomimosaurs (e.g.
*Beishanlong* and *Deinocheirus*), therizinosaurus (e.g.
*Therizinosaurus*), oviraptorosaurs, basal troodontids (now
*Anchiornis*), majority of dromaeosaurs, scansoriopterygids and birds.
Of these given the poor performance of morphological phylogenetics one
could imagine that in reality oviraptorosaurs and scansoriopterygids are
basal birds that have reverted to flightlessness. In support of this we
see similarities between *Sapeornis* and oviraptorosaurs, especially
basal forms such as *Omnivoropteryx*. Further, the furculae of
oviraptorosaurs also suggest secondary flightlessness. Even considering
such a scenario, the long-armed state appears ancestral to the
coelurosaurs. Thus, between the basal tetanurans and coelurosaurs there
could have been an arm-lengthening event. There is no evidence for
flight in the ancestral coelurosaur yet. While such a possibility cannot
be ruled out entirely, it is more likely that the long arms were
initially selected for something else — could be moving branches in an
ancestrally arboreal lifestyle (e.g. the Hoatzin chicks) or a predatory
mechanism that is yet poorly understood, or incline running.

[![anchiornis\_recon](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3509/3955623627_c89fc52bce_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3955623627/ "anchiornis_recon by somasushma, on Flickr")  
Artist’s reconstruction of *Anchiornis* by Zhao Chuang/Xing Lida

A historical aside: Among all these exciting dinosaurian finds probably
one individual who does not get the credit he deserves is the artist
Gregory Paul, who long before others (in the 1980s) imagined feathered
dinosaurs and understood deinonychosaurs and oviraptorosaurs as being
secondarily flightless. His hypothesis has been vindicated most
dramatically by *Anchiornis*. Ironically, another artist Gerhard
Heilmann set a reverse trend in the early 1900s — he saw that birds were
closest to theropods. But as theropod furculas were not known then and
due to rigid application of Dollo’s principle he concluded that birds
were not dinosaurs. Thus he reversed the pioneering conclusion of Huxley
that birds were dinosaurs. All this is history now and we perhaps
understand the origin of birds inside theropoda with considerable
clarity.
