+++
title = "Crocodiles in the shadow of thexa0dinosaurs"

+++
[![crocs-2](https://i0.wp.com/farm5.static.flickr.com/4044/4240078138_e4629b6bf4.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/4240078138/ "crocs-2 by somasushma, on Flickr")  
*Crocs: past and present*

**The crocodile line**  
The archosaurs of today are a study in contrast — the crocodiles are
rulers of the fresh waters, large ectotherms with relatively short
spurts of activity. However this activity when exhibited occurs with
extraordinary power. Today’s dinosaurs are the rulers of the air, small
feather-covered endotherms with a very visible constant display of high
energy, complex and intelligent behavior. While they are kings of the
air and water they are these days kept out by the mammals of the core
terrestrial niches that they once dominated during the Mesozoic. As we
have seen before on these pages, both these archosaurian lineages had
their heydays in the Mesozoic. In the earlier part of the Mesozoic, the
Triassic period, saw the rise of the crocodile line or the crurotarsans
(also called by some as pseudosuchians) that evolved to occupy all kinds
of niches — the giant predators like Prestosuchus and Saurosuchus,
gracile bipedal forms like Shuvosaurus and Effigia, fresh-water
crocodile-like predators the phytosaurs, the armored herbivores the
aetosaurs, the herbivorous ornithischian mimics like the Revueltosaurus
and finally the true crocodiles. Beginning in the middle Triassic and
through the late Triassic the other line of archosaurs, namely the
dinosaur-line or the ornithodirans started rising and expanding. These
included the dinosauromorphs, like *Silesaurus, Sachisaurus, Marasuchus,
Lagerpton*, and *Dromomeron*, the pterosaurs and *Scleromochlus* and the
early dinosaurs. These eventually displaced all members of the diverse
crocodile-line, with the exception of the crocodiles, and went on to
become the dominant vertebrates of the land and the air. Whether this
displacement of the crocodile-line by the dinosaur-line was due to
competitive superiority or ecological release due to extinction of the
former or a mixture of both is not yet fully resolved. There is some
evidence in favor of certain superior adaptations of the dinosaur-line
that might have eventually established them as better survivors and
stronger competitors under stress conditions, thereby favoring their
ascendancy. The dinosaur-line appears to have perfected certain body
plans that it stably maintained with relatively minor lineage-specific
modifications over 100 million years through the Mesozoic — these
include the bipedal predator body plan of the theropod lineage, the
long-necked herbivore body plan of the sauropod lineage, the relatively
short-necked bipedal or facultatively bipedal herbivore-body plan of the
ornithischian lineage. Some of the core features of these body plans
were already seen in the Triassic itself — the predatory adaptations of
Herrerasaurids and Eoraptor, the weight-bearing and long-necked
adaptations *Riojasaurus*, and the ornithopod adaptations revealed by
the tracks from the early Jurassic from Lesotho in southern Africa. They
also perfected flight via two very distinct independent adaptive
complexes — in the pterosaurs and the theropods and maintained dominance
of the aerial niche ever since.

While the crocodile-line lost out in all these niches to the
dinosaur-line, the crocodiles themselves appear to have retained their
place. For long there was a naïve and clearly erroneous belief that the
crocodiles were primarily occupants of the aquatic niche vacated by
their distant cousins, the phytosaurs, as predators with elongated jaws
and conical generalized teeth. Over the years a vast body of fossil
material has been published (in particular the pioneering effort of the
Argentinian worker Diego Pol deserves a specific mention) that has led a
new and improved understanding of the extraordinary Mesozoic radiation
of the crocodiles and their colonization of diverse niches in ecosystems
dominated by dinosaurs and containing mammals. We consider below the
history of the crocodiles and some of the apparent macro-evolutionary
puzzles presented by them. Historically, the realization of the
diversity of the crocodilian adaptations has been a case of the evidence
being always around but few people recognizing it. For example the
prolific South American fossil hunter Ameghino thought that the teeth of
the sebecosuchid crocodiles from the Paleogene of Argentina were
indicative of late-surviving theropods. Later another notable
paleontologist Simpson found more complete remains of the sebecosuchian
crocs and noted their possible crocodile-like features but still did not
recognize them as such. Similarly there was much confusion in
understanding the affinities of the earlier gracile and erect basal
crocs such as Sphenosuchus and Saltoposuchus. The work of Colbert and
Alick Walker played a big role in clarifying the anatomy of these early
crocs and their subsequently their affinities. Formally, the clade
crocodylomorpha (colloquially crocs or crocodiles) is defined as the
most inclusive clade of crocodile-line archosaurs that are closer to
Crocodylus niloticus than to the basal lineages of crurotarsans
(pseudosuchians) typified by Poposaurus, Gracilisuchus, Aetosaurus or
Prestosuchus. Given this definition, and the paraphyly of the so called
“rauisuchians”, it is conceivable that some of these end up as being
crocodylomorphs, unless the definition is again emended to exclude
these.

An important aspect of the crocodiles has been their remarkable ability
to survive great upheavals and extinctions. Firstly, in the Rhaetian age
at the end of the Triassic (202-200 mya) there appears to have been a
great faunal crisis that affected diverse tetrapods. While the
dinosaurs, pterosaurs and the crocodiles emerged successfully from this
crisis all other basal crocodile-line archosaurs, protomammal synapsid
lineages such as the traversodontids and archosauromorphs such as the
tanystropheids became completely extinct. Multiple lineages of crocs
similarly survived the catastrophic events at the end of the Cretaceous
that brought down all the non-avian dinosaurs and several other clades
of organisms. One major macro-evolutionary question is whether the
survival of the crocs across these two major extinction events, and
several other more minor extinction events in between has a common
biological basis. At the face of it would seem that opposite sets of
adaptations helped the crocs survive these events. As the crocs crossed
the Triassic-Jurassic boundary they developed as metabolically active
erect-gaited terrestrial hold out with a certain convergence to
mammalian predators. These might have helped to compete better in the
crisis situation compared to other members of the crocodile-line
relative in face of dinosaur-line competition. On the other hand as they
crossed the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary they appear to have reverted
to a sprawling gait and low-energy metabolism. However, the initial
survival of the sebecosuchids suggests that this picture might not be
entirely correct. Further, the role of none of these adaptations on
survival has been objectively tested making it entirely possible that
there are still undiscovered biological determinants of the resilience
of the crocs over the ages.

**Physiology of extant crocs reveals a different past**  
The physiology of crocs today is in the slow lane but they have many
features that are indicative of a once metabolically active past.The
physiology of crocs today is in the slow lane but they have many
features that are indicative of a once metabolically active past. Today
crocodiles occasionally display a mode of locomotion the “high walk”,
which corresponds to the erect gait of birds and mammals — a locomotory
mode typical of endotherms. Further, on occasions they can also exhibit
a remarkably energetic gallop which also resembles the gallop of an
endotherm. These locomotory adaptations are correlated with a
well-developed complex lung with a large absorptive surfaces formed by
several chambers enhanced by internal cubicles. They also possess highly
vacularized fibrolammellar which is more typical of endothermic rapidly
growing animals with bones that are selected to bear greater stresses.
Further, the extant crocs possess a diaphragmaticus muscle that operates
the hepatic piston to allow efficient inflation of the lungs. However,
in extant forms this mechanism is important only upon eating a meal when
additional assistance is required to take up large volumes of oxygen via
the lungs. The heart of the extant crocs is 4-chambered as in mammals
and birds and initially develops like a regular 4-chambered heart of an
archosaur. But later in development two new structures namely the
cog-tooth valve in the right ventricle and the foramen of Panizza that
allow deoxygenated blood from the right chambers normally routed for
pulmonary circulation to be shunted to the left for systemic
circulation. Thus, it appears that the extant crocs have acquired
adaptations that reduced the efficiency of their once highly efficient
heart and lungs. The tachymetabolic endotherms are typically associated
with more complex behaviors — it is also becoming clear that crocodiles
might exhibit much greater behavioral complexity than other extant
non-avian diapsid reptiles. They show a variety of intra-specific vocal
communications, they can possibly even respond to names like mammals and
exhibit flexible hunting strategies. Thus, the weight of the
observations suggests that they have more recently metabolically
downgraded from the fast lane in which their ancestors operated, but
still retain several features of the originally tachymetabolic life
style. Once this conclusion is placed in the context of the evolutionary
history revealed by the fossil crocs, the adaptive radiations and
diversification of crocodylomorpha through the Mesozoic and possibly
even the early Cenozoic start to make sense.

**The “sphenosuchian” radiation**  
The evolution of the crocodiles has several distinct phases that are
characterized by major radiations and diversification into different
ecological/functional niches. The first radiation that marked the
emergence of the clade crocodylomorpha distinct from the remaining
crurotarsans occurred in the late Triassic and may be referred to as the
“sphenosuchian” radiation. This represents the basal radiation of
crocodylomorpha within which was derived the monophyletic clade of the
“classical crocodiles” or the crocodyliformes which includes all the
remaining crocodiles. Currently, the basalmost known member of the
sphenosuchian radiation is Erpetosuchus from around 230 Mya (Carnian
age). It is a small gracile crocodile with erect limbs and a skull of
about 7 cm relatively narrow with a short snout. Its dentition is
relative simple with sharp minimally curved teeth with an oval
cross-section and no carinae. Thus, it appears that the crocodiles began
a small carnivores hunting small prey such as arthropods and small
vertebrates. The more derived members of this sphenosuchian radiation
continued to retain this basic structure while growing to somewhat
greater sizes and probably becoming more formidable hunters. This is
exemplified by the crocodile Dromicosuchus from around 227 Mya
(Carnian/Norian) which has a large skull of around 15 cm and long legs
suggesting that it was a fleet runner. Its teeth assume a laterally
compressed blade-like form with carinae bearing fine serrations. This
suggests that it was an active carnivore slicing flesh with its teeth.
Indeed, the Dromicosuchus type specimen is famous for its preservation
association with Postosuchus that appears to have died together with in
course of a predatory interaction. While the larger Postosuchus appears
to have shattered the neck and lower jaw of the crocodile with a bite,
the crocodile probably sliced a key blood vessel of the Postosuchus
before dying, there by bringing down its hunter with it. The
small-bodied representatives of the sphenosuchian radiation similar in
size to the Erpetosuchus continued into the Early Jurassic (\~200-190
Mya) but they appear to be distinguished by dental specialization. Thus
Litargosuchus from the Early Jurassic of South Africa, with a narrow
dinosaur-like snout, has blade-like recurved teeth with carinae
suggesting that it specialized in small vertebrate prey, whereas
Kayentasuchus from the Early Jurassic of North America has conical teeth
with non-serrated cutting edges suggesting that it might have tended
towards a more insectivorous diet.

Other lineages of the sphenosuchian radiation were characterized by
several other distinct adaptive features. For example a series of
distinctive adaptations emerged in the lineages of the sphenosuchian
radiation that are successively closer to the crocodyliformes (thus the
“sphenosuchians” paraphyletic vis-à-vis crocodyliformes) such as
Sphenosuchus, Dibothrosuchus and Junggarsuchus. In particular
Junggarsuchus from the Middle Jurassic of China shows a solidification
of several intracranial joints and an increase in the size of jaw
muscles that are involved in biting. At the same time this crocodile
shows increasing adaptations for running in the form of a modified
forelimb with a non-splayed wrist and a hand that is effectively
tridactyl (one finger lost and one off the ground). The humerus-glenoid
articulation in these sphenosuchians also started assuming a
superficially mammal-like appearance and is indicative of an erect
humerus. Thus, the cranial adaptations to produce large bite forces
emerged (something retained in modern crocodiles) emerged in the context
of a highly cursorial erect-gaited terrestrial predator rather than a
sprawling bradymetabolic aquatic predator like the modern crocs. Not all
members of the sphenosuchian radiation with small-sized predators (i.e.
\<2 m in length). An enigmatic crocodile, Redondavenator from the late
Triassic (Rhaetian?) of north America appears to have been one of the
first members of this lineage to assume large proportions (5-6 meters).
This suggests that probably already during the Rhaetian crisis the
crocodiles were making a bid to become large and dominant land
predators, even as their “rauisuchian” cousins were declining and the
dinosaur predators were yet to assume large sizes. Interestingly, its
skull shows evidence for pits that in modern crocodiles houses the
dermal sensory organs that are known to play an important role in
orienting the crocodile towards a pressure source or function as
osmoregulators. This suggests that another key feature of modern
crocodiles had emerged even in the sphenosuchian radiation and that to
in a terrestrial ecological context. The extant of the ecological
diversity of this early sphenosuchian radiation of crocs is becoming
apparent with the discovery of Phylodontosuchus from the Lower Jurassic
of China. This unusual crocodile displays dramatic heterodonty in the
form of anterior recurved teeth and posterior leaf-like teeth with
crenulations roughly comparable in form to that of herbivorous dinosaurs
and the crurotarsan Revueltosaurus. This suggests that already in their
early radiation the crocodiles were beginning to occupy herbivorous
niches.

**The “protosuchian” radiation**  
The next major phase of crocodile evolution was the “protosuchian”
radiation that emerged within the earlier “sphenosuchian” radiation even
by the time of the late Triassic (Late Triassic Hemiprotosuchus).
Members of this radiation were to last until the late Cretaceous. It was
within this “protosuchian” radiation that the “middle crocodiles” of
more derived aspect emerged (mesoeucrocodylia; thus the protosuchian
radiation is paraphyletic with respect to that clade). Within the
“protosuchian” radiation two major monophyletic clades are recognized,
the protosuchids proper and the zosuchids. They form successive out
groups to mesoeucrocodylia, with the former lasting till at least the
early Cretaceous the latter till the late Cretaceous. The protosuchids
are marked by the development of strong jaw musculature and were clearly
erect-gaited, small to medium-sized terrestrial hunters to begin with
(1-2 meters). Protosuchus with a short snout is likely to have been a
predator of small vertebrates. In contrast, its relative Orthosuchus had
a long snout might have specialized in piscivory albeit as shore-line
predator rather than an amphibious one (compare with spinosaurs). The
much later early Cretaceous protosuchid Edentosuchus shows a remarkable
dentition that is convergent to the mammalian condition with incisiform,
fang-like caniniform, premolar- and molar-like teeth. The molars are
multicuspid and globular in shape and likely to function as crushing
surfaces. This dentition suggests that Edentosuchus is likely to have
had a varied omnivorous diet processing all kinds of food like certain
modern mammalian taxa such as certain primates. Thus, even the
protosuchids show evidence for diversified dietary adaptations. Much
less is known of the zosuchid clade but appear to have included small
predators and insectivores. One zosuchid Nominosuchus from Asia is known
to occur in different beds in large single-species associations,
suggesting that it might have been one of the few gregarious crocodiles.
Another currently minor group within the paraphyletic protosuchian
radiation was the gobiosuchid group which also appears to have comprised
of small swift-moving and relatively long-necked predators.

**The mesoeucrocodylian radiation and diversity of notosuchians**  
The mesoeucrocodylian radiation from within the “protosuchian” radiation
was probably under way by the early Jurassic period. But much of its
diversification is only known to have occurred beginning in the middle
Jurassic and particularly in the Cretaceous. At least two immediate
successive sister groups to the mesoeucrocodylians have been recognized.
The first of these to branch off are the small Jurassic shartegosuchids
represented by forms such as Shartegosuchus and Kyasuchus from Asia and
an unnamed from the Fruita formation in North America. This suggests
that they might comprise a previously underappreciated, widespread clade
that probably acquired ecological prominence in the late Jurassic. Some
studies suggest that Nominosuchus might be related to the
shartegoshuchids rather than the zosuchids, though this proposal awaits
further analysis. Hsisosuchus from the Middle Jurassic of Asia is an
even closer outgroup to the mesoeucrocodylians. This form has flattened
serrated teeth (ziphodont – superficially similar to the sebecosuchians)
and is likely to have been a medium-sized predator (\~3 meters). This
suggests that the ancestor of the mesoeucrocodylian radiation was
probably a swift-moving terrestrial predator that sliced meat of its
prey using its ziphodont dentition. Within the mesoeucrocodylian clade
several major radiations are recognized namely the notosuchians, the
peirosaurids, the mahajangasuchids and finally the neosuchian radiation
which includes the pholidosaur-thalattosuchid clade and the eusuchian
clade. Of these one of the most remarkable radiations of crocodiles was
the notosuchian radiation. This clade attained its greatest diversity by
the end of the early Cretaceous and had a minimum of 30 distinct
Cretaceous taxa from all over the world through the second half of the
Cretaceous. The majority of the notosuchian diversity is currently known
from the ex-Gondwanan fragments of South America, Africa, Madagascar and
India, but they were also apparently known in the northern hemisphere
from Europe (e.g. Doratodon) and China (Chimaerasuchus). One major
notosuchian clade, the sebecosuchids appear to have survived the great
Cretaceous extinction and made it well into the Cenozoic of both South
America (e.g. the formidable Barinasuchus from Venezuela was around to
till as late as 16-11 Mya) and Europe (e.g. Iberosuchus from the Iberian
penisual and Bergisuchus from the Messel deposits of Middle Eocene
Europe). All the notosuchians appear to be erect-gaited terrestrial
crocodiles showing a wide range of unusual morphologies some of which we
consider below:

[![crocs](https://i2.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2804/4213832960_4c97020e22.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/4213832960/ "crocs by somasushma, on Flickr")  
*Skull and teeth of Simosuchus*

Simosuchus from the Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) of Madagascar was an
unusual small crocodile (\~1 meter) with a short broad snout with a
shallow U-shaped outline with most unusual teeth with multiple cusps
arranged in a single row. This teeth morphology is very close to that
seen in the herbivorous ornithischian dinosaurs, the stegosaurs and the
ankylosaurs. Interestingly like these dinosaurs Simosuchus also had a
broad body with extensive armor plating. Even the skull bears heavy
ossification such as the two palpebral bones above each orbit which also
resembles the conditions in the ankylosaurs (the bony “eyelid armor”). A
close relative of Simosuchus is the South American form Uruguaysuchus
(apparently from the slightly earlier Campanian/Santonian age) which has
similar multicuspid spatulate teeth. These features suggest that these
particular notosuchians occupied niche comparable to the ankylosaurs in
North America and Eurasia as herbivores with strong armor that provided
defense against predatory dinosaurs and crocodiles. Anatosuchus from the
Apatian/Albian (\~115 Mya) age of Africa in Sereno’s recent study also
emerges as one of the closest relatives of Simosuchus. This small
crocodile (\~1.5 meters), like Simosuchus it has a broad snout with a
U-shaped outline. However, it additionally has a spiky extension at the
rostral end which appears to be a specialized digging adaptation. In
sharp contrast to Simosuchus, the dentition of Anatosuchus is
characterized by smooth-surfaced, sub-cylindrical, curved, pointed teeth
which are not at all typical of any herbivore. Along with the rostral
projection the snout shows foramina suggestive a well-developed
neuro-vascular apparatus for probable sensory purposes. The hands are
large with claws potentially suitable for digging. These features
suggest that Anatosuchus was probably a competent digger with a
carnivorous diet of small animals which might have been pursued via
“snout-first” probing and hand assisted digging.

[![Anatosuchus](https://i1.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2587/4213288731_1c71a9844c_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/4213288731/ "Anatosuchus by somasushma, on Flickr")  
* skull of Anatosuchus from the Sereno & Larsson monograph*

In parallel other groups of notosuchians evolved their own distinct
combinations of dental and post-cranial adaptations. For example
Chimaerasuchus from the Aptian/Albian of Asia has an extremely
heterodont dentition with two large caniniform teeth on the premaxilla
which are curved, procumbent and pointed with deep roots and vertical
ridges throughout the length of the crown. The maxilla bears molariform
teeth with multiple cusps arranged in about 3 antero-posterior rows on
the teeth. These teeth appear to go hand in hand with the fore-and-aft
jaw movements in processing highly fibrous food. Taken together with the
procumbent caniniform teeth we interpret this form to be an herbivore
that probably dug out fibrous plant material including tubers with its
anterior teeth and ground them with the posterior molariform teeth. A
comparable situation is seen in the anterior teeth of Armadillosuchus
(although more procumbent), although here the posterior teeth are more
like those of the ornithischian dinosaurs. It is likely that the
anterior teeth were used similar to Chimaerasuchus or as a scissors to
cut plant material. Further this form shows an armadillo-like armor with
a heavy rigid shield and a potential banded region suggesting it could
have potentially shown a comparable behavior to the extant xenarthran.

Another enigmatic form is the divergent notosuchian Araripesuchus
wegeneri from the Aptian age of Africa \[also included as species of
Araripesuchus are at least two later forms the Albian of South
America\], pristine skeletons of which were recovered and recently
described Sereno et al. The heterodonty in Araripesuchus is
characterized by sharp premaxillary teeth which are curved or
triangular, followed by leaf-like anterior maxillary teeth and finally
posterior maxillary teeth which have a blunt roughly cardioid form. The
maxillary tooth m3 is enlarged and assumes a caniniform state. On the
dentary likewise the teeth range from a leaf-shaped to a roughly
cardioid shaped along the antero-posterior axis. The shape of the
leaf-shaped anterior teeth on both jaws is reminiscent of the shape of
the similar teeth of the basal sauropodmorph dinosaurs. Thus
Araripesuchus is likely to have been an herbivore but probably
specializing in a slightly different plant diet than the above
notosuchians. The large caniniform tooth m3 was probably used in
intraspecific combat and/or defense (as in pigs). Even more dramatic are
the crocodiles Yacarerani from the late cretaceous of Bolivia and
Adamantinasuchus and Mariliasuchus of similar age from the Bauru basin
of Brazil. These forms have a highly derived dentition with procumbent
rodent-like incisiform teeth on both jaws, especially the dentary.
Posteriorly these taxa show molariform crushing teeth but they differ in
architecture. In Yacarerani and Adamantinasuchus these molariform teeth
assume a multicuspid architecture, with two or 3 rows of cusps running
along the surface of the teeth. Mariliasuchus on the other hand has
prominent caniniform teeth on the upper jaw and simple chisel-like
molariforms. The wear patterns as well as the preservational features
suggest that these forms were burrowing crocodiles that might have used
their incisiform teeth in the burrowing process. However, the dental
differences between Mariliasuchus on one hand and
Yacarerani/Adamantinasuchus indicate that they probably specialized in
different types of subterranean foraging. Mariliasuchus might have also
been omnivorous roughly comparable to rodents and suids. Yacarerani also
shows a pointed snout which might have been used in a head-first
digging-foraging behavior. Along with Adamantinasuchus, it might have
specialized in digging out plant roots and other material. Further, the
presence of eggs in the Yacarerani burrow suggests that it might have
laid eggs in burrows, which it also probably inhabited. Finally, the
multiple adaptations for digging and burrowing, irrespective of the
dental adaptations, suggest that such behavior might have been ancestral
in this whole clade of within the notosuchians.

Completely distinct from the above forms were the members of a
monophyletic radiation within notosuchia, the sebecosuchians. The
current phylogenetic analyses are not clear with respect to the exact
relationships between the above-discussed notosuchians and the
monophyletic sebecosuchia as recovered in work by Turner. However, I
suspect that that there might actually be a basal split in notosuchia
with the predominantly herbivorous and omnivorous forms like those
discussed above (including he potentially carnivorous Anatosuchus)
forming a monophyletic clade with ancestral digging/burrowing
tendencies, and the sebecosuchians forming a monophyletic clade of
medium to large terrestrial predators (4-10 meters) that superficially
converged to a condition similar to that seen in the premammal synapsid
predators. The sebecosuchians are characterized by a high skull and
relatively short snout relative to the other non-notosuchian
crocodyliformes. The characteristic features of their dentition include
1) “ziphodont, i.e. laterally compressed teeth most bearing serrated
carinae both anteriorly and posteriorly, superficially resembling the
theropod dinosaurs. 2) A highly enlarged caniniform tooth on the dentary
that projects upwards and sits neatly in a groove present at the
premaxilla-maxilla junction (like a plesiomorphic feature). 3) At least
2-3 maxillary caniniform teeth forming an “overbite” just posterior to
the notch accommodating the dentary fang. These features indicate that
the sebecosuchians were active predators that probably attacked large
prey and killed them by a unique biting action that involved the dentary
fang cutting a key blood vessel. At least several late Cretaceous
sebecosuchians display evidence for dermal armor on their skull bones
(e.g. the palpebrals above the orbits protecting the eyes) and the
potentially strongly keratinized structures overlying the irregular
decorations of the dermal bones in Stratiotosuchus). This, taken
together with the evidence for puncture marks on the skull in
Baurusuchus, suggests that they might have engaged in aggressive
intra-specific combat.

In biogeographical terms, late Cretaceous sebecosuchians have been
detected in South America (Pehuenchesuchus, Baurusuchus and
Stratiotosuchus), India (Pabwehshi, now in the terrorist state) and
Europe (Doratodon), but not in the other Gondwanan fragments — whether
this unusual patchy distribution distribution arises due to sampling
bias or is real remains unclear. If real it might indicate some largely
unclearly ecological or geographical forces that played an important
role in the spread and establishment of these crocodiles. In terms of
survival the sebecosuchians were remarkably persistent crossing the K/Pg
event and continuing into the Cenozoic both in South American and
Europe. Some enigmatic teeth from a coal mine in Jammu resemble the
teeth of the sebecosuchians suggesting that they could have potentially
also survived in India (however, it is also possible it is a
Pristichampsus-like form closer to modern crocodiles). The exact
adaptations that allowed the survival of the sebecosuchians whereas
other notosuchians became extinct are unclear. The causes for eventual
extinction of the sebecosuchians in the Cenozoic remain equally
puzzling. There is nothing to support their extinction to be linked to
the rise of predatory mammals. In South America even as the giant birds
and marsupial carnivores diversified the sebecosuchians continued
unaffected. In the Paleocene and Eocene when the proborhyaenoid
radiation of marsupials was underway we find a parallel presence of
several poorly known but clear sebecosuchian predators such as
Bretesuchus, Sebecus, Ayllusuchus, Ilchunaia, and Zulmasuchus. Even in
the Miocene, as the marsupial carnivores were occupying a wide range of
predatory niches, the sebecosuchians held their own as both medium sized
predators (Langstonia, also called Sebecus huilensis) and the enormous
Barinasuchus, which at about 8-10 meters was probably the apex
terrestrial predator in the South American landmass. The extinction of
the Southern sebecosuchians occurred before the connection to the North
American land mass and was thus probably unrelated to the faunal
exchange either. In Europe, in fact the extinction of the sebecosuchians
and other neosuchian terrestrial predators such as the pristichampsines
might have provided the impetus for the emergence of large mammal
predators.

**The Peirosaurids and Mahajangasuchids**  
The peirosaurids and the mahajangasuchids (clade formed by
Mahajangasuchus and Kaprosuchus) appear to constitute a monophyletic
clade of ex-Gondwanan crocodiles. Some workers see them as a
monophyletic sister group of neosuchia. Others like Sereno and Turner
split them up into separate monophyletic mahajangasuchid and peirosaurid
clades. Strangely in Sereno’s trees Sebecus groups within the
peirosaurids rather than grouping with the baurosuchids in the
notosuchian clade. We believe this is an artefact of his including few
sebecosuchian taxa in his analysis. However, it is possible that the
monophyletic peirosaurids including the mahajangasuchids are closer to
the notosuchians than the neosuchians. At present we are agnostic on
this point (Turner’s analysis suggest that both these positions are
roughly equally supported albeit pretty weakly). We accept the monophyly
of peirosaurids including the mahajangasuchids though in Turner’s
analysis this grouping is somewhat weak. Another point of contention is
the inclusion of African Late Cretaceous forms Stolokrosuchus and
Elosuchus with long gharial-like snouts within the peirosaurids. In some
analysis they emerge as a distinct lineage which is closer to the modern
crocodiles than to the peirosaurids. We tend to accept this position of
the Stolokrosuchid clade outside the peirosaurids. Peirosaurids forms
are currently known only from the ex-Gondwanan continents of South
America (Uberabasuchus, Peirosaurus, and Lomasuchus, Caririsuchus,
fossil now lost), Africa (Kaprosuchus and Hamadasuchus), Madagascar
(Mahajangasuchus) and India (isolated teeth resembling Hamadasuchus from
the remote Naskal village of Andhra reported by Prasad et al),
suggesting that this clade might have been an entirely Southern
phenomenon. They were all carnivorous but appear to have assumed a
rather diverse array of skull shapes. The beautifully preserved
Uberabasuchus (\~2.5 meters) appears to have a high skull like that of
the sebecosuchians, but differs from them in having teeth with circular
cross-section. Thus, rather than slicing flesh and blood vessels, it is
likely to have inflicted powerful crushing bites (same is likely for
Lomasuchus and Peirosaurus). The post-crania and the geology suggesting
an arid climate indicate that Uberabasuchus was likely a terrestrial
predator.

In contrast to the above forms the skulls of Hamadasuchus, Kaprosuchus
and Mahajangasuchus are flatter at the rostral end more elongated as in
the case of modern crocodiles. This indicates a possible general shift
in their feeding strategy with respect to the other peirosaurids, but
there are differences even between these latter forms: the teeth of
Mahajangasuchus and Kaprosuchus are larger at the anterior end than the
posterior end of the jaw and are somewhat laterally compressed with
serrated carinae on both edges. The nasals are fused and the external
nares are placed upwards away from the tip of the snout. The snout of
the mahajangasuchids is also decorated with prominent rugosities
indicating that it was probably covered by a thick keratinous protection
in life. These features taken together with the strong jaw muscle
attachment features (e.g. the dorsal arching of the mandible) suggest
that the mahajangasuchids might have used a “head-first” approach with
the anterior end of a the jaw slicing out chunks of flesh from the prey
in a large gaped bite. Sereno et al observe that the eyes of Kaprosuchus
were directed lateral than vertically as is the case in submerged
aquatic crocodiles. This suggests that the mahajangasuchids were large
terrestrial (up to 4.5 meters) rather than aquatic predators. The
mahajangasuchids also have some distinctive cranial decoration — 3
longitudinal ridges are seen in Mahajangasuchus, which in life was
likely to have supported keratinous crests. In Kaprosuchus it is even
more dramatic in the form of prominent squamosal horns. Such decorations
are likely to have played a role in sexual display and more typical of
terrestrial than aquatic tetrapods. In contrast, Hamadasuchus has a much
longer snout with a much less anisodonty than the mahajangasuchids. Its
teeth are also less compressed and more conical in shape with
longitudinal striations on them. The long snout indicates that it might
have preyed on more aquatic fare such as fishes. But an important point
to note is that, unlike the modern aquatic crocodiles, the external
nares in the skull of Hamadasuchus placed laterally at the anterior end
of the skull. This makes it unlikely that it could have been
predominantly aquatic predator. Instead, it is more likely that it
hunted fish by remaining on the shore lines like spinosaurs rather than
swimming in water bodies.

**The neosuchian radiation and the invasion of the waters**  
The remaining mesoeucrocodylians which are closer to the modern
crocodiles (i.e. gharials, alligators and crocodyloids) than they are to
either the notosuchians or the peirosaurids form the great clade of
neosuchia. The radiation of this clade occurred in parallel with that
the above-described mesoeucrocodylian clades, beginning in the early
Jurassic as evidenced by the form Calsoyasuchus. The neosuchian
radiation displays several major monophyletic clades and certain smaller
enigmatic lineages. The atoposaurids were probably a sister group to all
the other neosuchians. The remaining neosuchians branch out into the
pholidosaur-thalattosuchian clade and the eusuchians their other close
relatives. The eusuchians include Hylaeochampsa, the gharials,
alligators and crocodilians. Their other close relatives include the
prominent Mesozoic clade — the goniopholids and the bernissartiids. The
more enigmatic lineages are: 1) the shamosuchids which have been
alternatively placed as the closest sister group of the eusuchians or
with the atoposaurids. 2) Stolokrosuchus and Elosuchus which have been
placed with the pholidosaurids or as a sister group of all the other
neosuchians.

The atoposaurids were a relatively long-lived clade known from the late
Jurassic (e.g. Theriosuchus, Atoposaurus and Alligatorium) to at least
the end of the early Cretaceous (Pachycheilosuchus). All the
atoposaurids are small crocodiles with a short-snouted skull that in
profile generally resembles the primitive skull profile seen in the
protosuchian radiation. This kind of short-snouted and moderately deep
skull profile is also the condition seen in the shamosuchids like
Shamosuchus and Rugosuchus, suggesting that it might have been the
primitive condition for the neosuchian radiation inherited from the
ancestors of the protosuchian grade. The paleoecology of the
atoposaurids remains poorly understood. Rogers in his description of
Pachycheilosuchus suggests that it was found in the brackish water
sediments along with several fish fossils. Hence, it is posited to be an
aquatic form foraging close to the sea shore (given that crocodile eggs
have been recovered alongside the bones). The depositional features of
Theriosuchus suggest that it was in wooded swamp or lagoon environment.
However, anatomically the orbits of the atoposaurids are directed
laterally rather than vertically, thereby arguing against a predatory
mode like modern crocodiles. Further, in Theriosuchus the supraorbital
palpebral bone is again consistent with a lateral focus of the eyes.
These raise questions as to whether the atoposaurids were all aquatic.
The short snout is also atypical of aquatic predators. Nevertheless,
given the depositional setting, it is conceivable that the atoposaurids
were shoreline or swamp-shore predators on small animals with
facultatively aquatic tendencies. A terrestrial niche is also plausible
for the shamosuchids, given that they are found in deposits indicative
of arid landscapes and have somewhat laterally directed orbits.

The common ancestor of all other neosuchians is inferred to be aquatic
in its lifestyle given that the eusuchians, the goniopholids, the
pholidosaurs and the thalattosuchians are all aquatic to differing
degrees. Of course, the degree of the commitment of the ancestor of the
lineages to the aquatic lifestyle is rather uncertain given the
equivocal evidence from the atoposaurids and potential
(partial/complete) reversals in more derived neosuchians like
Shamosuchus. It is quite possible that there were multiple reversals of
the less committed neosuchians to a terrestrial lifestyle through the
Mesozoic, even as it was seen later in the Cenozoic independently in
different eusuchians such as Pristichampsus and the crocodilian Quinkana
from Australia. If indeed Stolokrosuchus (and probably Elosuchus) is
indeed a sister group to the rest of the more derived neosuchians then
it appears that one of the prominent aquatic adaptations — i.e. the
longirostrine gharial-like morphology emerged early and repeatedly (see
below) in the history of the neosuchians. The gharial-like morph is a
clearly indication for optimization towards piscivory. However, it does
not necessarily mean that these forms only ate fish. While as an adult
the modern gharial practically feeds only on fish, the modern false
gharial (Tomistoma) has been recorded as eating monkeys, man, deer birds
and other reptiles. It is quite likely that the Mesozoic gharial like
morphs similarly included small dinosaurs, mammals and reptiles in their
prey. In the core neosuchian radiation the pholidosaur-thalattosuchian
clade is weakly supported, but the individual sub-clades within this
clade are clearly monophyletic.

**Thalattosuchians invade the oceans**  
The first dramatic invasion of the sea was by the thalattosuchians,
which represents the first successful colonization of the open oceans by
the archosaurs (there was Qianosuchus before this but probably not a
such a successful invasion). The incipient adaptations to marine life
were first seen in the basal thalattosuchians such as Teleosaurus,
Steneosaurus and Pelagosaurus which constitute a monophyletic basal
radiation within thalattosuchia known as the teleosaurids. These appear
to have lived close to the coasts and had a long tubular snout adapted
for hunting fishes and fast-swimming mollusks. The marine adaptations
initiated in the teleosaurids were perfected in the derived clade of
Metriorhynchoids which included Metriorhynchus, Cricosaurus, Geosaurus
and Dakosaurus. The nomenclature of the thalattosuchian genera
especially Metriorhynchus, Geosaurus and possibly Dakosaurus are
somewhat confused, paraphyletic and had recently been partially revised
by Young et al. In general terms these derived thalattosuchians
converged to a body plan and lifestyle comparable to that of the
ichthyosaurs — they developed a bend in the terminal tail vertebral
column to support a tail fin and the limbs appear to have developed into
flippers. At least in a subset of the thalattosuchians the skull
morphology also acquired a general ichthyosaur- or dolphin-like shape
suggesting a specialization in pursuing fast fish and mollusc prey. In
course of streamlining their body for marine life some thalattosuchians
also lost their osteoderms. The more derived forms also possibly evolved
to give live birth to young and thus had completely cut themselves off
from the land. The analysis of Young et al reveals that the
Metriorhynchoids diversified to occupy several distinct marine niches.
Cricosaurus retained the longirostrine ancestral condition seen in the
teleosaurid thalattosuchians and probably had a similar diet. In
Geosaurus the rostrum contracted in length and it acquired serrated
teeth arranged as opposing blades. This suggests that it hunted large
prey by slicing out flesh and probably specialized in attacking other
large marine vertebrates. In Dakosaurus the teeth became large and stout
superficially similar to those in tyrannosaurs. It probably specialized
in bone crushing high force bites on marine vertebrates, possibly
specifically other marine reptiles. This trend reached its pinnacle in
the form Dakosaurus andiniensis from the South American coast around the
Jurassic-Cretaceous transition which has a short skull distinctly
adapted for killing large vertebrates with a high force bite as against
slicing out flesh as seen in the case of Geosaurus. The metriorhynchoids
have been found to have traces in their anorbital fossa for
accommodating salt glands and their ducts which is consistent with their
completely marine habit. These salt glands appear to have discharged the
excessive salt via the openings in the antorbital fenestra. In extant
crocodiles the salt glands discharge salt via a duct on to the tongue
are in a different location (lingual glands). Hence it is is suspected
that these features emerged independently the two lineages.

**The dyrosaurs, Sarcosuchus and their relatives: the pholidosaur
clade**  
We interpret the morphological evidence as favoring the monophyly of the
dyrosaurs and some other longirostrine forms such as Sarcosuchus,
Terminonaris and Pholidosaurus. But some workers have been less support
for this grouping, but we must mention that their matrices have tended
to include far fewer characters than those that support the monophyly of
these lineages. The basal members of this clade, Pholidosaurus,
Sarcosuchus and Terminonaris appear to have been aquatic crocodiles
associated with fresh-water habitats. The long snouts of Sarcosuchus and
Terminonaris are clearly indicative of a primarily piscivorous habit for
these crocodiles. However, it should be noted that Sarcosuchus is a
powerfully built crocodile of about 11.5 meters in length (probably the
largest crocodile known to date). Its teeth are large, strongly built
and curved with a solid circular cross-section. These features indicate
that even though its snout might have a gharial-like morphology it
differs in having teeth adapted for grabbing and holding much larger and
more powerful prey. Thus, like the modern Tomistoma it might have taken
land vertebrates such as small dinosaurs or more likely the large
lungfishes (Neoceratodus 3-4 meters in length) of that were apparently
contemporaneous in Africa.

The dyrosaurids form a clearly monophyletic clade of longirostrine forms
that are a sister group to the above-mentioned freshwater forms. They
represent the second great invasion of the sea of the crocodiles and
interestingly they survived the K/T crisis to flourish in the immediate
aftermath of the extinction. In the latest Cretaceous (the Maastrichtian
age) they underwent a major radiation as indicated by forms such as
Sokotosuchus, Rhabdognathus and Chenanisuchus in the African inland sea
(in what is now the Sahara), Hyposaurus in the North American coast and
fragmentary remains in the European island coasts. Given their African
center of diversity it is possible that they originated there and
underwent a major marine dispersal. However, fragments of dyrosaurs have
also been found in inland settings in Kenya, Sudan and in India in the
intertrappean beds from Madhya Pradesh and the infratrappean beds near
Hyderabad suggesting that dispersing via the seas these crocodiles also
colonized inland freshwater bodies. After the K/T event they appear as
major marine predators around the African, South American coasts,
Atlantic and Tethys seas expanding even further in diversity. Through
the Paleocene they appear to have colonized a variety of niches as
suggested by their cranial morphology: 1) Relatively short-snouted
(short by Dyrosaur standards) form with sharp teeth — Chenanisuchus,
Guarinisuchus, and Hyposaurus; 2) A large form relatively short-snouted
form (\~7 meters) with powerful crushing teeth — Phosphatosaurus
probably specializing in marine turtles; 3) A large form with sharp
spear-like teeth — Arambourgisuchus, probably specializing in lamnid
sharks; 4) Medium to large (\~6-7 meters) forms with a very long snouts
— Rhabdognathus and Atlantosaurus that probably specialized in small
fishes. This expansion of the crocodiles surviving the K/T boundary was
probably due to the ecological release from the extinction of the giant
marine lizards the mosasaurs. The dyrosaurs continued to the early part
of the Eocene (till around 49 mya; e.g. Dyrosaurus itself) when they
finally became extinct and possibly provided the ecological release for
the radiation of the whales.

**The eusuchians and their immediate sister-groups**  
The eusuchian clade defined as the one that includes Hylaeochampsa and
the extant lineages of gharials, alligators and crocodylians was always
a noticeable component of the ecosystems since the Mesozoic times. Until
their recent destruction by man, they were major components of several
Cenozoic tropical inland aquatic ecosystems and continue to remain so
were they are undisturbed. The extant eusuchians show some interesting
features that might throw light on their ancestry — several species of
the crocodylian clade, like the salt water crocodile, Osteolaemus and
the false gharial Tomistoma have lingual salt glands. The gharial, while
having reduced salt gland openings and degenerate glands, still has a
keratinized yellowish tongue and buccal cavity suggesting that its
ancestors were adapted for reducing osmosis of body fluids through the
tongue while in saline environments. Further crocodylians and gharials
have dispersed widely across the seas to reach distant islands until the
recent past. For example the little horned-crocodile Aldabrachampsa,
which is probably a member of the African Osteolaemus clade, reached the
Aldabra atoll less than 120,000 years ago. Similarly, the mekosuchid
crocodylians have dispersed from Australia to various islands in the
vicinity and Voay (or its precursors) reached Madagascar from Africa.
Similarly, the Aktiogavialis, an Oligocene gharial from Puerto Rico
appears to have reached there from Africa and founded a clade of South
American gharials (e.g. Ikanogavialis, Piscogavialis and the gigantic
Gryposuchus) that expanded through the Miocene and became extinct only
in the Quaternary. Even earlier, along with the dyrosaurs, in the
African “Sahara” sea gharials such as Argochampsa appear to have been
important marine piscivores in the aftermath the K/T crisis. Among the
alligators the gigantic basal form Deinosuchus (\~10 meters) appears to
have crossed the North American inland sea in the late Cretaceous and
its fossils have been found in bays and marine deposits. These
observations indicate a marine tendency for the eusuchians which was
probably secondarily lost in the alligators. This, taken together with
the marine adaptation of the thallatosuchians, and the dyrosaurs, which
are seen as neosuchian sister groups of the eusuchians, suggests a
marine tendency in their common ancestor, though individual marine
adaptations like salt glands and other features might have been
perfected independently. Thus, we propose that the thallosuchians+the
pholidosaur clade (including dyrosaurs), eusuchians and their other
relatives like goniopholids and bernissartiids formed a monophyletic
clade whose ancestors acquired the aquatic adaptations on sea coasts and
led a facultatively marine life. We suspect that this marine adaptation
was initiated first in the atoposaurids. However, right from the
beginning the marine commitment within this clade appears to have been
repeatedly modified in different ways, including switches to freshwater
and inland water bodies and reversal to land life. This suggests that
there were always “shore-hugging forms” that never fully committed to
the aquatic life as some others. The marine invasion might be behind
several adaptations seen in modern forms such as the diaphragmaticus
being reused as a device to move the lungs and aid in making rapid
course corrections in swimming that are not easily detected by the prey.
Further, ectothermy in crocodiles might have also had its origins in
aquatic adaptations — deep dives or being submerged for long might be
facilitated by lowered oxygen consumption. This might have selected for
the “re-plumbing” of the four chambered heart to become less efficient
and might have also favored a reversal to a lower metabolic state. The
reversal to ectothermy might have given them the unexpected advantage of
being able to survive crises where food is limiting, thus allowing them
to make it past extinctions such as those which brought down the large
endothermic dinosaurs.

Despite this aquatic tendency and possible metabolic down-grading, the
eusuchians and their immediate relatives display morphological diversity
and appear to have occupied a considerable diversity of ecological
niches in both the Mesozoic and there after. A striking skull structure
is seen in a close sister of the euschians, Laganosuchus, from Late
Cretaceous of North Africa. It could very well be the same animal as
Stomatosuchus discovered earlier from the same regions (However, this
fossil was destroyed by the Americans during WWII).
Laganosuchus/Stomatosuchus has an extremely flat, broad and long skull
and dorso-ventrally thin U-shaped jaws. A comparable skull morph
reappeared several million years later in the Eocene and Orthogenysuchus
and again later in the South American caiman, Mourasuchus, from the
Miocene and Pliocene. The repeated appearance of this flattened morph
amongst crocodiles is functionally mysterious. Clearly both Laganosuchus
and Mourasuchus lived in the vicinity of other large crocodiles
suggesting that they specialized in a particular ecological niche
distinct from the co-occurring forms. One proposal that they were
filter-feeds seems untenable for they appear to be inland forms and
clearly had sharp straight teeth on their jaws. Sereno and Larsson
propose that they could have been submerged sit-and-wait predators that
caught fish by rapidly snapping their large jaws. In this sense they
might have converged to a much older adaptation that was seen in the
primitive tetrapods, the temnospondyls such as Mastodonsaurus and
Cyclotosaurus of an earlier era. But in the absence of any living
representative of this adaptation their real behavior remains uncertain.
Another notable morph is encountered in the basal eusuchian
Iharkutosuchus from the Cretaceous of Europe. This form has a highly
heterodont dentition with remarkable multicuspid teeth — some of which
have radial arrays of cusps around a central cusp, whereas others have a
cusp forming a cutting ridge. This heterodonty is comparable but
distinct from that seen in the notosuchians and the protosuchian
Edentosuchus. Analysis of jaw function suggests that the anterior teeth
were involved in a cutting stroke whereas the posterior ones in a
distinct grinding motion via transverse motion of the jaws. This along
with the wear pattern on the teeth suggests that it was primarily an
herbivore that processed highly fibrous plant material. Further, it
appears that this basal eusuchian had reverted to terrestrial life
style.

The morphological phylogenies support a sister group relationship
between crocodyloids and alligators (termed the brevirostres clade) to
the exclusion of the gharials (Tomistoma is placed inside the
crocodyloid clade). However, molecular phylogenies have shown this view
to be erroneous and have shown that the old view which grouped Tomistoma
and the gharial (the monophyletic gharial clade) is indeed correct. It
also shows that the gharial clade and crocodyloids are closer to each
other to the exclusion of the alligators thus falsifying brevirostres.
The molecular tree thus clarifies that the ancient gharials such as
Argochampsa, Thoracosaurus, Thecachampsoides and Eogavialis are outside
of the Tomistoma+gharial clade, which split up into its components
relatively late in the Neogene. In fact, by combining the molecular tree
with Holliday and Witmer’s extraordinary study of the epipterygoid, I
have acquired the strong suspicion that Leidyosuchus and Eosuchus are
actually not basal alligators and gharials respectively as previously
assumed by the morphologists. Rather, they are euschians that lie well
outside of modern clade of crocodylia (i.e. the last common ancestor of
modern gharials, crocodyloids and alligators and its descendents).
Further, the anatomy of the trigeminal ganglion region suggests that
Leidyosuchus and the form Borealosuchus (which was previously considered
branching just outside of the now falsified brevirostres clade) form a
monophyletic clade of eusuchians just outside of the clade crocodylia.
Similarly, Eosuchus appears to be an even-more primitive lineage outside
of even the ((Leidyosuchus+Borealosuchus), crocodylia) clade. It should
be noted that the gharial has numerous teeth in proportion with its
elongated jaws, but Tomistoma has similar teeth to other crocodyloids
but they are spaced distantly. We speculate that at the adaptive level
these represent somewhat distinct morphotypes. The former is entirely
optimized for piscivory whereas the later is optimized for a more varied
diet including large mammalian and archosaur prey. We speculate that the
development pathways related to formation of supernumerary teeth alveoli
(possibly the bmp2, bmp4, eda, edar, fgf8, pax9, pitx2, runx2, shh and
wnt7b network) also interacts with skull development to alter it in a
stereotypic fashion. Thus, each time a shift from simple longirostry to
polydentate longirostry occurred there was possibly a convergence to the
morph observed in the classical gharials. This phenomenon has possibly
resulted in the conflation of relationships observed in morphological
cladistic analysis.

The early branching of the alligators within the eusuchians is
consistent with the considerable Mesozoic record of the basal versions
of this clade. These include some dramatically disparate forms in terms
of morphology. The early basal alligator Acynodon is a small form (\<1.2
meters) from the late Cretaceous of Europe with an unusual pattern of
heterodonty — the anterior teeth a clearly incisiform and spatulate in
shape, whereas the posterior teeth are bulbous and globular with
vertical ridges and a flat grinding surface. Another slightly larger
basal alligator from the late Cretaceous of North America, Brachychampsa
displays yet another type of heterodonty — its anterior teeth are stout,
straight, circular in outline and sharp, whereas the posterior teeth a
bulbous, ellipsoid with convex button-like crushing surfaces. Despite
the superficial similarity of their posterior teeth the two basal
alligators were clearly distinct in their diets. Acynodon was perhaps a
herbivore which cropped plants with its anterior teeth and ground them
with the posterior teeth. In contrast, Brachychampsa was probably a
carnivore that specialized in hard-shelled prey such as turtles and
molluscs. Completely different from these was the giant basal alligator
Deinosuchus which appears in some ways a scaled up version of its modern
relatives. This form might have included terrestrial vertebrates such as
dinosaurs in its diet, much like the modern alligators bring down
various terrestrial mammals that stray into the swamps. The eusuchians
as noted above also repeatedly reverted as major terrestrial predators
after the Mesozoic. This happened once in the basal euschian
Pristichampsus and another time in the Australian radiation of
mekosuchine crocodyloids. Extinction of the former might have opened the
way for new radiations of predatory mammals. The eusuchians appear to
have had two major peaks of diversity in the Mesozoic — in the Eocene
and the Miocene. In the former epoch their fossils have been noted on
all continents from Antarctica to Canada, suggesting that they had their
peak in during the global temperature maxima that allowed their spread.
In the Miocene it is believed that they underwent several endemic
radiations such as the mekosuchines in Australia and the osteolaemines
in Africa. In these endemic radiations forms descending from a common
ancestor typically occupied multiple ecological niches with
corresponding morphological diversity emerging relatively rapidly. For
example, in the osteolaemine radiation there is a large (\~6-7 meters)
classical crocodile-like form Rimasuchus lloidi, which attacked large
mammals (including human ancestors) like modern crocodiles, the
mid-sized “Crocodylus” pigotti, the mysterious Euthecodon, which had
sawfish like dentition and probably hunted fishes in a fashion generally
similar to that shark, and the diminutive Osteolaemus itself.

[![crocs-1](https://i0.wp.com/farm5.static.flickr.com/4070/4239303005_fdcd8d3944.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/4239303005/ "crocs-1 by somasushma, on Flickr")
*Disparate cranial morphologies in crocodylomorpha*

This brings up the repeated theme seen in crocodile evolution — a
macro-evolutionary puzzle. The dinosaur-line it appears were rather
conservative maintaining a few stable morphs over very long periods of
time with occasional minor modifications for greater perfection. These
morphs also had a certain “scale-free” nature as discussed earlier on
these pages. The crocodile-line too maintained certain forms over long
periods of time; however, in contrast forms with considerable
morphological and ecological disparity emerged repeatedly on relatively
short time scales. This was particularly notable in the notosuchians and
neosuchians. Thus while the dinosaur-line appears to have been strong
competitors across certain key terrestrial niches by retaining a few
common body plans over a time-scale the crocodiles appear to have
adapted rapidly by assuming new morphotypes to fit different niches (to
a degree like mammals). The questions hence are: 1) Is this distinction
in the morphological strategies of the two great archosaurian radiations
a reflection of reality or a figment of imagination? 2) If the
distinction is real what was the cause for it?
