+++
title = "Yet another geopolitical yarn"

+++
As the va\~Nga paNDita said it is no more fun to talk of geopolitics for
what we have been prognosticating is turning out to be so nauseatingly
true. Further, whatever new stuff we might have to say turns out to be a
mere rewind of a past tape. It is truly hard to believe that Hindus had
manu, viShNugupta and viShNusharman in their midst\! Yet we shall take
up a matter of geopolitics that is worth discussion among the Hindu
elite. While the Hindus were distracted by the existential threat from
the legalist chIna-s they took their eye off their age old enemies the
mlechCha-s and the turuShka-s. These threats we shall discuss in two
dimensions. We have covered both these on these pages before but we
shall revisit them in different words (for after all what is there other
than to replay the tape if history repeats itself). Recently, a Hindu
thinker R Vaidyanathan created a new formulation of the clash of
civilization in which, in addition to the conventional Abrahamistic
players such as Isaism and Mohammedanism, he introduced a new player
termed “modernism”. He sees an all-all clash between modernism and the
other players such as the aforesaid Abrahamisms and also the dharma.
While we accept modernism as potentially real entity, like socialism
before it, we see modernism as merely a secularized tentacle of
Abrahamistic thought. The 2nd and 3rd Abrahmisms in particular have the
quality of being memetic viruses that deserve objective study as objects
of special interest. They have the distinctive property of producing
mental aberrations that normally arise from defective brain hardware via
merely a viral “software”. This property of Abrahamisms is in a sense
like a prion disease, wherein a defective prion molecule is enough to
make normal protein molecules to fold as prions. This infective property
of the Abrahamisms has been inherited by modernism. It does spread from
brain to brain just like its predecessors but one of the properties of
it is its ability to “emasculate” the infected individual. As a result a
population with an epidemic of modernism becomes weak and susceptible to
a life-threatening infection by Isaism or Mohammedanism.

So what is this modernism? While it tries to hide itself under the guise
of science, technology, entertainment and fashion it is in reality none
of these. Most lay observers fall easily to these subterfuges adopted by
it and fail to recognize its debilitating social character. It is a term
used by R Vaidyanathan but in the past it went under some other names
stemming from socialism such as “progressivism” and “liberalism”. Like
modernism these terms seem attractive and even desirable to the
undiscerning.

To really understand what this modernism, or what ever one might call
it, really is we have to turn to an analysis of the pretamata. We do
this at some length because here is where we apparently depart from R
Vaidyanathan. While the marUnmAda is similar, it is cruder and more
primitive of the two so we can subsume its devices largely under the
analysis of the pretamata. The premata is a system that rests on the
belief in an entity called God (I spell this entity as they do with the
capital letter God, only to distinguish it from the older concept of a
god). From this God, the pretAchArin-s believe that an \*absolute\* set
of values termed good and evil and something else which they call morals
emerge. They typically believe that these are unique to Homo sapiens and
non-existent or nearly non-existent in other organisms. In circular
reasoning that is typical of such mata-s they claim that the presence of
“moral behavior” in humans is proof for this entity called God. But it
is a rather well-known result in evolutionary biology that behaviors
termed “moral” by the pretamata are consequence of kin selection or of
optimization of a prisoner’s dilemma type game. Thus, “moral behavior”
has already been explained within the evolutionary theory and a
corollary to this is the elimination of God of the pretamata/ the
marUnmAda. Now, even though this is the case, we must realize that most
influential biologists and other secular thinkers are products of
Western “civilization” whose concepts are founded on the pretamata.
Thus, wittingly or unwittingly they have imbibed this concept of
absolute values in morals — most of them are rather terrified by the
prospect of these values being in reality very relative. Hence, even if
they reject the values of the pretamata, they create a new set of values
that they hold as being absolute. It is this constellation of the new
absolute values, adherence to and enforcement of them that constitute
what is termed modernism. The individual set of values differs from
group to group of those who uphold modernism but still the founding
aspect of the pretamata, i.e. they are absolute, does hold within each
group. One aspect of such values held by modernism is termed political
correctness in the madhyama mlechChavarSha and its satellites in the
leukosphere. But it additionally includes a wide range of other values
that might be upheld to different extant within the leukosphere.
Examples of these include:  
1\) The leukosphere has the supreme right in deciding what form of
government is good for all people of the world. Corollaries of these
include it is alright and not a genocide when Iraqis are killed in large
numbers, but the Hindu varNa system is a crime against humanity. It is
good for the leukosphere to possess nuclear weapons but it is bad for
India to possess them. Republican Party (GOP) of US is a good mainstream
party whereas RSS in India is a terrorist/fundamentalist organization.

2\) Practices allowed by the rubric of modernism are good, whereas those
which belong to competing systems, such dharma, are bad. Corollaries
include: Valentine’s day is cool, but vinAyaka chaturthi or janmAShTamI
are outmoded, noisy or primitive. Reading English works is good and a
sign of civilization, whereas reading itihAsa-purANa or kAvya is sign of
being old-fashioned. Talking of great modern western scientists is
inspirational, while talking of old Hindu scientists in chauvinistic and
obscurantist. Observing bhakShya and bhojya rules is strange and
old-fashioned whereas drinking and eating all kinds of abhojya stuff is
modern and progressive. Pop music is good but any form of old Hindu
music is not keeping with the times.

3\) The right of self-defense against predatory religions/ideologies is
human rights violation on part of the victim who is defending
himself/herself. A corollary is that it dangerous to know about or learn
to use Ayudha-s. A strange spin off which is visible in the madhyama
mlechCha desha is the idolizing of law enforcement. The very job
definition selects for a typical law-enforcement agent to be one who is
willing to use violence himself to achieve dominance. Now such people
are intrinsically dangerous themselves and should be carefully
controlled for society to be stable. By idolizing the law-enforcement
agent (an aspect of modernism) one is actually idolizing a rather
destructive streak of human nature. In contrast the intellectual
kShatriya idolized in the archaic brahma-kShatra tradition was a very
different figure who was an \*upholder\* of dharma rather than a
\*law-enforcement\* agent.

These absolutes of modernism, not surprisingly, emerged in the
leukosphere as it is an offshoot of the pretamata. As a consequence it
has been in some conflict with the pretamata. But at deep level there is
no conflict as they are structurally similar ideologies. Further, the
madhyama mlechChavarSha, the bulwark of the leukosphere, is still
strongly anchored in the pretamata. Hence, the pretamata uses modernism
as a defensive strategy (as it earlier used socialism and democracy) to
attack its rivals such as the marUnmAda and the heathens. The Hindu
heathens fall prey to it in same manner they fell to the marUnmAda and
the pretamata in the past. But this is further compounded by the
intellectual lilliputs among the Hindu elites who are simply unable to
fathom these ideologies.

For example, the Hindu intellectual cretins want to fight the
evolutionary theory because they feel it undermines their “faith”. They
feel that scientific understanding threatens their “religion” because it
considerably undermines the very concept of punar janma. Hindus assert
that they believe in God and that they have only one God. Some also
speak of believing in God even though they are very modern and hence do
not practice karman-s. When pressed to say more about this god they say
brahman is the one God and all other gods are merely manifestations of
him. They proudly cite the shruti pramANa for their one God being
dIrghatamAs’ words: “ekaM sat viprA bahudhA vadanti”. When you ask them
does any real Hindu \*believe\* in brahman or puruSha they tell you of
course. On another matter they assert that Hindu kings never invaded any
other “country”. All this is a sign of not just infection by modernism
but the fact that these memetic diseases have completely blinded the
heathen. Thus, rather than harnessing his unique position to study the
unmatta mata-s and increase his horizon of knowledge and with that
create a defense against diseases of the mind the Hindu eager succumbs
to those very diseases.

The other dimension we intended to cover was that of the consequences of
the war between the mlechCha-s and turuShka-s in Afghanistan. However,
due to other matters of interest arising we are keeping away from this
for now.
