+++
title = "Will the veil of the pelagornithids bexa0pierced?"

+++
[![pelagornithid](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3590/3325302488_bfbe023afd.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3325302488/ "pelagornithid by somasushma, on Flickr")

I had read of the pelagornithids long ago but never really thought too
much about them until a month before the seizure by the first grAhin in
1998. We were the visiting a world famous museum near our city, with the
right company that one needs to visit a museum. It had a remarkable
reconstruction of the local pelagornithid skeleton soaring above our
head and a fossil jaw fragment of the same. It was then that the mystery
of the pelagornithids came to my attention. What were their affinities?
We had spent a while talking about this issue and continue to remain
puzzled by them to this date. The most notable feature of the
pelagornithids is their convergent evolution of teeth-like structures
long after the avian lineage did away with real teeth (even before the
end of the Cretaceous). This has given the pelagornithids their other
common name the pseudodontorns. The other notable feature of these birds
is their enormous size – the smallest of them were about as large as an
extant wandering albatross (3.5 m wingspan) while the largest of them
were about 6 meters in wingspan. Perhaps the only other birds that might
have rivaled them in size were the teratorns, which appear to have been
a clade of the accipitrid raptors (eagles, hawks, kites, condors but not
falcons), most likely related to the new world vultures and condors.
These birds were around from around 55 Mya (late Paleocene) down to
about 3 Mya (late Pliocene), when they appear to have mysteriously
become extinct and they are known from all continents including
Antarctica and islands such as New Zealand and Japan in the Pacific and
England in the Atlantic. This wide distribution and their enormous
wingspans have drawn the obvious comparisons between them and the
albatrosses that routinely circumnavigate the globe, albeit at lower
latitudes.

Their presence right in the Paleocene makes it clear that these birds
arose early and that one must seek their origin among the avian clades
that diverged prior to the Paleocene. Molecular studies have firmly
demonstrated that evidence from morphology is always problematic in
evolutionary reconstruction and should not be taken at face value. This
makes placing an extinct clade like the pelagornithids particularly
difficult. Anatomy points in two directions. The first comprehensive and
objective anatomical study aimed at evolutionary reconstruction of these
birds was performed by Estelle Bourdon who was using what was at that
point one of the best-preserved skulls of Odontopteryx (from the early
Eocene) along with earlier remains of a related bird from Morocco. This
study, which was reasonably well-presented, had some fairly striking
aspects: It found that the pelagornithids formed a clade with the ducks
and geese (Anseriformes) supported by no less than 14 synapomorphies. An
examination of the synapomorphies presented by the author shows that
several of them appear rather convincing from the anatomical viewpoint.
In terms of age, the proposal by Clarke et al that Vegavis from the
Cretaceous of Antarctica was an anseriform, implies that the radiation
of anseriformes was already underway in the Cretaceous. Hence, an
anseriform affinity for the pelagornithids is entirely compatible with
their presence in the late Paleocene.

Despite all this, there are other aspects of Bourdon’s phylogeny that
are far less attractive. Firstly, the author’s tree breaks up the
monophyly of galliformes and anseriformes, with galliformes as the
earliest branching clade of neognathan birds – this flies against the
extremely well-established clade galloanserae unifying the goose-like
birds and the fowl. Thus, in this respect Bourdon’s topology is simply
incorrect. However, constraining galliformes to be a sister group of the
pelagornithids+anseriform clade adds only a few more steps to the
published tree and only makes the 9 supposed synapomorphies unifying
(neognaths-galliformes) invalid. These 9 appear very dubious and given
the unequivocal support for galloanserae from molecular data, it is
clear that these nine characters are not synapomorphies. What about the
other relationships recovered by Bourdon in the same tree? The tree
correctly recovers the monophyly of a major water bird clade of
pelicans, hamerkops, frigates, cormorants, gannets and ahingas. However
inside this clade it gets some of the relationships wrong. Again it
fails to unify the grebes and flamingoes and instead places them along
with separates sets of water birds that are actually closer to each
other than to grebe-flamingo clade. The tree also wrongly places the
tropicbirds with a clade including the albatross. Thus, while getting
certain relationships correct, it is subjected to the vicissitudes of
anatomy being prone to rapid divergence and convergence. This
convergence is indeed striking in the case of post-cranial characters
that have certain adaptive significance – for example the sternum. A new
pelagornithid sternum was discussed by the noted ornithologist Mayr,
which along with the Nigerian pelagornithid sternum recovered long ago
adds much new data about this structure. The strenum of the
pelagornithid shows notable similarities to those of the albatross and
the frigate bird in being deeply vaulted and elongated like those of the
gannets (all of which belong to the great water-bird clade) but has no
features unifying it with any of the galloanserae.

However, given that anseriformes and pelagornithids do not share a
lifestyle we might view their similarities as reported by Bourdon as
possibly implying a genuine relationship. It is in light of this that
the pristine Peruvian pelagornithid skull reported yesterday might help
us further in uncovering their affinities.

As per the molecular phylogenies the basal radiations of the
anseriformes preceded the emergence of the albatross clade by a
relatively small interval. Thus, if we accept the hypothesis of Bourdon
that the pelagornithids are related to the anseriformes, they were
likely to be first occupants of the niche today occupied by albatrosses.
Gerald Mayr makes an interesting paleobiological observation in this
regard: He observes that in the Paleogene the pelagornithids span a size
range from the albatross-size to about 6 meter wingspans. However, in
the Neogene they are restricted to only the large end of the spectrum.
Could it be that this represents the interval in which the albatross
clade emerged and eventually replaced the pelagornithids in their lower
size range?
