+++
title = "Songs to open the doors of the worlds"

+++
The 4 gAna-s that comprise the vaishadeva series are based on the code
words:  
rAT, virAT, svarAT, saMrAT. The first is for the conquest of pR^ithivi,
the second for the conquest of antarikSha and the third and fourth for
the conquest of dyaus. The first sAman opens the earthly door so that
the yajamAna might behold the vasu-s. The second opens the door of the
atmosphere so that the yajamAna might behold the rudra-s. The third and
fourth sAmAn-s open the door of the sky so that the yajamAna might
behold the Aditya-s and other deva-s. The sAman-s end in oblations that
state that after the end of the life of the yajamAna “attains” these
loka-s. I have repeatedly heard the colloquial tradition among smArta
ritualists that states that these mantra-s are a means of attaining
these “upper” worlds of the gods upon the death of the yajamAna. I was
however puzzled by the need to go to pR^ithivI when you are already
there. If it was merely restricted to opening doors to go upwards with
the funerary fire to the atmosphere and beyond then the colloquial
belief is fine, but what about the earthly doors?

In reality these sAman-s should be taken in the same sense as the
vedAntic teaching of the last part of taittirIyopaniShat 3.10 (the
section beginning with asmAl-lokAt pretya; Here too, the brahmavit sings
a sAman as he attains universal consciousness upon his death). So what
is meant here is that the yajamAna experiences and expansion of
consciousness to become part of the pR^ithivI, antarikSha and dyaus
simultaneously. The image of the opening door is the related to this and
the passage of his consciousness to encompass these realms. To the
outside observer all this will appear to be either extremely bewildering
or the usual mumbo-jumbo :-). But if one looks at the altered
consciousness experienced by subjects under the influence
N,N-dimethyltryptamine one can see that the themes of both the gAna-s in
the taittirIya and the Chandogya are closely reproduced even in people
who have never encountered these texts (including the act of dying,
which happens early in a DMT experience, and then the expansion of
consciousness to occupy the worlds). The big question is how did the
vipra-s attain experience of these states –was it via substance or a
proto-yoga?
