+++
title = "The prelude to the philosophical penetration"

+++
It was a couple of months after dvAdashAnta. We were wandering on our
ashva at the foothills of the chanDikA parvata. We went down the road
south of the vinAyaka chaitya and the kapAla slopes and continued on the
long path past the hill of the dasyu-s and reached the end of the long
path near the school of the taittirIyaka-s of the mahArATTa country.
After a while ekanetra joined us and we bought ourselves some spinach
bhR^ijjika-s which we sat eating. To our surprise and delight she came
by a few minutes later on her much faster ashva. We exchanged signs of
recognition. She was a bit hesitant as to whether to stop to converse or
move on. She then said something in Hindustani, which neither of us
understood due to the Urdu idiom. She refused to explain its meaning and
simply chuckled saying it was one of the advantages of knowing the
“turukon kI bhAShA” — which we would not understand due to not seeing
movies. Then she started haranguing us on the filthiness of the
bhR^ijjika seller, the potential for disease from the bhR^ijjika-s and
then the possibility of a pAtaka. We some trepidation we wondered what
the elders might do if they knew that we were eating these bhR^ijjika-s.
But we knew she was in our pakSha and would not snitch on us. We asked
her what she was doing here when we had thought we had seen the last of
her.

There was a flashback: We had just finished the critical battle of
aNDAkara, even though we were afflicted with a raging jvara. We felt we
might fall to the jvara even before we entered the samarA\~NgaNa. But
like in the upheaval of the kShatriya-s on the 14th day of the Great
War, in our own last rush we picked up our khaDga and charged through
the ranks lowering the heads of hrasvaroman, ashvashiras, the proud
jyeShThamukha, kumbhaghoNa, ghanamukha, duShTa-brAhmaNa and the vile
sphigShiras. Coming out from the great yuddha still covered with the
lohita of our own and our bhrAtR^ivya-s we were barely holding on to our
ashva with our chaturtha fellow-rider by our side. We paused to send
forth a sUkta to that great indra who does not let the Arya name to fall
to the dasyu-s (“na yo rara AryaM nAma dasyave”) and that fierce viShNu
who tramples the dasyu-s underfoot. We were nearly delirious with the
wounds and the raging roga as we summoned our strength to aid our
chaturtha fellow rider who was severely wounded by a dart of hrasvaroman
to reach his destination. Then we rushed to the ashva-sthala to catch
one last glimpse of her who shone like vena in the firmament. We had
little strength left in us as we finally reached her who was like an
avantisundarI. We were delighted that she had waited for us. But we were
also alarmed as we learned that in her part of the raNakShetra she had
brought down the powerful braindeya and shvetA\~ngA without much of a
sign of injury. We spoke a few words on the braincase of theropod
dinosaurs — the implications of which we did not fully understand. But
we also felt that Proceratosaurus was likely to be coelurosaur something
that has recently become rather prominent (not just any coelurosaur, but
a basal tyrannosaur). By then my strength had reached its nadir. She
said that she was departing the next day to indraprastha and then to
krau\~ncha dvIpa for a couple of months after which she would return to
continue in indraprastha. We may have spoken on for hours but with the
jvara killing us, we retreated to our fort and collapsed. When we
recovered several days later we realized that it was the last we had
ever seen of her.

So it was a pleasing to see her back. After the preliminaries on the
bhR^ijjika-s she began filling us in about her visit to the
mlechCha-desha. Our heart nearly jumped out as we heard of the advances
that were happening in the realm of dinosauria — the recognition of an
abelisaur-ceratosaur clade, the definition of maniraptora and the like,
the dinosaur we had overlooked, Stokesosaurus and descriptions of
Segnosaurus and Therizinosaurus. But all this was a mere shadow of what
was to come, we clearly got the prophetic foreboding right then. But
there were other advances like that the protein with 4 homeodomains and
many zinc fingers that drew our more immediate attention. After all this
talk we started unveiling our newly acquired knowledge of quantum
mechanics — and how we had finally figured the way to derive the Hückel
rule for aromatics. Due to this she sparked a philosophical discourse
that exposed our profound ignorance. It proceeded thus: If we find some
regular laws in a domain of science we usually go downwards to explain
it with even more basic underlying laws. But are there some laws that
really do not depend on the more basic underlying laws in any basic
sense. They are simply laws that apply to the emergent properties of the
systems comprised of entities governed by the same or different downward
laws. Our discussions with her on this issue led to idea that such
emergent laws might be the ones important in certain areas of science
like the “laws” of domains of sciences like biology or linguistics. She
interpreted some of Dawkins ideas on memes and later what came to be
called temes as evidence for such emergent laws. However, I was still
not sure, bringing up the issue that perhaps it is either our limitation
of knowledge or the subtlety of the link or the triviality of the link
that makes us blind to teleology of the emergent laws in more basic
laws. The valence of carbon being 4 is not required to do a good part of
biology but it still subtly influences its “emergent laws” I felt. But
neither of us nor the spectator ekanetra, who wisely watched as brahma
priest, could create the formalism for testing the reality of emergent
laws. So, at least she and I took the path of experimentation to test
this possibility. Towards the end she also somewhat interestingly made a
statement, a little surprising for that age, that consciousness was an
emergent property of several simple signaling systems of neurons. She
declared that she wanted to devote her time to study this possibility
and wanted to investigate the functioning signaling systems. At the same
time a parallel thought was running in my mind in which I had move two
steps ahead — a study of the evolution of the signaling systems. But at
that point both of us were caught in the mist of this idea of
consciousness as an emergent system and dived into the study of
signaling (she says to her it was all probably “aparAvidya”). It was
already late and the kShatriya of the night had mounted the bear on the
high sky (amI ya R^ikSha nihitAsa uchchA) and we had to tear ourselves
apart before the earthly spasha-s of the pUrva-s came to know of our
clandestine rendezvous. As we rode our ashva back we had a feeling that
cannot be described — being at the threshold of the unknown that
seemingly lay in our hands but so beyond anything we knew. This we can
only say in retrospect.

[Led to this
excursus](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/09/21/macranthropy-and-the-sambandha-s-between-microcosm-and-macrocosm/)
