+++
title = "Orkoraptor and Aerosteon"

+++
[![Aerosteon\_Orkoraptor](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3538/3398110954_9569ce9037_o.png)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3398110954/ "Aerosteon_Orkoraptor by somasushma, on Flickr")  
The post-orbital bones of *Aerosteon* and *Orkoraptor* as described by
Sereno et al and Novas et al.

By the Maastrichtian epoch of the late Cretaceous of the northern world
(at least in North America and Asia) we see the dominance of the
coelurosaurian mega-predators, the tyrannosaurs. The picture in the
southern world (i.e. the ex-Gondwanan continents) seems to have been
different. We instead see more basal theropod lineages in occupying the
mega-predator niche. In the Early/Middle Cretaceous and the earlier
stages of the late Cretaceous (Cenomanian and Turonian) we find the
gigantic allosauroids of the carcharodontosaurid clade in Africa and
South America. Along side with them we also find the gigantic spinosaurs
from the Albian and Cenomanian of the same continents – these were
probably the largest land carnivores that ever lived (\~16m in length).
The spinosaurs appear to be an even more basal tetanuran lineage. On the
same continents through the Albian and the Cenomanian beside the above
tetanuran lineages was an even more basal theropod lineage of the
abelisauroids – e.g. forms like *Kryptops* and *Rugops* in Africa and
forms like *Skorpiovenator* from the Cenomanian of South America. As the
Cretaceous aged we find the abelisaurs gaining prominence throughout the
ex-Gondwanan continents– either the Santonian or the Maastrichtian of
India, Madagascar and South America have all yielded several horned
abelisauroid carnivores (e.g. *Rajasaurus, Indosuchus, Majungasaurus,
Aucasaurus* and *Carnotaurus*).

More recently, two enigmatic South American theropods were described by
Novas et al and Sereno et al respectively namely *Orkoraptor* (\~6-7m in
length) and *Aerosteon* (\~8-9m in length). These theropods suggest that
the picture in the southern continents might have been even more
complex. Of the two, Orkoraptor is quite scrappy, comprised of few skull
fragments, vertebra, rib fragments, a tibial fragment and some teeth
from the Maastrichtian layer of Patagonia. A careful phylogenetic
analysis by Novas et al using this fragmentary material reaches the
following conclusions: 1) Because the fibular crest is separated from
lateral (fibular) condyle they conclude the Orkoraptor is a derived
theropod with the tetanuran lineage. 2) Further they remark based on the
upturned rostral process (the part contacting the frontal) of the
triradiate postorbital that it is likely to be a coelurosaur because of
the similar trend seen in other coelurosaurians like compsognathids,
ornithomimosaurs, *Ornitholestes*, some deinonychosaurs and some birds.
3) Certain other features of the quadratojugal’s caudo-ventral margin
and the distribution of serrations on the teeth were also invoked to
suggest a link to the coelurosaurs. Further the authors noted that the
caudal vertebra of *Orkoraptor* had a pneumatic cavity (pleurocoel).
*Aerosteon* is from an even earlier layer of the Cretaceous of Argentina
(the Santonian) and was described by Sereno et al in a poorly-researched
but well-illustrated paper. Due to the unsatisfactory scientific quality
of parts of this paper key issues appear to have been missed. What was
highlighted in the paper was the dramatic pneumatization of the
*Aerosteon* skeletal elements including the gastralia and furcula. This
of course is consistent with the presence of an air sac system
equivalent to that seen in the birds as discussed earlier by O’Connor et
al. But I suspect the rivalry between Sereno and O’Connor has resulted
in the former dogmatically ignoring key conclusions of the latter’s
study. Of relevance in the current context is the conclusion of Sereno
et al, based on very limited analysis, that *Aerosteon* is a basal
tetanuran. However, one look at the distinctive postorbital of
*Aerosteon* shows that it is different from all other basal tetanurans
and close to *Orkoraptor*. Further *Aerosteon* and *Orkoraptor* also
share the presence of pneumatic cavities in their caudal vertebra.
Further, adding *Aerosteon* to a more extensive phylogenetic analysis
containing *Orkoraptor* results in the two forming a basal lineage
within coelurosauria. This strongly suggests that the *Orkoraptor* and
*Aerosteon* define a novel clade of basal coelurosaurs unique of South
America.

[![bambiraptor](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3576/3412420642_a66f76decf_o.png)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3412420642/ "bambiraptor by somasushma, on Flickr")  
Note the upturned rostral process of the postorbital in the
deinonychosaur *Bambiraptor* (as reconstructed by Burnham)

This suggests that detailed study of the latter in this context would be
of considerable utility. Furthermore, in 2002 Coria and Currie had
reported an obscure theropod from the late Cretaceous of Argentina in
the journal Ameghiniana that was not described in any detail. Novas et
al note that this dinosaur has a similar postorbital and tibia to
Orkoraptor. This suggests that indeed this clade of theropods could have
been a previously completely neglected lineage of mega-predators
dominant in the late Cretaceous of South America. I suspect some
unpublished non-abelisaur theropod remains from the Maastrichtian of
India might also belong to this lineage of theropods. Importantly, this
lineage seems to belong to the basal radiation of coelurosauria. This
suggests that both in the northern and southern landmasses two distinct
basal lineages of coelurosaurs, the tyrannosaurs and the orkoraptorids
grew in size to occupy the megapredator niche. Recently, Novas et al
also reported the dramatic discovery of another carnivorous dinosaur
from the Maastrichtian of Argentina- the dromeosaur *Austroraptor*. At
around 5 meters Austroraptor is approximately comparable in size (though
larger) to the Mongolian giant dromeosaur, *Achillobator* and probably
also the fragmentary American dromeosaur, *Utahraptor* which are sister
taxa to Dromeosaurus. However, their phylogenetic analysis indicated
that it belongs to the Gondwanan unenlagine clade including apparent
flighted forms like *Rahonavis* and Buitrerator which lay at the other
end of the size spectrum. This meant that convergently these dromeosaurs
grew in size in both the southern and northern continents to attain
giant sizes. Additionally the long snout of *Austroraptor* is vaguely
reminiscent of the spinosaurids. Thus, in the south it appears that the
spinosaurs and carcharodontosaurs faded away towards the late Cretaceous
and were replaced by giant coelurosaurs that shared the ecosystem with
the abelisaurs that remain unaffected till the end. If this contention
is confirmed it could mean a notable change in our understanding of
theropod faunas in the South.

In this context revisiting the dinosaur fauna of the Maastrichtian of
India would be of tremendous interest. One of the egg types found in
these deposits from Chandrapur is identical with those found in South
America and appears to be laid by a gigantic titanosaurid sauropod. A
Hindu social activist once had displayed his personal dinosaur fossil
collection from these beds, which included a large femur of a
titanosaurid. At least 3 types of theropod eggs appear to be represented
in these beds. One of these appears to be an abelisaurid while the other
two could belong to coelurosaurians including the orkoraptorids.
