+++
title = "The monitors"

+++
There was a good program aired by PBS on the monitor lizards that
features some work done by Pianka who has been studying these lizards
for several decades. I could identify with his fascination for these
lizards as I felt similarly in my youth. My live encounters with them
have been limited to a single species the Varanus bengalensis. Of course
this lizard is legendary in the mahArATTa country due to the role it
played in the re-conquest of Kondana from the Mogols. This is a rather
remarkable lizard which I first encountered literally in my
grandmother’s tale about a maternal relative who was bitten by it and
supposedly developed a long lasting immunological reaction at the spot
of the bite. I then read an article on this lizard by a guy called
Walter Auffenberg who had devoted his life studying them. This later led
me to his monographic book on the topic which is no longer easy to get.
I acquainted R with Auffenberg’s article in the Sanctuary magazine and
later she most helpfully managed to procure that book.

Before talking of any biology I should make note of a philological
point.The names for this Varanus in Indo-Aryan languages is (there could
be some inaccuracies here as I got it from an old book rather than
speakers)- Bengali: gohsAp; Bihari dialect: gho; Oriya: godhi;
Rajasthani: gho-eldo; Balouchi: goj; mahArATTi: ghorpaD; Nepali: gopar;
Dakkani Hindi: ghopor; Gujarati: patla gho; Panjabi: gar-gho/pattan gho;
Sindhi: kAla-gho; Kohistani:ghua; Simhala: goya  
In saMskR^ita we have godhA/godhikA which is attested right from the
vedic layer.  
In the Iranian languages we have- Persian: samserah; Pushto: somsereh;
Swati: samsArah; in Firdausi’s Persian we encounter the interesting
sUsmAr whose relation to the previous words is unclear to me. It is
certainly not of Arabic origin as the word in that language is zabb or
waran. It seems related to saMskR^ita shishumAra but the origin of the
link to the lizard is not clear. Notably, that was also the name for the
constellation of Draco probably meaning a Varanus lizard in Persian
while meaning a dolphin among the Indo-Aryans (shishumAra).  
In the Dravidian languages we have- Tamil/Malayalam: uDuMbu; Kanada:
uDA; Telugu: oDer(apparently tribal?) /uDumu; Tulu:oDu  
Thus, it is clear that within each of these language families the word
was vertically inherited from their respective common ancestors.
However, there appears to be no relationship of the word between
families. It is particularly interesting that Indo-Aryan and Iranian do
not share a common word though the word is conserved within each of
these families. While it is unclear if the animal was known right from
time of the Indo-European homeland further north, it is clear that the
early Aryans in both India and Iran recognized this animal. Its
conservation within each language family suggests that the animal was
well known and easily recognized once each Aryan group had settled in
their current locations. Yet the origin of the word godhA is unclear to
me — it is conceivable it was a saMskR^itization of a vernacular found
in the old IVC/SSVC language X. Indeed the monitor was a well known food
item of both Indo-Aryans and Dravidians mentioned as such in the
dharmasUtra-s, rAmAyaNa and the early Tamil poems. Monitor bones have
been found in kitchen garbage in IVC/SSVC sites. Indeed, I have seen
even these days the drAviDa make uDumbu kari. Indeed in one of the tales
of the tathAgata he narrates the case of a prince who gourmised a whole
roasted Varanus without giving his wife her share of it.

But the animal had a place beyond the dinner plate in early Indic
literature. There was the monitor-headed goddess godhikA in the early
kaumara system \[Footnote 1\]. An image of her has been found in the
Kushana age ruins from Uttar Pradesh. The godhA is also depicted as an
emblem of umA in several temples. There is also another perceptive tale
of the tathAgata in the pAlI jAtaka which eloquently captures the nature
of lizard. It roughly goes thus (jAtaka 138 and 325 in the vulgar
pALI):  
In the days long past the tathAgata had taken birth as a rAja-godhA or
the king of the lizards who lived at the fringe of a village. There a
parivrAjaka lived beside him and delivered lectures which were
appreciated by the villagers and also the lizard. Once that parivrAjaka
went away and a pAShaNDa posing as a parivrAjaka took his place. The
lizard continued to come out to listen to this pAShaNDa too mistaking
him for the real teacher. One day there was an unnatural rain in summer
and many insects had come out. Seeing this, several monitors came out to
feed on the insects. But the villagers who were in turn lying in wait
caught the monitors and cutting them up made a curry with several
flavors. They gave the pAShaNDa some of this meat to eat. He was
delighted by its taste and enquired what the meat was and the villagers
let him in on the secret. He thought to himself I see that monitor
coming out daily to see me. Let me kill him and make some more
lizard-curry for myself. So he fetched ghee, curds, salt and pepper, and
also a club and hid it under his saffron robe and waited for the
monitor. But as the pAShaNDa was turned windward the rAja-godhA smelt
the flesh of lizards on him and realized that the pAShaNDa was eating
his kin and might try to kill him next. The monitor ran away but the
pAShaNDa turned and tried to kill him but throwing his club. The monitor
deftly evaded his club and ran into a burrow and disappeared. Then
putting his head out of another burrow hole he recited a gAtha
denouncing the pAShaNDa and threatened to expose him as one. Fearing
this, the pAShaNDa fled the place. Then the tathAgata revealed that the
rogue whom the saMgha had caught cheating people was the pAShaNDa in his
past birth, while the brAhmaNa sAriputra was the original parivrAjaka,
whereas the monitor was the tathAgata himself as a bodhisattva.

There is yet another yarn of the tathAgata when he was again born as
rAja-godhA which we will narrate next (jAtaka 141). This along with the
above one shows the buddha’s deep understanding of Varanus behavior:  
During the reign of brahmadatta, the tathAgata was born as the
rAja-godhA who lorded over hundreds of lizards. He lived in a great
burrow in a forest near a branch of the ga\~NgA. He had a son who was
unnaturally infatuated by a Calotes lizard and spent his time sniffing
the Calotes with his tongue and embracing him. The royal monitor
reprimanded his son repeatedly for this allophilia warning him of his
intimacy with the lowly Calotes. Despite his repeated advice the young
monitor did not give up his intimacy. Fearing that a great calamity
might arise due to this allophilia the royal monitor dug up new escape
burrows to prepare for an eventuality. With time the Calotes remained
the same size but the young monitor was growing rapidly. Soon the
Calotes was crushed by the monitor’s embraces and felt he might die if
the monitor continued with his embraces a little longer. So he decided
to put an end to the race of the monitors. The Calotes saw a monitor
hunter arrive with his spade, club and dogs. He led the hunter to the
entrances of the monitor burrows and asked him to pile fuel and start
fires. The hunter got to work and as the monitors tried to escape the
smoke he clubbed them and those he missed fell to his dogs. But the
rAja-godhA who had dug new escape tunnels made it to safety via those
evading the hunter. As he escaped he recited a gAtha that the misplaced
allophilia for the Calotes had brought genocide upon the monitors. Then
the tathAgata revealed that the traitor who had left the saMgha of the
tathAgata and joined that of devadatta was the young monitor, the
Calotes was his cousin devadatta in his past birth who was hence
destined for the avIchi naraka, whereas the royal monitor was the
tathAgata himself as a bodhisattva.

[![godha](https://i0.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2569/4054244119_509c57ef55.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/4054244119/ "godha by somasushma, on Flickr")  
A picture of the Indian monitor at jetavana kindly provide by shrI
[sarvesha tivArI](http://bharatendu.com/). He informs me that the
bauddha sites of jetavana and srAvastI are notable for the prevalence of
the monitor (incidentally the buddha narrated the above tales at
jetavana). They probably have been so since the days of the tathagata
and beyond. Note that the lizard is performing typical activity of
exploring a cleft in the tree.

The Indian monitor is usually up by around 7.00 AM and comes out of it
burrow and spends the day foraging. Usually it returns to its burrow
around 1.00 PM for some rest and then forages again till it returns
between 4.30 to 7.10 PM to rest for the day. It also climbs certain
chosen trees and spends a while on those trees.

It was the third complete year after the battle of dvAdashAnta. The
non-jAmadagnya vatsa and I were strolling around 6.30 AM in gavalakuNDa
near a reptile holding area of his employer. As were coming up the
grassy bank we heard a pair of stone-curlews, those original R^iShi-s,
intoning their sAman-s, even as an udgAtar recites the vAn-nidhana
krau\~ncha sAman and the tritIyakrau\~ncha at offering of indra in the
dvAdashAha ritual. We soon were to witness an unforgettable battle
between the dinosaurs, a lepidosaur and a mammal. Suddenly, all went
quite with a monitor descending from a tree and swiftly running towards
were the stone-curlews were. The two birds ran towards the lizard with
their wings widely spread in a peculiar attacking pose making shrill
screeching noises. When I saw that a flash went off in my head — this is
exactly how the theropod dinosaurs might have held their hands while
attacking their prey \[Footnote 2\]. The small birds put up such a show
that the lizard hastily retreated. Then we saw the most unexpected sight
– a mongoose probably originally tracking the lizard made a lunge at the
birds. The stone- curlews mounted an attack on the mongoose next. They
took of the ground briefly to land on the mongoose and peck it and then
chased it on the ground till it ran out of their range.

Pianka remarked that the monitor is probably more intelligent than other
lizards. This is perhaps true based on the observations of the doyen of
monitor studies Auffenberg and my own few observations on V.bengalensis.
The monitor is able to maintain a rather active life-style because it is
freed from Carrier’s constraint by its gular pump and has a more
elaborate alveolar development than any other lizard. As the tathAgata
notices the monitor anticipates when and where insects might be
available. This has been noticed with respect rains in the Indian
monitor and with respect to forest fires in one of the Australian
monitors. The monitor does not attempt to take termite mounds in summer,
but as soon as it rains it translocates to these mounds and tears its
way through to get the insects. The Indian monitor also knows how to
exploit bovine dung to catch insects. The monitors routinely inspect
only dung pats at the correct stage in their decay when they are
inhabited by large beetles and termites and start dismantling them to
locate the insects and eat them. Then they dig up the insects from their
hole below the dung pats and eat them. The monitor is very hard to dig
out from its burrow as it can slash the attacker with its tail. But two
animals specialize in killing monitors in their burrows — the python and
the boar. The python systematically checks out burrows of monitors when
they are sleeping at night to pull them out. The boar having smelt out a
monitor will carry out an excavation into the burrow and kill the
lizard. When in the open it is sought by the mongoose and the power
crested serpent eagle. An acquaintance of mine, the shUdra of
dIpa-patha, claimed he had seen this fierce eagle carry away a monitor.
It may also be attacked and killed by its cousin the water monitor,
which I have only seen dead.

Most Hindus used to believe that the monitor is a poisonous lizard.
Years ago Gabe and St Girons published a paper that the monitor probably
secreted a venom from its large mandibular gland similar to the Gila
monster. A Russian Gorelov published an obscure paper claiming that the
monitor was venomous as its saliva paralyzed rats and sparrows when
injected. In another obscure paper Cogger basically reiterated my
grandmother’s claim that the monitor bites might produce prolonged
non-healing troublesome wounds. However, Auffenberg states that the
monitors have bitten him numerous times throughout his career and he
never faced any intoxication. However, he does state that once he had an
Indian monitor bite with a prolonged wound that resulted in a serious
bacterial infection reminding me of my grandmother’s tale. There has
been some revival of the poisonous monitor theory by Fry et al recently,
although they apparently fail to review the prior literature on this
matter.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Footnote 1: She is one of a series of zoocephalic deities in the AvaraNa
of kArttikeya, such as shishumAramukhI, the dolphin-headed goddess.

Footnote 2: Years later it was to become clear that the way people used
to reconstruct the hands of Mesozoic dinosaurs was wrong. They did hold
them like their modern representatives
