+++
title = "vijayanagaran activities in shrI lankA"

+++
Since the vijayan colonization of lankA several south India empires have
extended their sway over lankA. On occasions, the lankans too invaded or
interfered with the mainland, most famous occasion being the invasion of
parAkramabAhu. Due to some prominent historians underplaying or outright
ignoring the vijayanagaran forays into lankA, I too was misled into
believing this was an unimportant facet of their military and cultural
expansion. But an impressive collection of lankan gems that I had seen
in the karnATa country from the vijayanagaran period kept coming to mind
and culminated in more detailed look at the activities of vijayanagara
in shrI lankA. Further even the biased Islamic and Christian sources had
recorded the activities of vijayanagara in lankA, suggesting it was not
something minor to be brushed aside.

\-kumAra kampaNa, the hero of Madhurai, the destroyer of the Army of
Islam, had planned a large-scale invasion of shrI lankA to bring it
under vijyanagaran control. However, he died just before the invasion
and it was called off. Nevertheless the lankan rAjan bhuvanaikabAhu-V
sent an embassy with gifts to maintain status quo with vijayanagara.

\-In 1385 CE virupAkSha, was sent by his father harihara-II to bring
lankA to pay tribute. He invaded the island with an amphibious force and
forced bhuvanaikabAhu to accept vijayanagaran overlordship. He appears
to have taken the state of Yazhpanam (Jaffna) and brought it under
direct vijayanagaran rule and used it to exert pressure on
bhuvanaikabAhu. In support of this we note that a source mentioned by
the learned historian SK Aiyangar, the nArAyaNIvilAsaM states that
virUpAkSha set up a pillar of victory in lankA. We note that around this
time harihara-II took the grandiose title of
pUrva-pashchima-dakShiNa-samudrAdhIshvara. Copper plates found at
Alampundi in the drAviDa country state that virUpAkSha acting on behalf
of his father conquered the siMhala-s and brought gemstones for his
father from there. The Portuguese sources also mention the conquest of
lankA by a hindu king whose name is hopelessly corrupted and state that
the rulers of Jaffna were karnATa-s.

\-In 1424 CE devarAya-II came to power and appears to have strengthened
the navy by appointing a special naval command under the
nAvigaDa-prabhu. Initially, the naval force appears to have been active
on the Andhra coast as devarAya dispatched ambitious naval expeditions
against Burma. These invasions landed on the Pegu and Tenasserim coasts
and forced the Mon kingdom to become a tributary of vijayanagara and
possibly even under direct vijayanagaran control. In 1440 CE a conflict
appears to have emerged over the lankan non-payment of tribute during
devarAya-II’s reign. As a consequence a lankan spice ship was captured
and impounded by the vijayanagaran naval force. In response
parAkramabAhu-II hoping to relive the memories of eponymous predecessor
launched a naval expedition against the mainland and plundered
Adhirampattinam. In response, devarAya sent his mahApradhAni (prime
minister) lakShmaNa-daNDanAyaka to punish the lankans. In 1442 CE he
reconquered Adhirampattinam and launched an invasion into lankA. The
lankans were defeated in battle fought south of Jaffna in 1443CE.
Originally lakShmaNa intended to completely conquer lankA and bring it
under direct vijayanagaran rule. However, the alarming news of the great
Jihad being launched deep into vijayanagaran territory by the Bahmanid
sultan reached him just then. So he accepted the tributes of
parAkramabAhu-II and returned to the capital to reorganize the army to
fight the Moslem invasion. This is supported an inscription near
Chengalapattu in the Tamil country that mentions devarAya having
subjugated the siMhala-s. Even an Islamic source (Abdur Razzak the Turk
from Iran) and a Portuguese reports the same. Both these sources also
report the subjugation of Pegu and Tenaserim in Southern Burma by
devarAya. In the Burman accounts after the death of the king rAjAdhirAT
of Mons we notice that there was break before the king rAma-rAjadhirAT
takes the throne. This break corresponds to the vijayanagaran
subjugation of the Burman coast, probably taking advantage of the
internal conflict there.

\-With the death of devarAya-II the advancing Islamic Jihad pulverized
the Vijayanagarans and their empire began shrinking rapidly even as they
fought to barely stave off the annual jihads of the Bahmanids. In this
phase Lanka had entirely slipped out of Vijayanagaran control.

\-Finally when Vijayanagara was revived under the great kR^iShNadevarAya
he decided revive the control of Lanka. For this he asked the powerful
governor of Pudukotai, narasingharAyar to organize a force for looking
into the Lankan affairs.

\-Around that time (1521CE) the siMhala king vijayabAhu raised a cry for
help as he was invaded by the Portuguese armada. The Christian
terrorists asked him to convert to catholicism or face death and
launched a massive attack on him. The siMhala-s begged to the sAmUthiri
of the chera country to come to his aid. In the past 20 years the
sAmUthiri was raising a naval force to complement his army of skilled
nAyar warriors to deal with the Christian threat from the west. The
Christians had bombed Kodungallur in 1504CE and the sAmUthiri’s navy had
been engaged a fierce naval campaign in which he was facing the adverse
edge of the Christian armada. To shore up his naval defenses the
samUthiri tried to form an alliance with the Osman Turk navy against the
Christians. However, the Christians managed to make a landing at Kollam
and demolished a shAstA temple and built a church atop it. But at this
point the sAmUthiri deployed his force of elite nAyar warriors who made
a clean sweep of the Portuguese fort at Kollam, exterminated the
Christians and demolished their church. Soon after this strike the
Christians signed a peace treaty with the Hindus to secure their trade
in the west coast. But the king of Portugal sent an armada under Menezes
to wage holy war on the Hindus. The Portuguese in a move to outflank the
Hindus tried to conquer Lanka in an amphibious attack with several guns.
With the call for help coming, kR^iShNadevarAya who was the overlord of
the sAmUthiri sent a force to aid in this battle against the Christians
in Lanka. The sAmUthiri’s navy and the vijayanagaran land force
successfully thwarted the Portuguese attempt. However, soon after this
there was an internecine war of succession in Lanka that resulted in the
division of the land among the vijayabAhu’s sons.

\-In 1525CE the Portuguese fleet decided to punish the chera-s for
thwarting them at Lanka and set forth to attack Kozhikode. But the
sAmUthiri had by then developed a sufficiently strong navy and won a
major victory at sea against the Christians.

\-In 1533 CE taking advantage of the internecine war in Lanka
the general from the Tamil division of the empire narasingharAyar
invaded Lanka and made it a tributary of kR^iShNadeva rAya. These
activities are supported by the Pudukotai inscription of narasingharAyar
and the Piranmalai inscription mentioning kR^iShNadeva sending a force
during the time of the Portuguese invasion attempt.

\-In 1564 CE before setting forth to face the Moslems in that fateful
encounter rAmarAya dispatched a force of 20000 men under kR^iShNappA
nAyaka of Madhurai to bring Lanka under direct vijayanagaran control. He
routed the Lankan king and also a large Portuguese force that tried to
intervene and claim to be legitimate rulers of Lanka. He deposed the
siMhala rAjan and placed his brother vijaya gopAla nAyaka as the viceroy
of lankA. But the victory was to be last flash of the greater
Vijayanagara as Hampi itself was destroyed by the Mohammedans a few
months later.

\-1567CE vIra vasantarAya, vijayanagaran general was still trying to
enforce the empire’s rule in Lanka, but with the empire facing an
existential struggle against the army of Islam this hold was soon lost.
