+++
title = "gulikA-madness"

+++
In the long past days we were seated in a niche at the foot of the
viShThA-parvata with the chaturtha and the feral brAhmaNa. The chaturtha
was caressing his rAmapUrIya asiputrikA while SS polished the handle of
his hasta-nAlika. They were happy that they had made a great impression
among the striyaH with the display of their shastra-s. We had settled
down to waste our time over gulikA-krIDa – just watching it not playing
it. Those days the game of gulikA-krIDa was enjoyed over 5 days, but
nowadays it has contracted to a game of few hours, with pumshchalI-s and
mahAnAgnikA-s thrown in good measure. In many ways we have to be
thankful that this form of the game did not exist on the TV in our days.
We were starved for gulikA-krIDa and saw at best few snippets. That was
bad enough. Can we forget that day? We were not even in the game – our
dismal Hindu senA had been routed in the preliminaries by the
mlechCha-s, though, before reeling out, we had inflicted a crushing blow
on the Mohammedans. A great a battle was going on TV between the Saxon
crusaders lead by Martin Crowe and blood-thirsty green-robed Ghazis with
their ranks swelling with the many savages from the Khyber. In course of
watching this gripping encounter we suddenly realized that our physics
exam was supposed to be going on in some forbidding hall at the college.
In panic we mounted our ashva and rode towards the samarA\~NgaNa like
amarasiMha galloping on the ramparts of the turuShka fort at Agra. We
got in 40 minutes late, only to be accosted at the entrance of the hall
by a fierce marATha yelling some nonsense in mahArAShTrI. After some
effort a light-eyed brAhmaNa friend came to our aid and helped us to get
into the hall after repulsing that rapine marATha. In the remaining hour
we had to tackle a whole maze of Newtonian mechanics and electronics
which rather strained our already stressed cranium. We still wonder how
we broke that vyUha on that fateful day which featured a battle much
like that between ghaTotkacha and ashvatthAman on the 14th night after
the fall of jayadratha. We had already earned some censure for dropping
out of med-school. Now, pulling the plug in physics would have buried us
in true ignominy. A few years later the muni was showing signs of being
worse than us. I could not but help commiserate with him, despite the
rising wrath of the elders in the household, when he triumphantly
declared: “Exams may come again but a match like this will not come
again”. Now this abbreviated gulikA-krIDa lasting for a whole month with
all the gossip, including the fake IPL player, could have been fatal had
it played out in our days. However, the muni and I would probably think
we were very prophetic for our self-contained entertainment till my last
evening on the shores of jambudvIpa was this abbreviated form of the
game.
