+++
title = "A visual guide to avian phylogeny"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh5.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S2_DrWmwWaI/AAAAAAAABRA/wed_F-16oy0/s800/birds2.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/VpZyRcNwsIFt0LiXLN7zCw?feat=embedwebsite)

To truly appreciate its beauty click on the image and see it at higher
magnification.  
Key (grid of 8 columns X12 rows):  
\[ \[1) Crow; 2) Blue Tit; 3) Gray Parrot; 4) Falcon; 5) Seriema;\] 6)
\[Puffbird; 7) Jacamar; 8)Barbet; 9)Honeyguide; 10) Woodpecker; 11)
Kingfisher; 12) Bee-eater; 13) Indian Roller; 14) Motmot; 15) Tody;
\[16) Hornbill; 17) Hoopoe;\] 18) Trogon; 19) Cuckoo-roller;\] 20) Owl;
21) Mousebird; \[\[22) Secretary Bird; 23) Golden Eagle; 24) Hawk; \]25)
Condor;\] \] \[26) Plains-wanderer; 27) Seed-snipe; \[28) Jacana; 29)
Painted Snipe;\] 30) Turnstone; \[31) Button-quail; \[32) Gull; 33)
Skua; 34) Crab Plover;\]\] \[35) Thick-knee; 36) Plover; 37)
Oyster-catcher; 38) Sandpiper;\] \] \[39) Hammerkop; 40) Shoebill; 41)
Pelican; 42) Heron; 43) Ibis; \[44) Frigate-bird; 45) Cormorant; 46)
Gannet;\] 47) Stork; \[48) Penguin;\[49) Albatross; 50) Shearwater; 51)
Petrel;\]\] 52) Loon;\] 53) Turaco; \[\[54) Rail;55) Finfoot;\] \[56)
Crane; 57) Limpkin; 58) Trumpeter;\] 59) Cuckoo; 60) Bustard;\] \[61)
Humming-bird; 62) Swift; 63) Owlet-nightjar; 64) Frogmouth; 65)
Nightjar; 66) Oilbird; 67) Potto;\] \[68) Sunbittern; 69) Kagu;\]
\[\[70) Dove; 71) Pigeon; 72) Dodo;\] 73) Mesite;\] 74)Tropic-bird;
75)Hoatzin; 76)Sandgrouse; \[77)Flamingo; 78)Grebe;\] \[\[\[79)
Pheasant; 80) Peacock; 81)Quail; 82) Guineafowl;\]\[ 83) Curassow; 84)
Chachalaca; 85) Guan;\] 86) Brush Turkey;\]\[ 87)Duck; 88)Goose; 89)
Canadian Goose; 90) Screamer;\]\] \[91) Kiwi; 92) Cassowary; 93) Emu;
94) Tinamou; 95) Rhea; 96) Ostrich;\]

**A discursion on dinosaurian color**  
About 1.5 years ago when we started preparing the visual guide (one of
the reasons being the sheer visual treat offered by the extant
theropods) a few thought came to our mind regarding coloration of
dinosaurs. These returned to the fore with the publication of two works
by rival groups that look into pigmentation of fossil feathers of
non-avian dinosaurs. While the core findings of both these papers are
valid they present certain flawed ideas. There is hardly more anything
obvious than the fact that the extant dinosaurs are as a group the most
colorful of land vertebrates. How do they achieve these colors? A modern
textbook of ornithology would talk of several major effects:  
***Pigments***  
*Melanin-* This is the most common of all pigments and occurs in
different kinds of granules – long and narrow ones which generally
result in black and grey shades, short and wide ones with some
irregularity in shape that result in reddish brown, brown, buff and some
dull yellows.  
*Carotenoids –* These are lipid soluble pigments that accumulated in
lipid droplets and primarily acquired from the food. These result in
bright red, orange, yellow, certain purples and ultra-violet colors. The
bright colors of many bird eyes are also produced by carotenoid
containing droplets in cells of the iris. Since they are manufactured by
plants they happen to be more common in herbivorous than carnivorous
groups, unless the latter feed directly on herbivores.  
*Psittacofulvins –* They are another group of long-chain polyene
aldehydes that are highly that were first discovered in parrots (4 major
molecules of this class exist: tetradecahexanal, hexadecaheptanal,
octadecaoctenal and eicosanonenal). They do not appear to be directly
acquired from the food but are made locally in the feather follicles
probably by modifying the unsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis. They can
generate yellows, reds and oranges. There may be other as yet
unidentified pigments of this kind in the yellows of parrots.  
*Porphyrinoids-* These are mainly derivatives of hemoglobin catabolism
and usually produced reddish brown colors. However, these are sensitive
to light and degrade rapidly. Some birds have evolved means to make
further derivatives of them like the turacin which replaced the iron in
prophyrin with copper to produce a bright magenta seen in the turacos.
Another derivative is turacoverdin that can result in green shades of
the turaco, the Wattled Jacana, Crested Partridge and some pheasants.  
Several other pigments have not been chemically characterized and we do
not know the full extant of avian pigmentation yet.  
*Pterins-* Several birds are known to have pterins crystals in their
eyes that render them brightly colored.  
*Iron oxide-* Several birds seem to have external coloration of their
feathers in reddish brown to orange hues by rusts or iron oxides. At
least in bearded vultures it has been shown to be a case of cosmetic
pigmentation where the bird actually acquires iron oxide right from a
young age from soils and paints itself with it. There is clear evidence
that this painting behavior is distinct from the periodic bath that it
taken by several vultures.  
***Structural color***  
The second way by which birds achieve color is by using “nanotechnology”
in their feathers. There are at least 4 types of scattering via
different structural features in birds.  
*Incoherent scattering–* this is due to scattering of light from
irregularly shaped cellular air bubbles in feathers and results in white
color.  
*Coherent scattering from melanosome arrays–* periodic feather
melanosome arrays can result in iridescent colors like those seen in the
humming bird. Usually these melanosomes are air-filled in the center. In
the humming birds disc shaped hollow melanosomes are arranged in layers
of up to 15 discs. In trogons the metallic green is achieved via a
hexagonal array of capsule shaped air-filled melanosomes.  
*Coherent scattering by air pockets in the beta-keratin–* this results
in a blue as well as ultraviolet feather colors. Ultraviolet coloring
and detection have been confirmed in over 100 different families of
birds suggesting that it is an ancient feature of birds. Of course the
human inability to sense ultraviolet means that we really do not see the
birds in the same colors they see themselves.  
*Silvery sheen on feathers –* Such a “coloration” is seen on several
large open habitat birds. This emerges from a specialized type of
barbule which has a layer with black melanosomes on the top and a layer
of translucent pigment-free keratin below. The barbule is twisted so as
to expose some of the translucent part on the surface resulting in the
sheen.  
*Coherent scattering by collagen arrays-* parallel collagen fibers in
the bird skin can produce a range of colors all the way from the
ultraviolet part of the spectrum to oranges. We can see such skin colors
on the neck and face in most cases.

When we reviewed this range of mechanisms by which the extant dinosaurs
achieve color we realized that at least some of them were certainly
observed in the extinct dinosaurs. But if you look at the pictorial
guide above it becomes clear that most major lineages of birds depend
largely on melanin and basic structural coloring that produces white –
thus, black, grey, brown, reddish hues, buffs and dull yellows in
conjunction with structural white are the dominant colors in most birds.
In large part these are sufficient to produce the kinds of coloration
that help in camouflage of both terrestrial prey and predator. So my
expectation was that the extinct dinosaurs largely stuck to such shades.
This is generally in line with the new inferences on the coloration of
the troodontid Anchiornis and the compsognathid Sinosauropteryx. The
more elegant of the two recent works, namely that of Prum’s group, shows
that indeed in Anchiornis different melanosomes are of the form typical
of those seen in grey, black and rufous colors of extant feathers. Of
course there is nothing at all to prevent the extinct dinosaurus from
displaying bright coloration and indeed several of them probably did so
– the peculiar tail feathers of the scansoriopterygid Epidexipteryx,
the fan of feathers on the tails of oviraptorosaurs, the tails of early
birds like Protopteryx and male Confuciusornis showed bright colors
probably due to special pigments comparable to pisttacofulvins or
structural colors. These things are not yet identified in dinosaurian
feathers. Some forms of elaborate coloration might have required
structure similar to extant pennate feathers. But this does not mean
that the simple feathers of the non-avian dinosaurs could not have
achieved their own means of specialized coloration, including sheen.

It was also clear that the structural coloration of the skin played a
big role in the extinct dinosaurs. In particular theropods commonly
possess a set of small horns above the eyes and on the top of the head.
These horns are generally small and nothing particularly eye-catching by
themselves. The most likely scenario is that the skin around the eye and
on the horns was brightly hued by structural colors which probably
played an important role in communication. Interestingly, such horns are
infrequent or absent in most coelurosaurian lineages like
ornithomimosaurs, alvarezsaurs, therizinosaurs, oviraptorosaurs,
deinonychosaurs, scansoriopterygids and birds. By analogy to Anchiornis
it is possible that in these lineages used crest of feathers in place of
horns. Of course occasionally real crest re-appears as in the cassowary.
Farther afield the principle of horns and cranial ornamentation appears
to have been prevalent even among certain ornithisichians.

But this by no means implies that feathers were elaborated sole for
display. The authors of the paper led by Prum make the outright error of
claiming that feathers in oviraptorosaurs and deinonychosaurs (including
Anchiornis) predate the emergence of flight. This is nonsensical – in
reality some of these were in all likelihood fliers and others
secondarily flightless (Gregory Paul’s theory). In fact the
oviraptorosaurs are quite possible secondarily flightless birds rather
than a sister clade outside of birds. So the while feathers emerged well
before flight, their elaboration into a certain structural form as
observed in oviraptorosaurs and Anchiornis are certainly an offshoot of
flight or related behaviors like wing-assisted incline running (even the
ostrich and the cassowary appear to have independently descended from
flying ancestors \!). The display function was always around for various
integumentary structures throughout vertebrate evolution and the
feathers merely played their part of being captured into the functional
complex of display when they emerged. Of course the dinosaurian female
“mind” has displayed considerable constancy over at least the past 200
million years in falling for exaggerated exuberances in the form of
crests on heads and streamers on tails (shikhA-puchCha- lakShaNa\!). It
almost appears that there is an evolutionarily conserved mate
recognition circuit that pays attention to these as markers of male
quality.
