+++
title = "The mantra saMhitA of the devI purANa"

+++
The devI purANa is one of the several dedicated shAktA purANa-s such as
devI-bhAgavata, mahAbhagavata and kAlikA. The sections of other purANa-s
like the proto-skanda purANa (the vindhyavAsinI section), the mArkaNDeya
purANa (the devI mAhAtmya section) and the lalitopAkhyAna of the
brahmANDa purANa can also be considered mini shAkta purANa-s. The
dedicated shAkta purANa-s and the lalitopAkhyAna section contain
distinctive tAntrika material beyond the core Pauranic story frame. This
material is greatly developed in the kAlikA purANa and the
lalitopAkhyAna. Both of these have a regional flavor with the locus of
kAlikA being eastern India centered on the kAmAkhya pITha and that of
the lalitopAkhyAna is south India centered on kA\~nchi. In a sense the
lalitopAkhyAna is similar to the Tantric vindhyAchala mAhAtmya, but
found is way into an older mahApurANa as the uttara bhAga. Its main
objective is incorporation of the kAdividyA lineage of the upAsana of
tripurasundarI and the nityA-s from the shrIkula tAntrika system inside
a smArta system mainly followed by the south Indian taittirIyaka-s. The
kAlikA appears to be more plainly tAntrika expounding the upAsana of the
shrIkula goddesses, durgA-chaNDikA and vaiShNavI-mahAmAyA. The devI
purANa is centered mainly on the upAsana of chaNDikA-vindhyavAsinI the
slayer of the asura ghora who assumed the form of a buffalo. She is
described as riding a lion comprised of the combination of all other
deva-s rather than being formed by all the deva-s (as in the devI
mAhAtmya). She stations herself in the vindhya-s as a beautiful virgin
and is sought by ghora. In course of a fierce battle ghora assumed the
form of buffalo and was beheaded by the goddess. So her name became
mahiShamardini. Thus, it appears that the devI purANa preserves a
parallel version of the famed shAkta myth of the killing of the buffalo
demon. The central tAntrika vidyA taught in the devI purANa is the
padamAla mantra of chaNDikA, which has many different mantra pada-s for
different viniyoga-s (objectives).

Interestingly, the devI purANa also preserves a small mantra saMhitA of
complete Vedic mantra-s (not just pratIka-s) for the performance of the
daily Vedic ritual (chapter 56). This mantra saMhitA is primarily
composed of R^ik-s but also contains some yajuSh-es and a late
brAhmaNa-like terminal portion. This saMhitA is of interest because it
appears to present several variant readings from those seen the
well-known Vedic R^ik saMhitA-s: the shAkala saMhitA, the AV-S 20,
RV-khila, the AshvalAyana saMhitA which incorporates the khilAni into
the main R^ik saMhitA equivalent to the shAkala collection, the hautra
parishiShTha of the Apastamba taittirIyaka-s, the small R^ik saMhitA of
the hiraNyakeshin taittirIyaka-s and the saMaveda saMhitA pATha-s. I
must state that I have not examined any complete manuscripts of the devI
purANa but the editor used at least 4 of them from eastern India and
some of these variant readings in the R^ik-s are uniformly seen across
all the manuscripts used in the printed edition. The devI purANa was
also known in late medieval South India among shrIkula adepts. It is
mentioned by the great bhAskararAya in his saubhAgya-bhAskara
(commentary on LS 200). However, I have not been able to locate any
South Indian manuscript or publication of this purANa – this would have
been useful in determining of those variant readings were also prevalent
in the south.

Given that these reading drastically differ from all the extant homologs
of the given mantra we may postulate the following distinct but not
unrelated explanations:

1\) These readings were acquired from a now extinct shAkhA that was
isolated from the mainstream shrauta tradition early on, thereby
diverging drastically from the others.

2\) The readings are from the known shAkala text but due to memetic
drift arising much later isolation, which prevented correction through
meme conversion with the mainstream texts, the readings greatly diverged
(analogs of the evolutionary processes occurring in genes). This
isolation could have been spatial, i.e. geographical isolation, perhaps
in eastern India, beyond the zone with a high concentration of vaidika
practitioners. Or else it could have been traditional i.e. being a
tAntrika tradition and text the devI purANa mantra saMhitA transmission
was not subject to correction from the mainstream vaidika tradition.

While the grammatical irregularities in this mantra saMhitA might
support the less interesting alternative \#2, we still suspect that
these differences might in part indeed reflect a distinctive Vedic
tradition, even if not a distinct shAkhA tradition. Evaluating this is
hampered by the fact the only RV tradition that survives is the shAkala
shAkhA. More recently collection supposed to be the AshvalAyana shAkhA
was published. However, this saMhitA is identical to the shAkala
saMhitA, except that it has the kAshmIra pATha of the khila inserted
into the saMhitA itself. From various sources it was clear that the
bAShkala shAkhA showed differences in the arrangement of the
upamaNDala-s of the first maNDala (i.e. the
gautama-kakShIvAn-paruchChepa-kutsa-dIrghatamas order) and had an
additional samj\~nAna sUkta in the 10th maNDala which ended with the
R^ik “tach ChaMyor AvR^iNImahe …”. Of course there is also the
traditional variability between these R^ik collections in terms of the
inclusion or not of kANva-s of the vAlakhilya section of maNDala 8. What
we really do not know is whether the readings of the cognate R^ik-s in
bAShkala had substantial differences from those in shAkala. Now some
workers have taken the reference to bahvR^icha by AchArya-s like
kumArila bhaTTa to mean that there was an eponymous RV shAkhA. There is
no support for this view – 1) we do not find this name as a shAkhA in
the charaNavyUha-s, which typically only name seven recensions. 2)
pata\~njali says: “ekaviMshatidhA bahvR^ichyAm” i.e. there are 21
shAkhA-s of the RV – he means RV by bahvR^icha. Yet the term bahvR^icha
might point to a connection between certain RV practitioners and the
shAkta system because there is a shrIkula upaniShad known as the
bahvR^icha upaniShad. Whether these were connected to the compilers of
the mantra saMhitA in the DP remains to be seen.

Some examples of variant readings:  
\~RV 1.11.1:  
indraM vishvA avAvR^iShaM samudravyachasaM giraH |  
rathItamaM rathInAM vA rAjAnAM shatapatiM patim ||

\~RV 10.123.6:  
nAke suparNam upatyAnta havA revanto abhya chakShata tvA |  
hiraNyAkShaM varuNasya dUtaM yamasya bhuraNyuM yonau shakunaM ||

\~RV 5.64.1:  
varuNaM bodhipAdam R^ichAm indraM havAmahe |  
pari vrajech cha bAhvor jagandhaso svarNavam naraM ||

\~AV-paippalAda 20.5.8 \[\~RV khila 3.22.4.1\]:  
AdityaM devaM savitA manyoH kavi kratum archAmi |  
satyasavaM ratnadhAm abhi priyam atitaram kaviM ||

\~AV-paippalAda 20.5.9 \[\~RV khila 3.22.4.2\]:  
UrdhvA yasyA matibhA Adidyutat savImani |  
hiraNyapANir tvamimIte sukratuH kR^ipApayaH ||

\~RV 10.141.3:  
somaM rAjAnam bhavate agnim anvArabhAmahe |  
AdityaM viShNuM sUryaM brAhmaNaM cha bR^ihaspatim ||

\~RV 1.164.41:  
gaurIr mimAya salilAni takShaty ekapadI dvipadI sA chatuShpadI |  
aShTApadI navapadI bhUmIM sahasrAkSaM vA parame vyoman ||

\~RV: 1.114.8:  
mA nastoke tanaye mA na AyUShi mA no goShu mA no ashveShu rIriShaH |  
mA no vIrAn rudra bhAmito vadhIr haviShmantaH sadamit tvA havAmahe ||

These examples (by no means the entire set of paTha bheda-s in this
collection) clearly illustrate the grammatical irregularities and the
meaning-deforming mutations that are likely indicative of reflect poor
preservation. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the DP tradition was
founded by a genuine vaidika tradition with knowledge of a R^ik saMhitA,
including the khila mantra-s, as well as a yajuSh tradition. In light of
the changes in word order found in many of the mantra-s it is possible
that these represent genuine pATha-bheda-s in this tradition with
respect to the mainstream shAkala tradition. However, we would be
cautious, in light of the above discussed difficulties, about proposing
that they inhere from a lost eastern Vedic recension.

After providing the core mantra-s for the sthAlIpAka oblations the
section has an appendix imitating brAhmaNa-like prose which makes this
tradition distinct:  
evaM vediko.agniH saMtuShTho bhavati | athAtaH paristaraNa devatAH
kathyante | parisamUhane kAshyapaH | upalepane vishve-devAH | ullekhane
mitra-varuNau | ullikhane pR^ithvI | ambukShaNe gandharvAH | agniH
sAdane sharvaH | parisamUhy opalikhy ollikhana karma vidhir uchyate |
dakShiNAsAdane brahmA | uttarataH pUraNe sAgarAH | AstaraNe trasAH |
athAvasAdane shatakratuH | pavitra bandhane pitaraH | prokShaNI saMskAre
mAtaraH | juhvate sruche sruvApAsh cha brahmA-viShNu-maheshvarAH |
AjyAtapane vasavaH | adhishravaNe vaivasvataH | paryagni-karaNe marutaH
| udvAsane skandaH | utpanna pratyutpavane chandraH dyauH | AjyAvekShaNe
dishaH sarvAH | pavitra dhAraNe praNItAH | yAmumA devI | idhme cha
lakShmI | vishvasya vishvAbhUtAni ||
