+++
title = "Some meanderings on videshya inxa0Indo-Aryan"

+++
The traditional thought of the Arya-s described a class of words termed
deshya or originating in the country. Modern analysis suggests that this
class is a mixture comprised of: 1) non-Aryan words presumably emerging
from the inhabitants of the sub-continent prior to the Aryan influx; 2)
Indo-Aryan words that descend from para-Sanskrit dialects; 3) Words
descending from Sanskrit but whose evolutionary path was not uncovered
prior to modern analysis. As a mirror image of this deshya class modern
analysis posits a videshya class comprising of loans. These go back to
the invasion of the yavana-s. They exist in Sanskrit itself as a
consequence of the Hindu fascination for astrology and the associated
mathematics, with composition of texts like the yavana-jAtaka. Examples
of these include kendra (center) and koNa (i.e. as in trikoNA from gona
in Greek). In other cases they are related to trade with the yavana
states. For example, the modern Hindi word dAm (price of a commodity)
comes from the Prakritic damma which in turn is derived from Sanskrit
drakma (the Greek loan drachma meaning the classical coin). This could
be an example of NIA lengthening of the Prakrit consonant duplication
for a Sanskrit consonant cluster (e.g. rAtra\> ratta\> rAt \[night\];
jihvA\>jibbhA\>jIbh \[tongue\]). With Roman trade we also saw the
adoption of dinara (from denarius) into Sanskrit.

Another set of late loans into New Indo-Aryan tongues happened due to
the Mohammedan occupation of part of jambudvIpa. This brought in more
than three influences into the subcontinent which include Arabic, the
original language of the Mohammedans, Persian, the language adopted by
the Mohammedans as a literary language from Iran, and Turkic and
Mongolic, which were the native languages of the post-Arab waves of
Islamic marauders entering India. Early Turkic invasions following those
of Shahabuddin Ghori resulted in the establishment of Mohammedan
governments but they made little impact on the language of the the
Hindus – they were simply massacred or made to pay jaziya in the zones
were the arm of the sultan and the ulema held sway. But the
“integrative” phases during the Padishaw Akbar’s reign in the Mogol
north and the reigns of Chand Bibi and Ibrahim Adil Shah-II in the south
resulted in greater linguistic interaction. In particular, Akbar’s Hindu
finance minister Todarmal started using Persian in the administrative
transactions of the Mogol empire, Chand Bibi relying on mahArATTa
mercenaries and Ibrahim Adil Shah-II composing Persian works on Hindu
topics. As a consequence we see an abundance of Islamic loans in the NIA
languages especially in works pertaining to administration and music.
But what we wish to touch upon here is the conscious and sub-conscious
knowledge of and consequences of the underlying homology between Iranian
and Indo-Aryan in the medieval period.

The earliest apparent signs of the recognition of the homology of
Sanskrit and Avestan was due to the efforts of the great Iranian
ritualist dastUr nairyosangha dhAvala who transliterated and translated
the Avesta into Sanskrit, prior to the 1200s of CE and noticed many
facets of the deep homology between the two languages and also the
systems of the veda and the avesta.

We can then fast forward to the late 1600s when the bloody 26 year jihad
of Awrangzeb in South India was underway. We see three major trends that
were emerging among subcontinental Mohammedans at the point of the
demise of the Mogol empire: 1) The first of these may be termed the
Arabists, who looked to the core of their cult arising from the Koran
and the Hadith and the wished to see the dominance of the Dar-ul-Islam
after it had cleansed al Hind of its heathens. On a more global scale
they wished to establish a pan-Islamic Sunni Kilafat that would govern
over a Sharia governed world rid of all its Kafirs. Awrangzeb’s ulema
were the upholders of this ideal and felt triumphal as he crushed the
Hindus and marched into this great Jihad on the South. But with the
mAhArATTa resilience overcoming Awrangzeb’s charge and with the
mAhArATTa-s reaching Delhi this faction became both despondent and
desperate casting about for supporters. They got a new lease of life
with the formation of TSP and TSB in the second half of the 1900s, the
continuing Euro-American support for them against India and Russia, and
are master-minds of modern Islamic terrorism and modern articulations of
Islam in the world. 2) The second faction was also pan-Islamist and had
some support from Awrangzeb and more specifically several members of his
court. While this faction saw Islam as the binder of society in the form
of a normative scaffold, it prefered Persian over Arabic as its linguist
foundation. Some of the Mogol princes, like Akbar the son of Awrangzeb,
were members of this camp. This faction was more interested in the
imposition of a Persian cultural idiom over the whole of Hind rather
than an Arabic one and saw the Indians as degenerate not only on account
of their infidel ways but also due to their relative ineptitude in
Persian compared to the Moslems of Iran. There was internal tension in
this faction due to the divide between the Sunni Mogols and the Shia’s
from Iran. The more hardline Islamic sub-division within this faction
has survived to date and given rise the modern Islamic state that
occupies Iran (remember even Khomeini’s ancestors were from bhArata).
The Shah who ruled it before that belonged to the more Persian oriented
sub-division with this faction. 3) The final trend among the Mohammedans
of Hindustan were those open to a more syncretic cultural system wherein
the Hindi influences (i.e. Sanskrit and its daughters and nieces) also
find a place in their world view alongside their Arabic and Persian
heritage. In linguistic terms the most generic manifestation of this
trend was the emphasis on Urdu as a vehicle of literary and cultural
expression as against Arabic or Persian. Unlike the pure Islamic
artistic expressions this stream could go beyond geometric patterns on
Mazars and Masjids or calligraphy of the Koran to embrace the forbidden
arts such as North Indian classical music and philosophical
contemplation along Hindu lines. Indeed members of this stream like the
Mogol Naziri even boldy states that he visits Hindu temples to the point
he feels guilty when he sees a true Mohammedan. The modern day Bollywood
finds one of its roots in this third stream. As long as there was an
active Mohammedan power this stream tended was always under the risk of
being subsumed under the remaining two streams and this eventually
happened in both TSP and residual India.

It was in this Indo-Islamic world that Hisam-al-din of Agra was a ghazi
in Awrangzeb’s jihad and spent his life fighting Hindus. He belonged to
the second category with Persophile tendencies. His son was Siraj-al-din
Arzu, however, of a man of very different temperament. He acquired his
deep knowledge of Persian and Arabic as part of his ancestral tradition,
but rather than a ghazi, he was a faqir of learned disposition and
acquired considerable interest in North Indian classical music and its
underlying Hindu foundations, thus belonging to the third stream. At the
age of 32 he arrived in Delhi and befriended a scholarly kShatriya in
Delhi of the name Anand rAm, who helped him find patronage and gain an
understanding of Sanskrit and Hindi. Though a Mohammedan, Arzu was
rather unorthodox in participating in Hindu festivals and thereby
acquired a closer understanding of Hindu traditions. Amongst his many
students was a kShatriya student of the name munshi Tekchand, with whom
he delved into a comparative study of Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit. As
consequence of this unusual interaction during the devolution of the
Mogol empire the school of Arzu, Anand rAm and Tekchand made a rather
profound discovery: tavafuq al lisanayn, to use Arzu’s term, i.e. the
linguistic homology between Persian and Sanskrit. They used these
concordances to ascertain correctness of certain Persian words based on
the principles of linguistic homology. While there were some errors in
their formulation, these discoveries laid the foundations of modern
linguistics and the discovery of Indo-Iranian and subsequently
Indo-European. One of the points that appears to have been noticed in
the lexicons compiled by these scholars were the behavior of Iranian
loans in Indo-Aryan. It is a modern examination of such lateral
transfers that give us some interesting clues regarding certain apparent
underlying constraints in word acquisition by Indo-Aryan.

One feature that is routinely observed (as also noted by the modern
linguist Masica) is the change of the value of the vowel in several
Persian words when transferred to Indo-Aryan. Thus we have roz in
Urdu/Hindustani/Marathi as against the Persian rUz (daily); sher instead
of shIr \[lion\] or sipAhI for sepAhi \[soldier\]. Why this change
happens is not entirely known. It is quite possible that this is due to
Persian being delivered first via a Turkish intermediate rather than
directly via the Moslems of Iran.

It is also notable that words were the homology was clear the Persian
equivalent was often used side-by-side or in place of the Indo-Aryan
one. Masica uncovered a bunch of such examples, which are recognized by
the medieval lexicographers like Arzu and Anand rAm. Thus Persian band
for IA bandha is frequently used in constructions such as kamarband or
galeband; stan for IA sthAna (place) in formation of place names, words
like jAn from Persian which is related to the IA jantu (life) or nAch a
cognate of IA nR^itya (dance) or jAdU cognate of yAtu (used for magic)
or jigar for yAkR^it (liver). In other cases the pure NIA tends to
diverge from Urdu especially if the latter displays an Arabic analog
rather than a ortholog or the Persian word is not a cognate. Thus, a
pure NIA speaker would use prem instead of muhabbat (love); Anand
instead of khushI; shAnti instead of itmInAn; kR^ipA instead of mehrbAnI
and krodh instead of gussA. Further, the suffixes of Iranian of the -I
type were easily taken up by pure Indo-Aryan due to their orthology to
the -Iya type suffixes of OIA. Thus we have hindustAnI, ba\~NgAlI,
angrezI etc. But other kinds of prefix constructs of the be- type were
not easily take outside of Urdu, as the old nir- prefix was preferred:
nirlajj instead of be-lajj or the correct Persian besharam. Now the
secularized or Bollywoodized Hindus indignantly declare that this is not
true and people always used the Urduized form of the NIA languages. They
may object that this pure NIA I am talking about is a figment of my
imagination or the creation of Hindu “obscurantists” like bharatendu or
the learned AchArya raghuvIra and his son shrI lokeshchandra. This is
however simply not true because what I talk about is evident in
mahArATTI which was certainly nor influenced by the names mentioned
above\!
