+++
title = "A late-surviving new Sinitic basal theropod"

+++
We must state upfront that the below is based on a news report and not a
published scientific paper. Hence, the discussion here is necessarily
tentative. Of course one might question the wisdom of discussing these
unpublished specimens of great importance because the scientific
tabloids, where such finds are typically published, tend not to consider
manuscripts which have already been discussed by the public (have
experienced this first hand in a non-paleontological domain).
Nevertheless, this appears to be fair game because the animal in
question is being blasted all over the Chinese press with fairly good
photos and given the fact that this is a really exciting find. The
animal in question was discovered by the team of the veteran Chinese
fossil hunter Dong Zhiming in the Dalishu Village of Dinosaur Town in
the Lufeng County. These beds are apparently from the lower Jurassic and
have previously yielded several other dinosaurs, crurotarsans and
representatives of the mammal-line. These include the basal
sauropodomorph Lufengosaurus, the basal threophoran Tatisaurus and the
mesoeucrocodylian Dianchungosaurus. The Chinese reports claim that the
new dinosaur is a Coelophysis-like form; however, this seems patently
incorrect as one can judge from the panoply of skulls shown below.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh3.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TLIDL8xVpRI/AAAAAAAAB9k/A1yEHHUlAcE/s800/Sample%20Pictures.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/PvDzcj7OSn7ugdNMSxN8Sg?feat=embedwebsite)
Row 1: The Sinitic form; Row 2: Eoraptor (from Witmer/Digimorph); Row 3:
Herrerasaurus (from Witmer/Digimorph); Row 4: Tawa; Row 5: Coelophysis
(from Witmer) left and Dilophosaurus reconstruction from AMNH, NY; Row
6: Panphagia.

Clearly this new form lacks of the gap/notch below the external naris at
the junction between the premaxilla and maxilla that is so typical of
the paraphyletic grade of basal theropods including Tawa hallae,
Coelophysis and Dilophosaurus. It also lacks the pointed rostrum that is
typical of these theropods or the anterior elongation seen in some of
them. The lower jaw lacks the vertical expansion seen in the symphyseal
region, unlike the condition on Coelophysis or Dilophosaurus. Thus the
Sinitic form in question is certainly not a coelophysoid or even a
sister group of the more primitive Tawa. Instead, it shows certain
features resembling even more primitive theropods like Eoraptor,
Herrerasaurus and even what is considered one of the most basal
sauropodomorphs, Panphagia. Thus we have a dinosaur that promises to
further fill in that gap at the base of the theropod tree, just like the
other recent find Tawa. But what makes it rather more remarkable is the
fact that it is from the lower Jurassic, whereas the other basal forms
to which it is comparable are all from the Triassic\! This suggests that
the basal dinosaurian architectures survived considerable later than
previously believed.

A feature of animal macro-evolution is the persistence of forms with
primitive characters. In several cases this is accompanied by spatial
isolation – we have the monotremes surviving in Australia, where the
more derived forms were absent until much later. But a more striking
tendency is the survival of primitive forms coevally with their more
derived sister groups. The late-surviving heterodontosaur Tianyulong
appears to be one example of this. Earlier in dinosaurian evolution we
find Tawa coexisting with dinosauromorphs like Dromomeron and
Eucoelophysis, a herrerasaurid, Chindesaurus, and a possible
coelophysoid. Thus, we find that various primitive and derived versions
of the dinosaur-line were simultaneously co-occurring in the Ghost Ranch
fauna. This suggests that displacement of primitive characters is not
all temporally uniform. It appears that several forms with primitive
characters can acquire a small set of adaptations that allow them to
strongly compete and thereby persist over long periods (retaining most
of their primitive characters), even as their more derived sister groups
are radiating beside them. We suspect that the ultimate loss of
primitive characters from the faunal pool has got a lot to do with
recovery from extinction events – steady displacement by more derived
forms upon their emergence might not be the only factor. Further, this
recovery from extinction event might be unequal across the different
faunas of the world. Thus, in the middle of Norian age of the Triassic
there were dinosauromorphs, herrerasaurids, forms like Tawa,
coelophysoids and basal neotheropods like Zupaysaurus, probably in
several faunas around the world. But during the T/J transition the
dinosauromorphs, herrerasaurids and other basal theropods did not
recover strongly from the extinction whereas coelophysoids and more
advance neotheropods did. However, in Asia it appears that some of the
basal theropods did recover from the extinction and continued persisting
as suggested by this new animal.

This finally leads us to a brief discussion on our current understanding
of the early evolution of dinosaurs. The earliest currently known
dinosaur is Eoraptor which is dated to 228 Mya. Recent studies on
ichnofossils from Poland by Brusatte et al suggest that the
dinosaur-line was already present in the Early Olenekian (\~249–251
Mya), just a few million years after the great Permian/Triassic
extinction (252.3 Mya). The earliest of these members of the
dinosaur-line appear to have been primitive dinosauromophs, though true
dinosaurs could have well emerged as early as 246 Mya as indicated by
the Polish Sphingopus tracks. Thus, we have a major lacuna in our
understanding of the first 18 million years of dinosaur evolution,
despite several recent advances pertaining to dinosauromorphs and early
dinosaurs. Currently we have the following reasonably characterized
early dinosaurs-  
*Ornithischians*: Pisanosaurus from the Carnian-Norian of South
American; Eocursor from the Norian of South Africa.  
*Sauropodomorphs*: These appear to include a basal grade from the the
Carnian typified by Panphagia, Saturnalia, Guaibasaurus, Chromogisaurus
and perhaps Agnosphitys. Later in the Norian there was an explosive
radiation with multiple forms such as Thecodontosaurus, Pantydraco,
Efraasia, Ruehleia, Plateosauravus, Plateosaurus, Unaysaurus,
Riojasaurus, Eucnemesaurus, Coloradisaurus, Mussaurus, Melanorosaurus,
Blikanasaurus, Antetonitrus and Lessemsaurus.  
*Theropods*: From the Carnian we have Eoraptor, the herrerasaurids,
Herrerasaurus and Staurikosaurus. From the Norian we have the
herrerasaurid Chindesaurus, Tawa, Coelophysis bauri, Liliensternus,
Lophostropheus, Procompsognathus and Zupaysaurus.

At the face of it appears that the stem sauropods were most diverse
while the ornithischians were the most sparse and rare. While there
might be some truth to this picture of relative abundance it should be
kept in mind that the ornithischians and theropods began their careers
as small animals and might have been poorly preserved relative to their
sauropod relatives. The phylogeny of these early forms has also been
considerably debated. The discovery of Tawa seems to support the view
that the herrerasaurids as including Herrerasaurus, Staurikosaurus and
Chindesaurus are monophyletic and theropods. Further, Tawa also pull
Eoraptor as a more derived theropod than the herrerasaurids. On the
other hand Ezcurra et al recover a basal sauropodomorph clade comprised
of Panphagia, Saturnalia, Guaibasaurus, Chromogisaurus and Agnosphitys.
Further Langer et al, who discovered the dinosauromorph Sacisaurus, feel
that the silesaurids (currently including Lewisuchus, Asilisaurus,
Technosaurus, Eucoelophysis, Silesaurus and Sacisaurus) are closer to
the ornithischians rather than being a sister-group to all dinosaurs.
But none of these phylogenetic hypothesis are well-supported.
Examination of the supplementary material provide by the authors of the
Tawa study shows that any of these grouping could breakdown with
additional data. In fact, various authors have found herrerasaurids,
Eoraptor, Guaibasaurus variously as basal theropods, stem saurischians
outside of the sauropodomorph-theropod divide or stem dinosaurs outside
of the ornithischian-saurishchian divide. These features suggest that
our understanding of the relationships of early dinosaurs stands to
change with new finds.

The considerable similarities between Panphagia, Saturnalia,
Guaibasaurus and Eoraptor suggest that they are rather close to the
ancestral state of the saurischian clade. This ancestor was likely to
have been a small bipedal omnivore or carnivore and an ecological
generalist. At least early in their radiation the sauropodmorphs appear
to have retained this morphology, though by the Norian they were already
on their way towards becoming the most colossal land vertebrates. We can
be less certain of the state of the ancestral dinosaur itself due to
scarcity of the early ornithischian record. In recent analysis the
silesaurs appear as the closest sister group of the dinosaurs and
including them within dinosauria or as a sister group to ornithischia
makes the trees somewhat less parsimonious. These silesaurs as currently
reconstructed do not however appear as good proxies for the ancestral
dinosaur. They appear to be quadrupedal herbivores with a specialized
beaked skull and probably represent an early successful, global
radiation of dinosauromorphs close to the origin of dinosaurs. Thus, in
a sense they may have moved away from the ancestral condition for
dinosaurs. The next closest sister group of the dinosaurs is Marasuchus
from the Anisian age of the Middle Triassic of South America. This form
might have certain features closer to the common ancestor of all
dinosaurs. In particular the hindlimbs appear particularly close to the
expected ancestral conditions. It is not clear if the forelimbs of this
form are representative of the ancestral dinosaurian state. The
basal-most dinosauromorphs are the lagerpetonids like Lagerpeton and
Dromomeron which are from the Ladinian and later ages of the Triassic.
The lack of complete fossils of this lineage makes it unclear as to how
close they were to the ancestral state of the dinosaurs. Thus, despite
the recent advances in the dinosauromorph relationships many issues
remain rather unclear.
