+++
title = "The tale of Hindu and Sanskrit in the English mind"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TQ2FY0Kn9fI/AAAAAAAAB_Q/x8WN9Q_FP8I/s640/Hindu_Sanskrit.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/SwioQBx3SqfwWpjzXKuoug?feat=embedwebsite)

A plot of the words Sanskrit/Sanscrit and Hindoo/Hindu in English
literature from 1790-2010 using the Google Ngram viewer.  
\* Note the steady change in with Hindoo and Sanscrit being replaced in
English by Hindu and Sanskrit.  
\* we see a rise usage of the term Hindoo/Hindu following the British
defeat in the first Anglo-Maratha war (1783) and marks the increasing
awareness of the English regarding the primary roadblock to the most
profitable of all their colonial ventures. Since that point on we see a
increase in the term Hindu/Hindoo with spurts of interest coinciding
with the final Anglo-Maratha wars (1818) and the early period of
consolidation (1820-1840) after that as the British sought to complete
their conquest of India. This period also sees the beginning of the
widespread English interest in Sanskrit (under the orthography Sanscrit)
as they sought to interpret the people whom they were subjugating. This
phase of the English “discovery” of Sanskrit resulted in William Jones
version of the Indo-European hypothesis, which was similar in core
principles to that of Indic scholars of Urdu and Persian like Arzu and
Anand rAm.

\*In the period between 1840-1858 we see a general dip in the terms
Sanskrit/Sanscrit and Hindu/Hindoo. We see this an important textual
correlate of the prelude to the first war of independence in 1857-1858.
The English felt they had gained the upper hand in the subcontinent and
that the Indians were a depraved subject people with nothing much of
interest to write about. This probably correlated with the oppressive
actions of the English towards their new subjects which sparked the
first war of independence.

\*1859 onwards we see the beginnings of the big change. The first war of
independence had floundered and the English had finally completed the
conquest of Hindustan. As new rulers of the land they started using more
appropriate orthography for Hindu terms with great frequency. Hindu and
Sanskrit start peaking around the 1880s and mark the great wave of
orientalism or the western romantic interest in Sanskrit and Hindu
thought.

\*In this phase the Hindus started recovering from the aftermath of the
brutalities of the English suppression of the great rising of 1857. This
is when we see the revival of Indian freedom movements and consequently
an English reaction towards all things Hindu and the gradual decline in
both Hindu and Sanskrit on the graph. In a sense this mirrors the
situation between 1840-1858. Additionally, this period also saw the
Abrahmistic fight-back that sought to purge Western thought of its
flirtations with their ancestral Indo-European connections that were
inspired by the collision with India.

\*In the phase between 1940-48 we see a spike in the use of Hindu though
Sanskrit continues to decline. This is the only phase were the two are
notably decoupled. We suspect that this is a reflection of the peaking
national consciousness of Hindus writing in English, associated with the
final push towards freedom from English rule.

\*We then see a peak in both the terms Hindu and Sanskrit starting in
the 1960s and ending in the late 1980s after which it has been a general
downward trend. This new phase marks the new invasion of the west by
Sanskritic culture backed by the Hindu and bauddha teachers carrying
their systems to the USA and also neo-Orientalism (Frits Staal,
agehAnanda etc). Its eventual decline beginning in the 1990s marks a
combination of: 1) the mlechCha secret-agent backed framing of Indic
teachers in scandals usually of a sexual type; 2) The Malhotran U-turn
resulting in the return of mlechCha-s to their Abrahamistic roots. 3)
The general decline in funding for Sanskrit and Hindu related studies
with the imposition of South Asianism by the mlechCha-s.

\*Some of the above discussion is also recapitulated by the term
“buddha” suggesting that it generally captures genuine trends
regarding Indic matters. Also note the invention of the terms Hinduism
and Buddhism by the British and their eventual imposition on the world
at large.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh3.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TQ2FZxV69BI/AAAAAAAAB_U/N_RkphmITM4/s640/Buddha_Hindu.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/SjE4q2-A7jfxCphtnNuC-A?feat=embedwebsite)

Regarding the term South Asian we have always held that it is an
US-inspired Anglospheric attempt to back Pakistani legitimacy and
delegitimize the Indian cultural and power projection on the
sub-continent – their natural sphere of action. The graphs simply
reinforce this point we have made before.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TQ2FaVYzDZI/AAAAAAAAB_Y/vvqKvMmfA1M/s640/Southasian_Pakistani.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/beVeIfvY0FNia5Te4kj6JA?feat=embedwebsite)
