+++
title = "mAhAsamanta “feudalism”?"

+++
“nUtana-mAnava-samAjasya-purashcharaNam
mArksa-engelsa-lenina-nAmadheyAnAm tejasvinAm mahA-mAnavAnAm
punIta-smaraNArtham ||”

Thus, Kosambi the pitAmaha of the deshIya rudhira-dhvaja-s offers his
ma\~NgAlacharaNaM to his mentors, of all places in the introduction to
his edition of the vAkya-s of bhartR^ihari. He claimed that he was
working to change humanity towards world peace but his idols mArksa,
engelsa, lenina ityAdi ati-duShTAH, as also their mahA-bhaya\~Nkara
chIna-deshIya putraka, were collectively responsible for more
man-slaughter than everyone other than their ideological forbears, the
followers of the unmatta-mata from the paschima-maru.

“I hate Indians. They are a beastly people with a beastly religion.”

Thus a head-rogue of the leukosphere and a mass murderer of Hindus
encapsulated the modal attitudes of the mlechCha-s towards the Hindus.

Despite having the collective wisdom of manu the law-giver, vidura,
viShNugupta and viShNusharman thereafter, the Hindus failed to prevail
in the battle of the mind against the two inimical forces represented by
the above quotations, which have been arrayed against them over the past
century. Despite their superficial differences, the two forces have
gained the upper hand through a similar memetic mechanism, in the
process weakening the previously active Hindu resistance against the
marUnmatta-s and kIlita-pretArAdhaka-s. Simply put both of them used
what a vaishya would recognize as a market strategy founded on roguish
dishonesty. Both in the academia of krau\~nchadvIpa and bhAratavarSha
the rudhira-dhvaja-s donned the title of the “intellectual” and
ruthlessly purged it of divergent views. Thus, to be recognized as an
intellectual ones production of literature no longer mattered. It was
your political proclivity – if you were not a dAti-mudgara your
intellectual activity received no recognition, be it in the desh or in
the mlechCha-varSha-s of krau\~nchadvIpa. In the desh this operated in
the systematic destruction of all native intellectual tradition there by
banishing the very possibility of a heathen intellectual tradition in a
learned discourse. The natural intellectual productivity of bhArata was
represented by the likes of the nambUthiri nIlakaNTha somayAjin or
vAchaspati mishra. But today you cannot be an intellectual in their
tradition – how could you even dare to call yourself an intellectual if
you were not in tradition of Kosambi’s murderous mahAmAnava-s.

Kosambi equated Marx with the two greatest intellectuals of the
occident, Karl Gauss and Charles Darwin. With such equations he tried to
conflate in the minds of the undiscerning masses the crass with the
sublime. Then again we must take note of the fact that the mlechCha-s
gave their highest puraskAra, the Nobel Prize on one side to Planck or
Einstein and on another side to the same English architect of the
genocide of the va\~Nga-s who had the above words for the Hindus. Thus,
in the same manner as above they create in the minds of the ignorant an
equation of the two. Thus, by a system of dishonest brand-building they
successfully eliminated the non-leukospheric and the non-Marxist systems
from even participating in intellectual discourse. The result has been a
deep perversion of the whole scaffold of Western academia that enforces
restrictions free presentation of ideas despite professing academic
freedom. The deleterious effects of this perversion can be felt in
underpinnings of the academic enterprise itself especially clearly in
certain fields such as anthropology and philology, more subtly in
biology, and to a lesser extent, in a more indirect form, even in the
most mentally demanding fields such as mathematics and physics. But the
analysis of the termites in the undergirding of the Western academia is
a discussion for another day. Here our main concern is India which has
been the target of the forces spawning the above quotations. In India
the same effects as in the West exist, but even more fundamentally it
has the added effect of keeping most Hindus misinformed about
themselves. This lies at the root of how these forces have corroded the
Hindu intellectual tradition both in the academic sense and also in
terms of its quotidian expressions and replaced it with jejune and vapid
expressions toward which the so called Hindu elite gravitate. In more
practical terms, it is this erosion that has directly contributed to the
loss of the innate immunity against the unmatta mata-s, thereby allowing
them to intrude on to very character of India. Before going ahead, let
us briefly take up one issue that many a naive Hindu brings up: “Is
Kosambi not a great intellectual? Hence, what sense does it make to
criticize him and replace him with your typical Hindu
obscurantism?” Etc. Yes, Kosambi himself was certainly an admirable
polymath and I have myself expressed some level of intellectual kinship
with him (To clarify there is some overlap on many topics though not
reaching a “bhavabhUtian equivalence”, as in:  
ye nAma kechid iha naH prathayanty avaj\~nAM  
jAnanti te kim api tAn prati naiSha yatnaH |  
utpatsyate tu mama ko .api samAna-dharmA  
kAlo hy ayaM niravadhir vipulA cha lakShmIH ||). However, men are rarely
paragons of perfection and mixed in with those admirable qualities are
dreadful delusions. Most often the followers of the great end up only
imbibing the crassest of their guru’s offerings and so it was even in
Kosambi’s case. His successors only acquired the worst of his ideas and
hardly any of the better ones. So in conclusion we were left with the
tradition of his ghora nUtana mahA-mAnava-s and none of that of
bhartR^ihari and his kind.

The main idea here is to discuss the deep amnesia, brought about by the
above forces, of that age of Hindu history before the Hindu world
started going down-hill under the fury of the bearded buddha-busters.
Representative of this are the below quotations regarding the age that
produced vAkpati-rAja, bhavabhUti and bhojadeva-paramAra, the last of
whom carved himself a place in memory only second to vikrama-

*Says the mlechCha historian Basham:* “The history of the succeeding
centuries \[7th to 11th\] is a rather drab story of endemic warfare
between rival dynasties. It can be followed in some detail, thanks to
the numerous inscriptions and copper-plate charters of the period, but
the detail is monotonous and uninteresting to all but the specialist.”

*Says the art history Devangana Desai:* “Art under feudalism represents
an ossification of form and spirit… The siddhis (achievements) of
tantric Acharyas (preceptors) were considered useful by kings and feudal
chiefs in serving their two dominant interests, war and sex.”

*Says an Indian historian GC Choudhary:* “The political characteristic
of our period \[i.e. 7th to 11th centuries\] is somewhat monotonous and
stagnant … we actually fail to find out any notable changes or
developments. Everywhere one may meet with the same conditions of
suzerainty and vassalage; everywhere one can see the same despotism…”

*The Mohammedan KA Nizami characterizing the period as one of decadence
inescapably leading to Islamic dominance:* “From the 8th centry onwards
India had lost all contact with the outside world and the Hindu society
was set in rigidity like a concrete structure. One great achievement of
the Turkish conquest of northern India was the ending of this isolation
and the establishment of the International status of India in the
then-known world”. This view forms the bedrock of the terrorist state of
Pakistan, aided and abetted by its mlechCha backers from the
Anglosphere.

In essence the tendency has been to portray the history of this period
as one of decadence due to feudalism of the mahA-sAmantas – an idea
founded by Kosambi and given full shape by B. Chattopadhyaya in his book
addressing precisely this topic “The making of Early Medieval India”. We
however suspect that this picture of history is more one of political
imagination than the ground reality. The title of Chattopadhyaya’s book
is a valid one, but to really address the point several questions need
to be thoroughly answered – 1) is the characterization of the said
period 7th to the 12th centuries of the common era truly one which is
decadent, culturally uncreative, stagnant, monotonous and uninteresting?
2) Is the term “feudalism” as evident from its western meaning really
applicable here to bhAratavarSha? 3) Were the intellectual, social and
political institutions of that age seriously disrupted by the Mohammedan
eruptions and what exactly happened in their aftermath? Our aim here is
not answer them comprehensively at all because that is a part of a still
ongoing historical enquiry of which elements are posted here from time
to time. The objective here is merely to provide tidbits of information
that seriously question the historical view that has been thrust upon us
by the subversive and the subverted intellectual tendencies.

Let us for example look at this remarkable diagram produce by Ashish
Sinha et al from their research on the stalagmites from the Dandak cave,
Jagdalpur in Chattisgarh. They use the temporal variations in the
Delta-oxygen-18 isotope as proxy to measure the strength of the Indian
monsoon, which as [we saw before is a favored topic in Sanskrit
literature](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/06/15/southwest-monsoons-in-kavya/ "Southwest monsoons in kAvya").
The central graph is the variation of this measure with time. They
indicate the particularly wet periods by green bars and particularly dry
periods by pink bars. On this they superimpose the records of major
famines as violet stars. This graph has considerable implication for
understanding key aspects of the period under consideration.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TFj6H1RchrI/AAAAAAAAB3s/DkD5u_Il1jA/s800/famines.png)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/0ofF2fvtsLFGDDHOdrGcJQ?feat=embedwebsite)

One thing that becomes apparent from this analysis is that there were
more famines in the period overlapping with the incursions and
occupation by the army of Islam. The period between 600-1015 CE saw 4
famines, while that between 1015-1500 saw 15 famines (the temporal
division marked by Mahmud Ghaznavi’s invasions deep into India). Even if
we leave out the 4 famines (including the two big ones, like the
durgA-devI famine) that correspond to the onset of the “Little Ice age”
we see an increase in the frequency of famines with the spread of
Mohammedan destruction over the sub-continent. Further, it must be noted
that though the period under consideration did not have an episode like
the “Little ice age”, there were two substantially dry periods that that
appear to have been weathered by Hindus with relatively few famines.
Now, this observation suggests that the Hindu on the whole was much
better in the period condemned by the historians than in the sultanate
period. The reason for the prevention of famines becomes apparent when
the evidence from the Hindu activities of the age is examined: 1) As we
have seen before the ancient tradition of construction of water
reservoirs and tree-plantation is a highly [encouraged activity in Hindu
tradition](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/09/24/on-some-danas-and-utsargas-of-the-mediaeval-hindus/)
(kUpAdi dAnaM and vR^ikShaM). 2) From inscriptions it is clear that both
the kShatriya-s (real or honorary) and the shaiva and, to some extent,
vaiShNAva AchArya-s of major maTha-s engaged in a series of hydraulic
works, the foundations of which are found in the [pratiShTha tantra-s of
their
tradition](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/08/the-urban-mandala/).
3) The system of Hindu urban and rural planning by both the rulers and
the maThAdipati-s was such that new settlements were concentrated in
villages as against large cities. This distributed architecture allowed
maintenance and governance of large agricultural lands and reduced
hoarding of agricultural produce to few hubs. This distributed
architecture of the network made it more resilient to attack (i.e. by
events like famines).

As an anecdotal example of water management let us consider the case of
bhojadeva paramAra. Putting into action his teachings from the
samarA\~NgaNa sUtradhAra, he planned and financed several hydraulic
works throughout his reign not only in his kingdom but also in other
kingdoms (e.g. the lake in Kashmir). But the most famous of his works
was the bhoja reservoir that was south of the modern Bhopal city. This
was the largest artificial lake in India and perhaps the largest in the
world at that time (650 Sq km). This reservoir was a civil engineering
feat indicating that the Hindu texts of the era were not mere
theoretical fancies of the impractical brAhmaNa-s and kShatriya-s. The
reservoir was created by damming both the vetravati (Betwa) and
kaliasrotas (Kaliasot) rivers such that the surplus water during
monsoons would be collected in the reservoir. In the placing of the
sandstone blocks no mortar was used, showing that they had means of
cutting the huge blocks so precisely that there was no gap between them
for water to leak. This lake supplied water for the entire region for 4
centuries until the invasion of the Ghazi Hoshang Shah, under whom the
frenzied army of Islam spent 3 months demolishing the dam in 1434 CE.
This act of destruction is proudly recorded by the Mohammedan chronicler
Sahib Hakim who says that after the destruction of the dams of bhoja at
two places by the army of Hoshang Shah the reservoir took three years to
drain completely and became a malarial marsh for another 30 years there
after. The climate of mAlava itself changed in the aftermath of this
Islamic vandalism with the whole place prone to drought while Vidisha
was repeatedly flooded in the monsoons. In 2006 CE the newspapers
reported that the people in Bhopal and Vidisha were getting water only
once in 3-7 days and riots were breaking out when water tankers arrived.
Thus, the ecological effects of the Islamic vandalism of the Hindu
waterworks are felt to this day. Such Mohammedan acts were not just
limited to the bhoja reservoir but all over the sub-continent,
suggesting that their activities had a major role in decline of water
management in the medieval period. Thus the very basics of human
existence declined from the condemned period to the one after it.

Continuing with the example of bhojadeva paramAra it should be noted
that the civil engineering feats of his time are not at all the
indicator of a society in decline, but one in which positive innovations
are taking place. This extended to the other spheres of human activity,
commonly misunderstood by those represented by the above quotations. For
example, let us take the inscription above the most famous serpentine
Sanskrit sword of udayAditya (\[grand\]son of bhoja). It states that the
paramAra “sword” represented by that sarpa-bandha protects all the four
varNa-s of society and also bestows on them and protects the knowledge
represented by the serpentine sword. Hindu tradition suggests and
provides examples to show that in bhoja’s realm everyone from the
brAhmaNa to the shUdra had education and culture that was borne by the
media of saMskR^ita, prAkR^ita and deshabhASha-s. This puts to sword the
basic idea founded by Kosambi that in this period Sanskrit represented
the mores of the “oppressive” upper castes and was not an expression of
“the people” (of course in the Marxist sense). Nothing could be
further from the truth; under the paramAra-s exemplified by bhoja (as
also their rivals) education had clearly spread wider and there was a
conscious effort to provide institutional education which was epitomized
by the bhojashAlA. Thus, the period comes out, in sharp contrast to its
characterization in the above quotations, as one where the rulers not
only sought to protect their people but also educate them. It was
precisely the institutions such as these that were targeted and
destroyed by the Mohammedans – it suffices to note that the bhojashAlA
today serves as a monstrous Masjid where Hindus are not allowed to enter
on Friday lest the muezzin and his blood-curdling bearded hordes be
offended. Indeed, the Hindu population remembers bhoja due these acts
much more than any other ruler. We have [discussed this
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/12/12/raja-bhoja-the-glory-and-tragedy-of-the-setting-hindu-sun/),
but let us illustrate it again with another anecdote. The hoysala-s of
the karnATa country built a shiva temple in the Tamil country known as
hoysaleshvara in the 1200s at Kannanur, Tiruchirapalli. In Tamil it was
initially called boysaleshvara (due the h-\>p/b transform between
Kannada and Tamil). But as the boysala-s were destroyed the connection
to them was forgotten. Instead, a legend arose that the bhojadeva used
to spend half of the year in his south Indian capital in Tiruchy and had
built the bhojeshvara there (i.e. boysaleshvara became bhojeshvara) and
brought his enlightened reign to those regions. However, illustrative of
the amnesia forced on the Hindu by the collusion of Marxist and their
Occidental subversionist partners is the case of our class 5 history of
India textbook. It had a separate sympathetic chapter on Mahmud Ghaznavi
(based on which students were asked to discuss his “good” and “bad”
points) while there was \*not even\* a mention of the great bhojadeva
paramAra – truly an attack on the Hindu mind itself. Let it not be
forgotten that these textbooks were designed by Kosambi’s own
rudhira-dhvaja successors.

Finally, we come to the social organization of the period. Due to
Marxist thinking the period has been described as comparable to the
coeval Europe wherein the essence of “feudalism” is the channeling of
agricultural surplus produced by the action of peasant serfs to the
feudal lords. These feudal lords are said to parcel the serfs and the
land on which they ply to their vassals as fiefs. Due to B.
Chattopadhyaya’s works the terminologies of the great feudal lord, the
vassal and the fief was replaced by the term “sAmanta feudalism”, where
the mahArAja-s, maNDaleshvara-s, mahAsAmanta-s and sAmanta-s were the
equivalents of the great feudal lords and various tiers of vassals.
Further, the Marxist RS Sharma (a close ally of the German subversionist
from Harvard) goes on to tell us that the brAhmaNa-s were the feudal
lords of the agrahAra-s who could be compared to the religious feudalism
of the Isaistic church in Europe. We are told the the early medieval
social system was the one in which these feudal lords by
“extra-economic” means i.e. social, religious or political coerced
material out of the serf. So who were the serfs of Hindustan? Marxists
like RS Sharma tell us that the Sanskrit terms such as kShudra
prakR^iti, Andhra (\!), chaNDAla and janapada denoted the serfs. He
audaciously claims that the janapada-kopa described by kauTilya means a
peasant revolt due to exploitation. Further, he goes on to claim that
the use of the term daNDa in inscriptions for violators of the land
grants as evidence for the use of force by the feudal lord in punishing
the serfs. He also claims that the vIrakal-s south India are frequently
found in the vicinity of agrahAra-s; hence they must be records of the
revolts of serfs against the Brahminical oppressor. Indeed Marx sees
class struggles everywhere\! Others like Davidson, the American
historian of the bauddha-s, sees the mahAsAmanta feudalism operating via
the rapine seizure of “tribal lands” for distribution as fiefs. The
force-fitting of Hindu history into Marxist-inspired constructs indeed
leads to these ridiculous characterizations of the time. It is clear
that RS Sharma has completely misunderstood both the Sanskrit terms he
quotes and the objectives of the land grants. In light of the discussion
on the hydraulic works and the role of the royal and tAntrika agents in
rural and urban development it is clear that the description of the
agricultural labor as serfs and its characterization as feudalism (as
defined by the Marxists) is utterly misguided. What actually emerges is
a complex symbiotic network between agricultural labor, brAhmaNa
land-developers, mahArAja-s and sAmanta-s, rather than a simple
hierarchical flow from the serf to the mahArAja. Further, rather than an
ossified control along caste lined from top to bottom in these period we
see a greater integration of not just the castes but also the more
remote tribal populations, which was being absorbed into the Indo-Aryan
core. This specifically arose as a result of the tAntrika dIkSha-s which
were being offered to all the castes and the avarNa-s. Further, we find
based on the evidence from tAntrika sources (e.g. the lalitopAkhyAna)
that the tribal populations were receiving new openings to rise within
the system in various capacities, including acquisition of honorary
kShatriya status. In conclusion, the characterization of this period by
the Marxist-Leukospheric alliance has led to a complete inversion of the
picture of this major phase of Hindu history.
