+++
title = "Torvoneustes and a note on the diversification of dentition in derived thalattosuchians"

+++
As background for this note one may read our [comprehensive
review](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/12/19/crocodiles-in-the-shadow-of-the-dinosaurs/)
of the basics of crocodile evolution.

There have been some interesting developments in the field of crocodile
evolution since the note alluded to above. Firstly, we had a note
describing the unusual notosuchian, Pakasuchus (not from the terrorist
state but Tanzania) with a remarkably mammalian dentition. It raises
many interesting questions which we might look into at some later point.
Then we had the description of two thalattosuchians of the
metriorhynchoid clade, namely Torvoneustes and Neptunidraco. The former
is a reasonably well-preserved fossil that was previously considered a
species of Metriorhynchus, Dakosaurus and Geosaurus before being given a
well-deserved generic name of its own (Andrade et al). Neptunidraco was
the name given (Cau and Fanti) to a fossil known since the 1950s as a
species of Metriorhynchus or Geosaurus. While it is preserved in a
rather bizarre fashion – i.e. as slabs of polished stone that section
through the embedded skull and neck vertebra, it represents one of the
earliest members of the geosaurine clade (the Bajocian age of the
Jurassic \~167-171 Mya). It is the thalattosuchians which we shall
further discuss here.

Before we get to them we shall revisit the discussion by Prasad and de
Broin on the teeth of crocodiles. They define the following sometimes
subtly different types objectively:  
1\) Ziphodont: These are serrated teeth with clearly distinct denticles
on the carinae or keels of the tooth. These denticles start separate
elements right from within the edge of the body of the tooth crown and
have a distinct enamel edge for each. The ziphodont teeth are further
distinguished by Andrade et al into 1.1) microziphodont teeth which have
microscopic denticles less than .3 mm in size and 1.2) macroziphodont
teeth which have denticles greater than .3 mm in size. In functional
terms these denticles have been proposed to aid grip of flesh and
improved mechanical efficiency of slicing (which is why even knives have
them) by propagating the force to crack hard substrates.

2\) False-ziphodont: These teeth do not have distinct denticles that
come off the body of the tooth crown. However, they do have distinct
keels which bear serrations on the enamel part alone. Unlike true
denticles, these serrations do not continue into the body of the tooth,
which instead show anastomosing ridges. The exact functional
capabilities of false-ziphodont teeth vis-a-vis true ziphodont teeth is
unclear.

3\) The non-ziphodont teeth: There are of many types, but among
carnivores are typically triangular or conical with no keels. Thus, they
are piercing rather than cutting structures.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TJbtnVNm-uI/AAAAAAAAB8g/dHMPXaUAa-g/s400/ziphodont.png)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Mgcpp2XeNAlEszQzA3xiWA?feat=embedwebsite)

Now ziphodont teeth are widely distributed across the crocodile clade:
They are present in the non-crocodylomorph crurotarsans like
Batrachotomus and phytosaurs, the sebecid clade of notosuchians, certain
notosuchians like Araripesuchus, Armadillosuchus and Sphagesaurus, basal
crocodiles of the sphenosuchian grade, peirosaurids and among the
pristichampsids and mekosuchines in the eusuchian clade. Outside of the
crocodile-line it is seen in the stem archosaurs like Erythrosuchus and
the dinosaur-line. This suggests that it could have been an ancestral
developmental program that could be repeatedly re-activated even if it
were temporarily subsumed in certain lineages. The metriorhynchoid clade
offers a good opportunity to evaluate this phenomenon of differential
expression of ziphodonty over a crocodile monophyletic clade.

Metriorhynchoid crocodiles are among the most modified members of the
entire crocodile-line and are more intricately adapted to a marine
lifestyle than any other clade of crocodiles including the dyrosaurs and
the gharials. They were perhaps the most aquatically adapted of all
archosaurs including the avian dinosaurs like Hesperornis and the
penguins. While the basal members of the thalattosuchian clade had
incipient marine adaptations, the metriorhychoids appear to have
acquired several additional features that made them “fish-crocodiles”.
Importantly, they acquired hydrofoil forelimbs, a tail-fin, salt glands
to excrete out salt and probably even an ocular sclerotic ring to aid
better deep-sea vision. There are some indications from their wide
pelvic girdle aperture that they likely had acquired live birth, thereby
completely freeing them from the land.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TJb8Fd-o_CI/AAAAAAAAB84/lZsBxvmIwhY/s400/Dakosaurus.png)Reconstruction
by Bogdanov from Andrade et
al](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/DWUTxvl47jMQGxLQp7R7uA?feat=embedwebsite)

The studies by Andrade et al indicated that at the base of the
metriorhynchoid radiation there are two stem forms, Teleidosaurus and
Eoneustes, both of which have narrow snouts with piercing teeth that
together appear to be best suited for piscivory. The crown is comprised
of two radiations, namely the metriorhynchids and the geosaurids. The
former are characterized by an elongated narrow snout comparable to the
stem forms and piercing non-ziphodont dentition. Their upper jaws are
also strongest at the anterior ends and this is likely to be an
adaptation to hold on to struggling prey like fishes. The
metriorhynchoid radiation is characterized by the genera:
Metriorhynchus, Gracilineustes, Cricosaurus and Racheosaurus. Of these
forms like Metriorhynchus palpebrosus has a somewhat wider snout than
Gracilineustes acutus and might have had some differences in their prey.
The geosaurid radiation is contrasted from the metriorhynchid radiation
by the presence of broader snouts with ziphodont or false ziphodont
teeth. This trend is already noticeable in the more basal members of
this clade, Suchodus and Purannisaurus. However, Torvoneustes and
Neptunidraco have somewhat more slender and narrow snouts. Their sister
group Geosaurus and Dakosaurus have progressive broader and stronger
snouts clearly indicative to taking on larger prey. The trend
“culminates” in a Dakosaurus species from South America that has a
particular tall snout which is particularly strongly engineered in terms
of its ability to take stress.

Now, in phylogenetic terms using the information from both Torvoneustes
and Neptunidraco its appears that they are both stem geosaurines – while
Torvoneustes has false ziphodont teeth it is not clear what kind of
teeth Neptunidraco has. Throughout the thalattosuchian clade the only
crocodiles with ziphodont teeth Geosaurus and Dakosaurus, suggesting
that at least within this clade this morphology emerged late. Given the
basality of both Torvoneustes and Neptunidraco it would be best to
interpret the emergence of ziphodonty, in the crown clade uniting the
two Geosaurus and Dakosaurus, as a single event, followed by
specialization into micro- and macro- ziphodont forms concomitant with
the ecological diversification of the latter two taxa. Andrade et al
point out that Dakosaurus and Geosaurus were among the largest of the
metrirhynchoids (\>4m in length) and they co-occurred in the Jurassic
ecosystems of the late Kimmeridgian and Tithonian ages. Given their
broad, shortened, deep snouts it is clear that both specialized in
hypercarnivory. However, the differentiation of their ziphodonty and
ecological overlap suggests that they were partitioned into niches
related to slicing flesh of softer prey (Geosaurus; microziphodonty) and
shattering bone and shell of harder prey such as, basal
thalattosuchians, turtles and cephalopod mollusks (Dakosaurus;
macroziphodonty).

The role of the false ziphodont dentition is more enigmatic: It appears
twice in the evolution of the thalattosuchians, once in the teleosaurid
Machimosaurus and in Torvoneustes. While these two forms are far apart
in the thalattosuchian tree, they share some features in common:
Torvoneustes is large, whereas Machimosaurus is gigantic (up t0 9
meters, with a 1.5 meter skull) suggesting that they very likely to be
capable of handling large prey. They overlapped temporally with the
other large marine crocodiles, with Machimosaurus from the Kimmeridgian
and Tithonian and Torvoneustes from the Kimmeridgian. But both forms had
somewhat shorter and blunter teeth than the crown geosaurines. While
Andrade et al speculate that Torvoneustes’ false ziphodonty is a
convergent adaptation to the true ziphodonty of the crown geosaurines,
we think it is otherwise. It is quite plausible that the false
ziphodonty was related to a distinct type of prey specialization that is
as yet poorly understood. Machimosaurus bite marks have been seen
extensively on turtles and Krebs and Buffetaut have proposed that it
might have specialized in feeding on turtles.The basal thalattosuchians,
like Teleosaurus, were generally long-snouted, but from the work of
Pierce et al we might infer that of them Machimosaurus had the most
robustly built snout. This feature taken together with the somewhat
blunt teeth (a feature shared with Torvoneustes) suggests that such
forms might have specialized in crushing prey. Further studies need to
be performed to investigate if this mode of feeding might have a
relationship with false ziphodonty.

Given that we have noted above that ziphodonty could be the ancestral
condition for archosaurs, it is likely that the developmental network
for it was never lost. We speculate that with the with emergence of an
aquatic habit in the thalattosuchians the initial adaptation was for
piscivory, which resulted in suppression of the ziphodont mode of tooth
development in favor of the conical teeth. The pathway for denticle
formation is likely to be related to the ectodysplasin, Shh, Wnt10b,
Bmp4, Fgf4 network. Hence, we speculate that ziphodont\<-\>non-ziphodont
transformations could occur simply as a consequence of the different
levels of expression of ectodysplasin and its receptor Edar along with
concomitant shifts in Shh expression, much like in the scale\<-\>feather
transformations in the dinosaur-line. So a return of the expression
levels to the old state could result in a return of ziphodonty when ever
it is under positive selection. Under such a model the re-emergence of
ziphodonty is relatively simple atavistic reversal, rather than repeated
convergence to this morphology. Indeed this better explains the
frequency with which it repeatedly occurs throughout archosaurian
evolution. In light of this we wonder why false ziphodonty should
occasionally emerge instead of true ziphodonty? It is possible that in
certain lineage the developmental network for ziphodonty was lost
altogether, so they are forced to convergently evolve a similar
morphology, resulting in pseudoziphodonty. This appears less likely to
me because it is unlikely the key developmental signal genes are lost,
and difference between the ziphodont and non-ziphodont morphologies is
merely one of levels of expression arising from changes to their
regulatory elements. If this were indeed the case then we have all the
more reason that pseudoziphodonty is a distinct adaption for a
particular feeding/predatory mechanism.
