+++
title = "How many men were around?"

+++
A few years back we had a dispatch on the evolution of the great apes of
Africa (including ourselves). We are now revisiting this topic inspired
by an unexpected recently reported find – the Denisova hominin (to which
we will come down the line). Throughout its existence several distinct
morphotypes have been observed within the clade Homo and many of them
have been accorded the status of separate “species” of men. The cranial
remains of most prominent among these have all been collated below for
illustrative purposes. This is useful because right away one can see
that there has been notable anatomical change since the earliest
reported clades of Homo all the away to the more recent clades like
H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis. Despite this the actual nature of
these morphotypes is incompletely understood.

Skulls of great apes currently placed in the clade Homo

![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S67UZw1OZ5I/AAAAAAAABW0/rgI6V2tfb84/Untitled.jpg
"kapAla mAla")

Formerly, it was customary to place some of the morphotypes as distinct
“chronospecies” having an ancestor-descendent relationship: H.habilis
was seen as a the first chronospecies leading into H.ergaster and that
in turn leading to H.erectus and H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis
finally emerging from H.erectus via transitional forms like
H.rhodesiensis or H.heidelbergensis. Some other species were seen as
temporally coeval but morphologically and reproductively distinct
populations like H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis. However, in the past
several years (as in the former note on the topic) it has become
increasingly clear that the linear picture of hominin relationships is
not supported by the data. In fact H.habilis and H.erectus are seen as
having a 500,000 year overlap. Further if H.erectus indeed showed the
drastic sexual dimorphism as suggested by finds in the past several
years then it is quite possible that the line leading to H.sapiens was
distinct from the classical H.erectus. Finally, irrespective of the
whether there was actually an ancestor-descendent relationship or
covevality between two morphotypes the reproductive interactions between
these overlapping groups remain unclear. For example, were H.habilis and
H.erectus reproductively isolated from each like a lion and tiger when
they overlapped in space and time? The same question arises again with
H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis later in time. Finally, when one clade
of Homo replaced another in a particular area (e.g. H.erectus finally
replacing H.habilis) did one have to become extinct of reasons other
than competition or was there a competitive displacement. If competitive
displacements occurred were they without genetic absorption of the clade
being destroyed (i.e. real genocide) or did some of their genes survive
in their destroyers?

The recent finds suggest that genetic evidence might come to bear on
this data. The main data set here is the sequencing of multiple
mitochondrial genomes of Neanderthals. As can be seen below, the
mitochondrial genome data clearly points to a deep and clear separation
of H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis.

Pairwise mitochondrial distance distribution between genetically
characterized members of the clade Homo. Note the bimodality in the
distance distribution within extant Homo sapiens due to the deep split
between basal African lineages (includes mitochondrial genomes from
Mbuti, San, Ibo, Hausa, Biaka among others) and rest of H.sapiens

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S67-J0fQwlI/AAAAAAAABXU/349Ej1LXt4g/s400/Inter_homo_distances.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/3g7KVzNk48ewXVmF8-F9xQ?feat=embedwebsite)

The morphological data (below) agrees in large part showing that
H.sapiens and H. neanderthalensis can be separated from each other as
populations. However, the morphological data is not as unequivocal as
the mitochondrial genomes: there is a small overlap between H.sapiens
and H. neanderthalensis (especially if archaic sapiens is included) and
even more overlap between H.erectus and H. neanderthalensis. The
implications of these observations are of interest and it is here that
the Denisova material comes in to add a wrinkle and reminds us to
revisit that enigmatic Indian hominin represented by the Narmada
cranium.

Separation of major morphotypes of Homo by principal component analysis
of cranial parameters adapted from White et al.’ description of the
Herto crania.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh3.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S7A0z83v6WI/AAAAAAAABXc/3caf86OI8YE/s400/inter_homo_anatomical.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/8A9D1cOWXEAXJvb1vsiREA?feat=embedwebsite)

To place all of this in context we must get to the big question in the
evolution of Homo: How many waves came out of Africa and what were the
interactions between them. Different lines of evidence give slightly
different answers and the differences in the details are of some
significance:  
\-Paleontological studies suggest that there were the following waves
out of Africa: 1) Homo erectus, who is seen in Asia in the form of the
Peking Man and the Java Man. This wave is believed to have first left
Africa around 1.9 Mya and persisted in Java as a distinct species till
around till between 30-50 Kya. Thus at least in Indonesia H.sapiens
overlapped with H.erectus. 2) Based on the relationships between H.
rhodesiensis and H.heidelbergensis it has been proposed that there was
an out of Africa wave around 500-300 Kya that brought H.heidelbergensis
to Eurasia. This form is believed to have eventually given rise to the
Neanderthals, who were contemporaneous with H.sapiens. 3) Finally,
H.sapiens is supposed to have emerged in Africa by around 100 Kya and
left Africa around 40-60 Kya to populate the world.

But there are several wrinkles to this picture: 1) There is the Dmanisi
Homo (“H.georgicus”) from Georgia that displays some features which
might be even more primitive than H.erectus. So was “H.georgicus” a
H.erectus at all or was he an even earlier migration of H.habilis out
Africa or an australopith that gave rise to Homo after migrating back
from Eurasia into Africa? 2) There is the enigmatic cannibalistic
H.antecessor that was found in Europe between 800 Kya to 1.2 Mya. Was he
an evolute of H.erectus or a separate earlier migration out of Africa?
His relationship to other contemporaneous and later species of Homo
still remains unclear. 3) Finally, what is the status of the
“intermediate” forms like the Narmada cranium and the unusual
relationships between upper Paleolithic H.sapiens populations suggested
by the Hofmeyr Man from South Africa who displays some primitive
features with respect to the waves out of Africa?

\-The use of genetic evidence to derive a picture of human evolution has
been fraught with controversy. In my personal opinion the statistical
frame developed by Templeton provides a means of addressing this problem
using haplotype data. After one works through his algebra and statistics
one comes to the following metric:  
Templeton states that “the age of a node in a haplotype tree can be
regarded as a random variable with a gamma probability distribution
function with mean given by ‘T’, the standard phylogenetic estimator of
age of the node, and variance given by the formula:  
S^2=T^2/(1+k); where ‘k’ is the number of mutations that have
accumulated in the descendants of the node whose age is estimated to be
T. Templeton then computes this gamma distribution for a bunch of loci
using a 6 Mya split between humans and troglodytes for calibration. He
shows that 15 of these loci show evidence for expansion from Africa to
Eurasia using his metrics for assessing geographical expansion. Then he
shows that it is very improbable that the peaks of all the gamma
distributions for these 15 loci cluster into a single event. Instead he
found that the peaks of these distributions cluster into three distinct
intervals: 1) between 96-169 Kya; 2) between 390-970 Kya; 3) between 1-3
Mya. Templeton notes that these show a good match to the three main out
of Africa events suggested by paleotological studies, namely those of
H.erectus, H.rhodesiensis/H.heidelbergensis and finally H.sapiens.
Further, he shows that between these expansions there was a lower
background Africa-Eurasia genetic exchange along with isolation with
distance. Finally, he shows based on the gamma-distributions that there
is absolutely no support for the hypothesis that the out of Africa
expansion waves replaced the earlier populations completely. Instead
they seem to have incorporated their genetic material into themselves as
they expanded.

While Templeton’s argument is rather clear there have been
counter-arguments to this genetic picture.

continued…
