+++
title = "Two sides of the phone"

+++
ST was describing her readings of a chIna authoress (I totally forgot
her name) writing in English and how they touched a “nerve” in her even
though the author is from an alien cultural setting. The points which ST
mentioned as impinging on her was the sense of déjà vu, the sense of
vaivasvata’s haunting presence, the sense of foreboding and the sense of
what Conan Doyle had termed the genius of locus. ST said she was
wandering aimlessly by the sea as the day was an “indra-datta” enjoying
the gift of maghavan and conspiring an elaborate feat of sUpa-kala that
would rival the feats of vR^ikodara in the virATan court. But she
declared that she had hit a conceptual barrier that she was unable to
break past. As she was walking along in this state of an uncoupled
engine she told me of an insect that she was seeing and started
describing it to me. It sounded like a neuropteridan, but that is merely
a conjecture since verbal devices of communication only go that far.
Then ST all of a sudden queried about a term used on these pages: the
rAmapUrIya asiputrikA.  
I: When we talk the mlechCha dIrghashravas, who is steeped in adharma,
listens in like a karNapishAchinI. So for you to understand that let me
use the “words of the twilight”. Remember that night when we were
camping on the foot of the great massif of the on which stood the
maharAshTrI rAjan’s “rAjamAchi”. The chief of the shastra-bhR^it-s of
our dala caressed a few asi-putrikA-s. Ah’ the intrepid ardor of youth,
where is it now?  
Then ST went on to tell me of her peregrinations in the Northern lands
at the largesse of her master. We simultaneously converged on the name
Snorri Sturluson – A déjà vu said ST? Nothing to be surprised by I
thought. ST asked why did you think of him?  
I: Some how the word asiputrikA reminded me of the constructs of the
Hattatal.  
ST: Touche, you will not believe what was in my mind.  
I: Though deluded by the kIlita-preta there was something of kavI still
left in old Snorri.  
ST: In those regions the past still linger as genii of the locus under
the grime of the unmatta-s. I could still connect with Steinunn, the
connection to the Indo-European stem?  
I: Yes, indeed despite being centuries apart and miles apart and seeming
different to the undiscerning eye a common skein runs through the frills
of Snorri and the contortions of the paNDita-rAya.

This conversation was to send ST on the path of a philosophical
discovery. Unlike, ST I am rarely prone to the déjà vu. Hence, her
proclivity for it contrasted with my own gave me a window into a common
misunderstanding about consciousness that we might discuss sometime
later using ST’s philosophical discovery as a kathAmukha. But one thing
to note at this point is that there could be a genetic foundation for
the proclivity for déjà vu as ekanetra too, like ST, experiences it
strongly. But there is another more subtle phenomenon that sort of
resembles the déjà vu that we do experience that relates to the same
class of cognitive processes. What we are referring too is the
phenomenon of feeling like being at some other place and time that we
feel we might have been through before. This is often induced by novel
auditory cues and sometime by a more complex set of simultaneous
environmental stimuli – visual, tactile and auditory flowing through the
different j\~nAnendriya-s.
