+++
title = "Society and biological constraints"

+++
For long we have remained a sAkShI on the ethology of Homo sapiens. We
have observed with how the man-made constructs interact with biology. We
realized that constructs that conflict with strongly selected biological
elements bring grief to man. In our youth we heard people that
progressive and liberal thinking, modernization and technology has
uplifted us from the state of being animals to being “human”. We were
often called to rise about animal instincts and strive for more “noble”
pursuits. Somehow all this seemed rather incongruous since we were
animals. Hence, we declared that mokSha lay in realizing and embracing
the fact that you are a pashu rather than denying it. An elder asked why
is it that these good-looking and well-educated women chose these guys
with such “bad habits”. They imbibe mAdhvI-pAna, sniff various dhUma-s
and oShadhi-s and are engaging in maithuna with so many women. There are
so many sincere puruSha-s working hard and so well-behaved, yet these
strI-s have no interest in them. In the past when we knew little of the
behavior of strI-s we had directly asked the two strI-s, who like us,
can be sAkShI-s. They plied me with insights that immediately fitted
into the large scheme of human ethology. This resulted in us
rediscovering the handicap principle that had long ago been discovered
by Zahavi. Firstly, by imbibing injurious substances these males
strongly signal their overall quality. Secondly, the male who was
described as hard-working and well-behaved is perceived as being lower
in social status than the rough and crude male who is engaging in
maithuna with many women. By engaging in multiple maithuna-s he has
signaled two things in one shot: 1) he is a bhUriretas who has a
plentiful supply of bIja. 2) He is desired by many women, so he must be
of good quality. By his roughness he signals that he might be an alpha
male ready to fight and suppress other males. This is highly sought
after by females. Also she knows that by lending his genes to her
offspring he is likely to confer those behavioral traits on the
offspring and increase their survival chance.

Here is where the point of human constructs i.e. maladaptive memes comes
in. Popular sociology or social engineering by the vested interests
projects that women basically are after goody-goody males who will
participate as an equal partner as the female in a nuclear family. But
this is not at all consonant with human ethology. In reality a female is
much more willing to have a quick rendezvous with an alpha to receive
his retas for her aNDAni than to spend her life with that lower ranked
“hard-working” male. When it comes to the open battlefield, that
hard-working tag really does not work anywhere near real biological
signals exuded by an alpha male. But human social constructs have
offered an even-more insidious option for the female. She could use the
hard-working but biologically low-ranked male as service-provider while
slipping out at the peak of her fertility in the monthly cycle to have a
brief secret encounter with an alpha male to receive his retas.
Consequently, the hard-working male is reduced being a provider for a
jAragarbha – a condition no better than a parasitoid wasp’s victim.

It is in this context that some experiments in Drosophila are of
interest. One can breed flies through artificial selection for increased
male fitness or female fitness. That is males who do better at spreading
their genes or females who do better at spreading their genes than the
average for the population. Interestingly, these actually reduce the
fitness of their offspring of the opposite sex. Thus there is a major
conflict between the traits that increase the fitness of one of the
sexes. This conflict in a natural population keeps the traits at a point
of balance but this point can be altered by artificial influences. We
are of the opinion that indeed such a bipolar effect of selection is
operating due to the influence of modern society that might have
interesting consequences by sliding the point. In our circles we have
also speculated that such an effect might have formerly acted in the
South Indian brAhmaNa communities, especially those from the drAviDa
regions and is having its serious consequences. Of course all of this
needs more empirical investigation to test.
