+++
title = "Tritonal recitations ofxa0vaiShNava-s"

+++
KRK astutely observed that the tritonal recitation of the nAlAyira
divyaprabandhaM (DP4000) by the shrIvaiShNava-s might be a survival of
an even earlier custom of the tritonal recitation of the pA\~ncharAtra
texts. The evidence from the AgamaDambara (AD) of jayanta bhaTTa in
support of this seems rather clear. In the AD an orthodox smArta
ritualist severely condemns the vaiShNava-s and shaiva-s in a
conversation with a smArta teacher. In the 4th act of the play the
R^itvik states:  
yad amI pA\~ncharAtrikA bhAgavatA brAhmanavad vyavaharanti | brAhmaNa
samAja madhyam anupravishya nirvisha\~Nkam abhivAdaya iti jalpante |
*vishiShTa svara varNaanupUrvIkatayA veda-pATham anusaranta iva
pa\~ncharAtra grantham adhIyate* | “brAhmaNAH smaH” ity AtmAnaM
vyapadishanti vyapadeshayanti cha | \[The attack on vaiShNava-s\]  
shaivAdyas tu na chaturvarNya madhya patitAH shruti smR^iti vihitam
Ashramam avajahataH shAsanaantara parigraheNaanyathA vartante | ete
punar “A janmana A santater brAhmaNA eva vayam” iti bruvAnAs tathaiva
chaturAshramyam anukurvantiiti mahad duHkham || \[Attack on shaiva-s\]

In his attack on the pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava-s the smArta states that
they move around in the midst of brAhmaNa-s using the same abhivAdanaM
as them. They are also said to recite their pa\~ncharAtra texts with the
special svara-s as thought they are a veda recitation. The call
themselves brAhmaNa-s and expect others to do so likewise. With respect
to the shaiva-s he says that they fall outside the varNAshrama dharma
and follow their own authoritative texts (he means the shaiva tantra-s)
and claim they are brAhmaNa by birth and lineage. They imitate the
four-fold Ashrama-s (or does he include varNa in this?) of the smArta-s.

So it appears that KRK is indeed correct in observing that tritonal
recitation of the DP4000 in imitation of the veda is likely to have been
further based on the model of the recitation of the pA\~ncharAtra texts.
In this light, we should note that certain Kashmirian pA\~ncharAtrika-s
who were temporally relatively close to jayanta bhaTTa (e.g. the great
kShemendra) mentioned that they were practitioners of the ekAyana shAkhA
(of the shukla yajurveda), which is believed to be the root of the
pA\~ncharAtrika texts. So was this supposed recitation of pA\~ncharAtra
texts in imitation of the veda actually a hold over from an older
“ekAyana shAkhA”? One line of reasoning could be: given that the
ekAyana is mentioned in the latest layers of the Vedic texts (namely the
teaching of skanda in the chAndogya upaniShad), it is possible that a
body of early vaiShNava material under this name existed in that period
and it could have been indeed accented. A model for such accented early
vaiShNava material could be the vaikhAnasa mantra-pATha which includes
several accented vaiShNAva mantra-s (including the famous AtmasUkta
which have described on these pages) affiliated with the taittirIya
shAkhA of the kR^iShNa yajurveda. Likewise, the taittirIya AraNyaka and
AV auxiliary literature include a vaiShNava text, the nArAyaNa sUkta
(valli), which is recited in an accented form, though TS version has
words with atypical accents. It is possible that the shukla yajurvedin-s
had a vaiShNava movement parallel to the KYV vaikhAnasa-s, known as the
ekAyana-s, who were the precursors of one of the strands of the later
pA\~ncharAtra. Of course, it should be noted that ekAyana is not
mentioned in any of the charaNa lists as a distinct shukla yajurvedIya
shakha-s. Furthermore, within the pA\~ncharAtra tantra-s themselves,
though the ekAyana is mentioned as a collection of yajuSh-s, the SYV
shakhA with which they are associated is explicitly given as kANva or in
rare cases as also including the mAdhyandina-s:  
sAtvata 25.16:  
ekAyanAn yajurmayAn AshrAvitam antaraM | (ekAyana as a collection of
yajuSh-s)

jayAkhya saMhitA 1.109 (manuscript):  
kANvI shAkhAm adhIyAnAv aupagAyana-kaushikau |

Ishvara saMhitA 21.554:

kANvI shAkhAm AdhIyAnAn veda-vedAnta-pAragAn |  
saskR^itya dIkShayA samyak sAtvataadyukta-mArgataH ||

pAdma saMhitA charyApAda 21.4:  
aupagAyana pUrvAsate nAnAgotrA mumukShavaH |  
adhIyAnAH kaNva-shAkhA tathA mAdhyandinaahvayam ||  
Also of note is the fact that the pAdma saMhitA places its frame story
in the Ashrama of kaNva and the text as a lecture delivered by kaNva.

Hence, the ekAyana collection was probably a mantra collection somewhat
like the vaikhAnasa mantra pATha rather than being a shAkhA by itself.
As noted before on these pages, in support of this we find that the
mahAbhArata mentions a pA\~nchrAtra system of the ekAyana type that
certainly preceded the full-blown tAntrika version of pA\~ncharAtra.
This Mbh section alludes to a mahopaniShad of these pA\~ncharAtrika-s
that could have been from the ekAyana collection (perhaps a parallel to
the nArAyaNa valli). This vaiShNava section of the Mbh mentions the
certain early vaiShNava groups like ekAntika-s and chitra-shikhaNDin-s.
Now some pA\~ncharAtra tantra-s (e.g. viShNu saMhitA, 2nd paTala)
mention the types of vaiShNava-s to be: 1) vaikhAnasa-s, 2) shikhin-s,
3) ekAntin-s and 4) sAttvata-s, 5) mUlaka-s. Of these, the vaikhAnasa-s
are the equivalents of their modern versions.  The shikhin-s are the
chitrashikhaNDin-s and ekAntin-s the followers of the ekAntika dharma of
the Mbh – they were vaiShNAva equivalents of the shaiva atimArga
ascetics.

Based on the evidence from the mahAbhArata we hold that the sAtvata-s
are the vaiShNava-s who originated the chatur-vyUha system and were
associated with the sAtvata confederacy – the deification of their
heroes kR^iShNa and balabhadra or their identification with a 4-fold
vaiShNava pantheon was probably at the heart of this system. We also
hold that the bhagavad-gIta is a text originally belonging to the early
sAtvata-s that acquired a wider currency in jambudvIpa. Now the mUlaka-s
are likely to be the proto-pA\~ncharAtrika-s who worshiped viShNu
independently of the vyUha-s. Now, we should note in this regard that
some early pA\~ncharAtra tantra-s mention the vaiShNAva pa\~nchabrahma
which clearly points to an alternative to the vyUha-style of worship.
The long vaiShNava interpolation in the R^igvidhAna also appears to be
the work of relatively early vaiShNava-s possibly belonging to this
vaiShNava system. It is not impossible that the ekAyana was originally
prevalent among these vaiShNava-s. In this regard, as we pointed out
before, the very name pa\~ncharAtra is not understood in most of the
later Tantric saMhitA-s of this system. In fact they give different
“folk” etymologies to try to explain this name. However, it should be
noted that this term is more naturally explained as a deriving from an
ancient Vedic ritualist term i.e. the 5 nights rite. Indeed, the
pa\~ncharAtra of puruSha nArAyaNa is currently known from the shukla
yajurveda tradition (shatapatha brAhmaNa). It is likely that this was
indeed the origin of the term. Subsequently, the mUlaka-s and sAtvata-s
appear to have amalgamated to give rise to the classical pA\~ncharAtra
system.

Hence, while the evidence is wholly circumstantial it is possible that
the later pA\~ncharAtra recitation might have itself followed this early
recitation pattern of the accented ekAyana material.

We may point out that some vaiShNava mantra-s recited by saMkarShaNa in
the AgamaDambara in the famous raNasvAmin temple in Kashmir are found
with some variations in the appendices of a medieval shukla yajurvedIya
paddhati in the context of viShNu worship:  
namaH krama samAkrAnta chitra trailokya sadmane |  
kukShi-koNaika deshAmsha-lIna vishvAya viShNave ||

On philological grounds we can rule out that this mantra was early: it
has the word “koNa” which is a loan into Sanskrit from technical Greek
(xenolog of Greek gona; ortholog of Sanskrit jAnu). So the mantra has to
be post-Hellenic, but the link between the SYV and the pA\~ncharAtrika-s
might be real.
