+++
title = "The scope of shivAjI’s plan ofxa0svarAjya"

+++
dADhi ke rakhaiyan kI DADhi sI rahati cHAti bADhI marjAda jasa hadda
hinduvAne kI |  
kaDhi gaI raiyati ke mana kI kasaka saba miTi gaI Thasaka tamAma
turakAne kI |  
bhUShaNa bhanata dilIpati dila dhakadhakA suni suni dhAka sivarAja
mardAne kI |  
moTI bhayI chaNDI binu-choTI ke chabAya sIsa khoTI bhaI sampati chakatA
ke gharAne kI ||

The hearts of the beards burn like bonfires, such now are growing the
bounds of the Hindu Nation\!  
Hopes of people are all answered, such is being demolished the vainglory
of turuShka-s\!  
bhUShaNa says this hearing the heartbeat of the lord of Delhi in awe of
king shivAjI the manly —  
that chaNDI grows fat chewing the shikhA-less heads and wealth of the
house of Chaghadai now lies in waste\!\!  
(Verse and translation is provided by shrI Sarvesh Tiwari, whom I would
like to thank for bringing my attention to this verse).

The above verse of the hindI kavI bhUShan captures the triumphal spirit
of the Hindus that was awakened by the coming of the founder of the
mahArATTa nation. As nAlanda and jagaddala were burning the bauddha-s
felt that the dharma was supposed to end in jambudvIpa after 1500 years
from the birth of the sAkyasiMha. They turned in their last days to the
Hindu hope that end of the kAlI would be marked by the coming of kalkin
to relieve the world of the sores caused by the dasyu-s, turuShka-s and
mlechCha-s (cf. kAlachakra tantra). Now with the coming of shivAjI and
with the turuShka-s being routed for the first time in ages, some Hindus
even thought it was the epic end of the kali yuga. Even as shivAjI was
bringing down the silsila-i-guergen, he was in a sense enacting a Hindu
version of the epic played a few centuries ago by Chingiz Kha’khan. On
his deathbed, just before the fall of the Tangut kingdom, Chingiz laid
out the plans of vast conquest that his successors were to follow. He
advised them to finish off the Tanguts and then send an army south-west
to crush the remnants of the Moslem sultan and the Kalif of Baghdad.
Another army was to be sent westwards to conquer the Russians and
advance into Europe. A third force was to conquer the Kin empire and
then complete the conquest of China by destroying the Sung.
Unfortunately for the Hindus, shivAjI did not live as long as Chingiz
Kha’khan. But the evidence suggests that he too had clearly made his
grand plans. In a letter of 4th June 1691 CE the mahArATTa ruler rAjArAm
lays out the ultimate goal of their struggles to one of his generals,
hanamantrAv ghorpaDe: He states that their objective is to first
reconquer Raigad, the old capital of shivAjI. Then he proposes the
successive conquest of Bijapur, Golconda and Aurangabad to secure the
whole of peninsular India. Then he proposes a thrust towards Delhi to
put an end to Islamic rule in India. Now, it is a bit unusual for the
ruler who was being hemmed in at Gingee by the Moslem marauders to make
such a drastic claim. But as TS Shejwalkar pointed out that the evidence
of the Aj\~nA-patra suggests that this comes from the mind of shivAjI
himself (we will return to that shortly). Even as the great Jihad of
Awrangzeb was still in progress, in 1697 CE, Moslem astrologers made
forecasts that the Mogol empire might come to an end and Hindus might
take Delhi. Hindu writers were clearly mentioning the end of
Mohammedanism and the end of Masjids. These are other hints that the
plan of shivAjI was not an unknown one.

*The family of sono paNDit*  
sono (sondev) paNDit was a R^igvedin brAhmaNa, whose family according to
some sources came from the village of Bahut (unlocated) and according to
others from a village in the Thane district. He was appointed to the
administrative staff by shAhjI. In the beginning of shivAjI’s career a
number of young brAhmaNa-s where attracted towards his plan of svarAjya
and contributed their intellectual and organizational abilities to his
cause. These included the sons of sono paNDit, the sons of nArAyaN
paNDit hanmante (raghunAth and janArdan) and the “pillar” (to use MG
Ranade’s word) of shivAjI’s power paNDit moro tryaMbak pingLe. Of the
sons of sono paNDit, the elder son AbAjI paNDit was the first one to be
deployed as a part of shivAjI’s plan to roll back to the Islamic powers
from India. After securing the lands originally granted to shAhjI,
shivAjI sent AbAjI to sack Kalyan. This old seat of power of the
Andhra-s, where the records of the somayAga-s performed by their
emperors still survive, had been seized by the Moslems during the great
Jihads of Khalji and Tughlaq. The Mogols had taken it during a Jihad
initiated by Akbar and a masjid had been erected on a temple during that
invasion. So it was of great significance when AbAjI sondev reconquered
it from the Moslems against considerable odds due to intelligent
strategy, captured the local treasury and even imprisoned its governor
Mullah Ahmed. It marked shivAjI-s first successful outward strike,
planned to secure an outpost in the Northern Konkan to make further
inroads into Islamic territory. AbAjI was also involved the planning of
new mahArATTa towns like Kalyan, construction of forts including rAigaD
along with moro. He was a revenue auditor for the mahArATTa nation and
was one of those entrusted with running the kingdom while shivAjI was
detained in dilli. His brother nIlo (nIlkaNTh) paNDit planned and
executed the storming of the formidable purandar fort (earlier ceded to
the Mogols). He was also the accountant general of the kingdom and also
served briefly as a leader of the marATha fleet. He along with shivAjI
led the naval expedition to conquer Basrur in southern coastal Karnataka
to prevent the mlechCha-s from getting a foothold. Then nIlo died
relatively young leaving behind two sons. The first was dull-witted,
while the second, named rAmachandra paNDit at the saint rAmadAs’ behest,
inherited his family’s intelligence. The rAjan was quick to spot this
and had made him the chief administrator of the naval head quarters at
the sea fort of Sindhudurg. He was then made accountant general at the
age of 20 as the shivAjI felt that he saw in him a man who would rise to
even greater heights than his father \[Footnote 1\]. At the age of 24 he
was promoted to the post of amAtya of svArAjya and was one the
officiants at the rAjyAbhisheka of shivAjI. Thus, the family of sono
paNDit was close to shivAjI and was a part of his plan from an early
age. Their numerous memoirs were preserved among the papers of the
Kolhapur rAj, in which it is stated that they had the records of the
ideas and plans of shivAjI. It was rAmachandra that composed the famous
Aj\~nApatra which lays out clearly the vision of shivAjI. Here some
points are of note in this rather remarkable document: 1) He states that
they must not stop after clearing the lands from the Narmada to
Rameshvaram of the kaNThaka-s and the followers of the lord of the
yavana-s. Instead he makes it clear that the war should be pursued until
the lands of Delhi, Agra, Lahore, Dacca, Bengal, Tattha and the whole
sea coast is conquered. Finally, after these conquests the li\~Nga of
vishveshvara should be re-established in vArANasI. 2) He stresses the
importance of securing the coast against several types of inimical
forces such as phirangi (Portuguese), ingrej (English), valAndej (Dutch)
and shyAmala (Africans) by raising a naval force that can counter them.

*At the shmashAna of rAjArAm*  
With the fierce shUdra, the feral brAhmaNa and the most intelligent of
strI-s, Mis-creant, we stood atop the massif of kauNDinya beside the
samAdhi of rAjArAm, the third ruler of the mAhArATTa nation. The
afternoon was exceedingly still and not even a breeze blew. The blazing
rays of savitar’s eye glancing of the ear studs of Mis-creant danced all
around on the shrubbery – now falling on a hemp herb and then on a
dattUra plant. This sent us into a reverie. In 1698 after having escaped
from the siege of Gingee rAjArAm returned to mahArAShTra. On the vijaya
dashamI of 1699 he decided to take to field himself against the Moslems
and proceeded northwards with a strong force commanded by dhanAjI jAdav.
They encountered several Mogol detachments on their way and were about
to fall into an ambush by a large force under Zulfikar Khan. Here
rAjArAm received a secret communication from within the Mogol camp from
shambhAjI’s captive wife yesubAI. Seeing, that they were outnumbered by
the Mogols, rAjArAm led his men towards Brahmapuri (renamed Islampur by
the Padishaw). He hoped to attack the Mogol camp directly to try to
liberate shAhu. In December of 1699 rAjArAm launched a furious attack on
the Mogols, which he describes in a letter sent on 22 Dec 1699 to
inactive marATha sardArs to participate in the fight for the svArAjya.
Awrangzeeb getting wind of the attack from his spies quickly escaped.
However, the marATha-s arrived before he could complete the retreat and
several prominent Mogol families and Awrangzeeb’s daughter were taken
captive. In honorable Hindu tradition she was released unharmed. She
remembered the favor and made good by helping bAlAjI vishvanAth later to
obtain the release of yesubAI. The marATha-s attacked the Mogol baggage
train and carried off the supplies borne by 10,000 pack animals. rAjArAm
confidently declared that the Mogol army would be routed in the near
future. On the way to Satara which was being besieged by Awrangzeeb in
person, rAjArAm suddenly collapsed. He was conveyed by a palanquin to
Simhagad, where he plied himself with cannabis and opium to ease his
pain, perishing on 2 Mar 1700 at the age of 30, probably from an
overdose.

Even as the Jihad was thus grinding down peninsular India the plan of
shivAjI, outlined in the Aj\~nApatra remained imprinted in the mind
AmAtya rAmachandra. From his station at Vishalgad he conducted the war
non stop, strategizing constantly, and deploying his troops with
extraordinary fortitude. His key move was to keep the focus on taking
northern India as per the plan even as the Mogol forces incessantly
hammered the marATha-s. In 1699 he dispatched nemAjI shinde and a
brAhmaNa warrior chimnAji dAmodar to attack Malwa. In the battle with
the Mogols, Hussain Khan the governor of Thalner was captured by nemAjI
and ransomed for a sum of Rs 200,000. This greatly shook up Awrangzeeb.
Then the marATha-s incited the Gond tribals who had been converted to
Islam to rise against the Mogols under their leader Buland Bakht of
create internal friction in the Islamic ranks. In conclusion the
momentum of marATha-s even as their kings perished could be compared to
that of the Mongols under the sons and grandsons of Chingiz Kha’Khan.
The adherence to the visionary plan helped them achieve much more than
what would have been possible given their own personal limitations –
especially in the case of shivAjI, given that his successors, rAjArAm
and shAhu, lacked his vigor.

*mAdaNNA, akkaNNA and Gingee*  
The sun was barely up but that morning but Bhaganagari was already
turning into a cauldron. With the non-jAmadagnya vatsa, whose ancestor
had been part of the great marATha thrust to the south and our coethnic,
the organic chemist, we set out to the south of the city in a van. We
had a raucous time debating on the models of ocular development of
insects and at other times on the chemistry of amines. Ere long we were
at the suburb of Maheshwaram – it was not swank as it is these days back
then. The chemist led us through some interesting sights and finally
took us to the ruins of a vast temple of rudra. It was probably the
largest temples in south India built since the end of the choLa-s by
akkaNNA, the brAhmaNa minister of the Qutbshah. As we took in the ruins
we realized that the complex might have been an enormous one announcing
the revival of the Hindus in the midst of the turuShka terror. In 1685,
after akkaNNA and his brother mAdaNNA had been murdered by the
Mohammedans, the Mogol shahzade Muazzam Shah Alam invaded Bhaganagari
and ravaged it. The first target of his was this enormous temple of
rudra – how, he asked could a temple of the Kaffirs, be constructed in
an Islamic sultanate? Promptly he restored Islamic order by demolishing
it \[Footnote 2\]. As we stood there we passed into a reverie for couple
of minutes when our silence was broken by the voice of the
non-jAmadagnya vatsa. On our return in an animated discourse we pieced
together the narrative of the great Hindu “revolution” within the
Qutbshahi sultanate. Its great significance to shivAjI’s southern
conquest is normally ignored by most Hindu authors who might be caught
in the never-ending argument of whether akkaNNA and mAdaNNA were
mahArAShTrI or telugu smArta-s.

In the Sultanate of Nizamshah the learned brAhmaNa paNDita dalapati
(author of nR^isiMha prasAda) began a project of subverting Islamism
from within. He worked his way by his eloquent ways to the Sultan’s
inner circle and convinced the Sultan to relax the Sharia on the Hindus
and instead allow them to be governed separately by the dharmashAstra.
He also got the Sultan to construct facilities for Hindu astronomers to
carry out their studies. As a result of such efforts the Hindus got some
space for themselves in the Nizamshahi Sultanate and endeavored to
defend it when it was targeted by the Mogol invasion from the North (we
have already talked about the efforts of shAhji on these pages). The
Mogols, hence, clearly saw the Nizamshahi as bad Moslems because they
were not following the path of the Rasool and they were a target of
Jihad. We have Mohammed Yusuf Alawi who had come from Syria to wage
Jihad on the Hindus on behalf of the Mogols but died from his wounds
sustained while fighting a mArATha warrior. An inscription from Northern
Maharashtra on his grave states that “Alawi fought with the Kaffirs who
had blocked the way of the Musalamans had attained daraja-yi shahadat
(i.e. martyrdom in a Jihad) along with his son, relatives and servants”.
This movement of Hindus working within continued even after the fall of
the Nizamshahi, which shAhji tried to save from the Mogols and turn
pro-Hindu (there was an opposing faction of fanatic black Mohammedans
led by the brave Ethiopian Maliq Ambar). Here it would worth pointing
out the case of Khawas Khan and paNDita-s murAri and narahari. Around
the 1620s an interesting individual of the name Khawas Khan came to
power in the Adilshahi sultanate at Bjiapur. As a youth Khawas Khan
belonged to a jAti of indigenous mAhArAShTrI metallurgists known as the
tAmbekar-s. He was captured by the Moslems and converted to Islam.
Despite his dark skin and lower position as a convert he arose as result
of his intelligence and strategy. Even after his conversion for some
reason he appears to have retained his affinities for the Hindus. He
spotted a poor but highly intelligent brAhmaNa murAri and patronized him
even as he rose through the court ranks. Both Moslem and Dutch sources
explicitly mention the intellect and military skills of murAri – coming
from hostile parties it must have been clearly notable. This brAhmaNa
and his capable nephew narahari worked hard to improve the Hindu
condition through administrative and revenue reforms (something which
Mohammedans understood very little about). For example, he
diplomatically negotiated with the Qutb Shah of Golconda to compensate
the Hindu farmers who had been mauled by the Moslem force sent by that
Sultan. Then when the Qutb Shah wanted to wage a Jihad, promising the
Ghazis one golden Hon for every nose or pair of ears of Hindus they
collected, narahari successfully negotiated with him to desist from such
a plan (even beating back the ulema’s protestations to the contrary).

When the Mogol invasion of Shah Jahan came upon mahArAShTra, murAri and
narahari induced Khawas Khan to organize the defense against the
Padishah. Another powerful minister, the Turk Mustafa Khan from Iran
wanted to pay a tribute with the Mogols and join hands with them to wage
Jihad on the Kaffirs. But murAri somehow managed to convince the Adil
Shahi Sultan to imprison Mustafa Khan and continue the resistance
against the Mogols who could have inflicted devastation on the land. He
also made efforts to prepare for the great famine which was spreading
through land, for which the Mohammedans were totally unprepared. As a
result of Khawas Khan and murAri’s efforts the Mogols were frustrated.
Eventually, the Ulema and the core Moslem headed by the Qutbshahi
princess who was a wife of the Adil Shah called on the Sultan to destroy
Khawas Khan and murAri as their influence was converting the Sultanate
into a Kaffir state. The princess declared that murAri had looked at her
by lifting her pardhA and had greatly disrespected the Moslems of the
land – so the Kaffir must be killed. First an African assassin was sent
by the Sultan to kill Khawas Khan. But murAri dispatched his own African
assassin to kill the Sultan himself – he cut down several men before
being killed himself. Then murAri and narahari with the mArATha-s loyal
to him tried to stage a Hindu rebellion to seize power. The sultan acted
quickly he posted the head of Khawas Khan atop a minar of his palace and
announced that anyone supporting the Kaffir murAri would be put to
death. At the same time murAri also realized that the Hindu population
with the Sultanate was under threat and opened negotiation with the
Sultan to try to reach a settlement wherein he would separately
administer the Hindus, but retain allegiance to the Sultan. But the
Sultan struck swiftly – a large ghazi force surprised murAri at night
and captured him. He was subject to typical Islamic treatment – dragged
by a horse through the streets with Mohammedans jeering at him. His
nose, ears and hands were lopped off. He still hurled abuse on the
Sultan, when his tongue was cut off and he was paraded on a donkey and
finally beheaded. This sent a grim message to Hindus regarding their
position under the Sultanate – the message which shivAjI answered
fittingly.

Nevertheless, the attempts at internal revolution by Hindus within the
sultanates did not stop – this is where we come to mAdaNNA and akkaNNA
and their brilliant coordination with shivAjI. mlechCha subversionists
or authors influenced by them, such as Jadunath Sarkar (prior to his
U-turn), Basham, Laine and Gordon, have characterized shivAjI as a
bandit whose main objective was to plunder South India to make up for
the expenses stemming from his lavishness towards brAhmaNa-s during his
rAjyAbhisheka. This line comes straight from the near contemporary
thinking of the Dutch and English agents who saw shivAjI’s southward
movements with fear. The Dutch in particular were close to the Moslem
elite and feared the arrival of shivAjI. However, the French agent and
spy Francois Martin correctly records the objectives of shivAjI and
mAdaNNA – it became clear to him that their objective was to restore the
whole of the south to Hindu regime. At his indrAbhisheka shivAjI had
clearly declared that he would put an end to slavery, and make sure that
the Europeans comply with that. Thus, when shivAjI conquered south India
he sent a strong message to all the European companies that he was
abolishing slavery. He made it explicit that, though under Moslem rulers
Europeans could buy and transport slaves across South India, it would no
longer be possible in his reign. He also said that Europeans could not
make slaves not try to sell any and that the marATha-s would strongly
prevent any such activities. Thus, informed by the tradition of dharma,
in 1677 shivAjI acted to restore human dignity, even as the mlechCha-s
made money from sale of humans while claiming to be the bringers of
civilization. It is not very surprising that the mlechCha sources engage
in negative propaganda regarding the Hindu rAjA, especially his southern
campaign.

The family of mAdaNNA came from the town of Hanamkonda, Northeast of
Bhaganagari, where under rudradeva kAkatIya a large temple of viShNu and
sUrya had been constructed. The father of the brothers, bhANu-jI paNDita
was a revenue administrator of the town and was named after one of the
deities of the town. The son mAdhava paNDita (mAdaNNA) and arkarAja
paNDita (akkaNNa) were also named after the two deities of the temple.
They had other siblings, one of whose sons was rAmadasa, the legendary
South Indian classical musician whose tale is told in every traditional
South Indian brAhmaNa household. The town of Hanamkonda was ravaged by
Awrangzeb, the main temple defaced and the large idols of sUrya and
viShNu were broken. Based on various lines of evidence it is clear that
the brothers were polyglots who were fluent in Sanskrit, Hindi/Urdu,
Marathi, Telugu and Persian \[the fact they used the Modi script by
default has been taken as the strongest support for their origins in
mAhArAShTra\]. There is an account of the Dutch agents regarding how
mAdaNNA used to translate documents extempore between different
languages in the court. They two brothers were initially appointed to
aid the Persian official Sayyid Muzaffar in administration. It was then
that they initiated the Hindu subversion of the Sultanate. In 1674 they
intrigued with the new Sultan who had come to throne after the death of
his father Abdullah Qutbshah to get Muzaffar dismissed from office and
divested of his weapons and troops. The Mohammedan faction, especially
backed by Turks and Persians, tried to restore Muzaffar but mAdaNNA
maneuvered to keep him out and had himself appointed as Vazir. He
quickly dismissed many of the powerful mullahs in the court and
appointed Hindus to key positions. He then induced the Sultan to place
his cousin yengaNNA paNDita as a military general so that he could get a
handle over the army, which was still dominated by the Mohammedans. By
the treaty of Gulbarga he moved to place his brother akkaNNA to keep a
tab on the Adilshahi sultanate too. An year later (1675) he formulated
the plan to restore peninsular India under Hindu control so that it
could be a bulwark against the Mogol incursion to the South. He realized
that he needed a Hindu military arm and saw that shivAjI was the man in
this regard – an ideal brahma-kShatra alliance of yore could be forged.
He right away contacted shivAjI and his brAhmaNa minister aNNAjI paNDit
to devise a plan whereby shivAjI would be the mighty protector of the
whole south against the Afghans and Mogols. shivAjI, raghunAth hanmante
and aNNAjI reasoned that as soon as the Mogols were engaged in the North
by other conflicts he could conquer the South completely. shivAjI also
quickly realized that for his plans of ousting the Mohammedan power in
India he needed the entire South as strategic depth when the Mogols
would come to bear on the mahArATTa-s with the full force of the Jihad
machine. Thus was born the great strategic coalition of mAdaNNA and
shivAjI. As shivAjI worked out the military plan with hambIrav mohite,
santAjI bhosle, his half-brother through shAhjI’s south Indian
concubine, and his son-in-law harjI mAhAdik, mAdaNNA and akkaNNA put
various organizational and diplomatic measures in place.

The brothers firstly worked on improving the situation of revenue
administration – prior to them the Islamic agents had local tax
collectors whose job was to extract taxes. The Islamic agents had their
goons who would bash the tax collectors if they did not rake in the
money, and in turn the local tax collectors would terrorize the local
population to extract the money. In the reform by the brothers, firstly
the Moslem agents were dismissed and replaced by Hindu agents under
honest brAhmaNa-s. The tax administrators were then given attractive and
regular salaries and a fixed schedule to remit their taxes directly to
the revenue office under mAdaNNA. The taxes were assessed based on
productivity to the locality and the collectors were kept under multiple
layers of surveillance to cut out embezzlement. The Sultan was kept as a
pensioner by the brothers and the treasury was to a good measure
controlled by them. The revenue reforms by mAdaNNA found a remarkable
resonance in a parallel move by shivAjI. He destroyed the old Adilshahi
and Mogol system of administration under jAgir-s. Instead, he appointed
a regular revenue office that would assess tax and have it remitted
directly to the royal treasury. The military was then paid directly from
the royal treasury. By military and diplomatic means they also checked
the influence of the Dutch, English and the French. To the great dismay
of the Dutch they found that they had to pay large fines for their
profiteering on the coast. A Dutch diplomat complains how the brothers
have displaced the Moslems who were favorable towards the mlechCha-s.
The same Dutch diplomat however records akkaNNA as making it clear that
as a Hindu the brothers had the interest of the true people of the land
in mind, whereas the Mohammedans loyalties lay elsewhere. A subtle, but
often ignored point, is that akkaNNA realized by studying the Europeans
closely that their power derived from controlling sea trade. He decided
that best policy was to create his own merchant navy that could operate
directly in the open seas for trade – a Hindu answer of the East India
companies. He initiated this by launching three large merchant ships
under the Hindu entrepreneur li\~NgaNNA that would directly operate off
Pulicat. It was this point which greatly alarmed the mlechCha-s,
especially the Dutch and the English. In particular akkaNNA took up the
cause of the merchants from the tamiL country who were being harassed by
the English and sent li\~NgaNNA to provide them protection. A similar
idea was also taken up by shivAjI who launched merchant ships, albeit of
a much smaller size on the west coast. shivAjI used his navy to protect
them from attacks from various sea-going mlechCha-s and shyAmala-s.

Within two years mAdaNNA and akkaNNA through their shrewd enterprise had
amassed considerable surplus revenues under their control, which they
decided to use to help shivAjI in his venture to conquer the south.
Accordingly in 1676 shivAjI sent the diplomat nirAjI rAv to negotiate a
border truce with the Mogol commander Bahadur Khan. Then he sent his
other ambassador prahlAd nIrAjI to be in residence in Golconda and set
up the plans with the brAhmaNa brothers. Then in the beginning of 1677
he set out to Golconda and made a grand entry into the Qutbshahi
sultanate with 50,000 armed men, leaving the brAhmaNa moro tryaMbak as
the viceroy in Raigad. The Sultan was in reality alarmed because of
shivAjI’s reputation and agreed to come forward to meet him – fearing he
might occupy Golconda. But shivAjI charmed the Sultan by stating that in
Hindu tradition the junior always go to meet the elder and he would come
as a younger brother. He Sultan was impressed by the discipline of the
mArATha army and agreed to meet him in a palatial outpost in Golconda.
Flanked by hambIrav mohite and his half-brother Anandrav bhosle, shivAjI
first met with the brAhmaNa brothers and then disbursed gifts to the
citizens of Bhaganagari. The Sultan upon meeting shivAjI offered him
tAMbUla and perfumes and in return shivAjI presented him with a green
robe. The Sultan flippantly asked shivAjI how many elephants he had. He
pointed to his mAvle infantry men from the ghats and said: “These are my
elephants”. The Sultan looked at their burly commander, yesAjI kank and
asked him he could fight an elephant. The mAvle said it was not a big
deal. The Sultan, fond of blood sport, immediately sent a giant elephant
in musth against yesAjI, to the consternation of the marATha-s, But
yesAjI took it on with his sword and killed it by cutting of its trunk.
Now it was the Sultan and his Mohammedan generals who were alarmed at
this display of strength and agreed to whatever demands shivAjI might
have.

Thus, using the Qutbshah’s resources shivAjI conquered the fort of
Gingee and extended his domain into the south ending the careers of
several Jihadis and putting a check on the mlechCha-s who were
surrounding the coast. As the drAviDa historian of the kOvaLan clan,
nArAyaNan kOn put it he restored the rule of law in those regions. A key
development of this campaign was the ability of shivAjI to use the
entire in length of peninsular India as strategic depth against the
Mogols. He rightly realized that in the head on conflict with the Mogols
that was to unfold he would need to effectively use the length of the
country against them – it was exactly in this regard that the last kings
of vijayanagara had failed in their post-Talikota struggle. But
shivAjI’s untimely demise on April 3 1680 resulted in a set back for
all these plans. In 1683 after the release of the Mogol ambassador to
the Qutubshah from imprisonment, he set about instituting an internal
counter-revolution with fellow Mohammedans to destroy the brAhmaNa-s. He
unleashed a reign of terror on brAhmaNa-s and as Muazzam invaded
Bhaganagari he conspired with the internal Moslems to kill mAdaNNA and
akkaNNA. The Qutbshahi Begums themselves arranged for African assassins
to kill the brothers when they were returning home from court. The
severed heads of the two paNDita-s was send to Muazzam, while their
mutilated corpses were put on display in Bhaganagari. Immediately after
their murder, a major pogrom was launched against the brAhmaNa-s with
every one of their houses looted and for a radius of 50 miles around
Golconda and numerous brahmANa-s were slain. Nevertheless, the plans of
shivAjI ultimately gave rise to the marATha ascendancy, which in turn
gave birth to the modern Indian nation and attenuated if not removed the
evils of the religion of peace in peninsular India.

*shambhAjI’s letter to rAMsingh*  
The final exhibit in this epistle is the evidence for the plan of larger
Hindu unity throughout India in the marATha enterprise. The rAjpUt-s,
though diminished in their national sense since the days of the great
struggle of mahArANa pratAp and his son amar singh, were still not
devoid of their Hindu affinities. There were still pockets of brave
rAjpUt resistance that was no less in fury than that of the mahArATTa-s.
One of these was led by the last of the bundela chiefs, ChatrasAl. As
youth he had journeyed to shivAjI to serve in his army. shivAjI asked
Chatrasal to found his own enterprise against the Mogols modeled along
the lines of the mArATha one and strike Awrangzeb in the North.
Chatrasal did accordingly by taking Panna which was rich in diamond
mines and initiating a great war of liberation in the North. When
shivAjI was arrested in Delhi rAm singh the son of jai singh helped him
with his dramatic escape and prevented his assassination by the Qazi of
Delhi. In 1679 when shivAjI was ambushed in his final campaign against
the Mogols, kesari singh in the Mogol camp sent a secret message to
shivAjI leaking Mogol plans and allowing him and his commander haMbIrrav
mohite to escape. Thus, these rAjpUt-s though given to traitorous ways
were prone to express their basic sympathies. Their position was not
unlike that of most common Hindus of today – they may work faithfully
for the enemy, despite having their sub-current Hindu sympathies still
intact. The case of rAm singh of Amber, the son of Awrangzeb’s greatest
general jai singh exemplifies this. He received a proper Hindu education
in Kashi and was well-versed in various shAstra-s and was a practicing
vaidika Hindu in the most fanatic Islamic court, just like his father.
In addition to helping shivAjI escape from Delhi, rAm singh also helped
at his own cost the sikh guru tej bAhadUr. Awrangzeb wanted to execute
the guru, but rAm singh interceded and enabled him to escape a month
after tej bAhadUr was given to his custody. Awrangzeb clearly saw rAm
singh as being partial to the Hindus and sent rAm singh as punishment
with a mere 8000 men against the rAjA of Assam chakradhvaja singh-deva
and his most valiant commander-in-chief lachit barphukan. Initially, the
Mogol viceroy in Assam, Rashid Khan turned against rAm singh himself,
who had to drive him out by deploying a specially trained force of large
war dogs. Then rAm singh advanced valiantly with his small force taking
fort after fort with the ahom-s in full flight. Just as he neared the
ancient pA\~ncharAtrika hayagrIva sthala (the root site of the
hayashIrSha saMhitA) of Kamarupa, lachit crushed the Mogol forces and
pushed them into a retreat. They next tried to take the Darang fort, but
the ahom rANI jayamati routed them in a fierce encounter. Undaunted, rAm
singh tried to take Gauhati for the Mogols but lachit defeated them
again in a fierce battle. There a shAkta tAntrika from kAmarUpa laid an
abhichAra on Munawar Khan, a Mogol subhedar, and rAm singh and the
former died as a consequence of it and the later retreated in terror.
After he was called back from Assam to return home, the attempt by
Awrangzeb to convert ajit singh, the infant rAthoD prince, to Islam took
place. The brave durgAdAs rAthoD spirited the infant away from the
Mohammedans and raised a rebellion against the Mogols by helping Akbar
rise against his father Awrangzeb. Then durgAdAs and Akbar were given
shelter by shaMbAjI as they were pursued by the Mogols. Another brave
rAjpUt warrior, durjan sAl hADA, also joined the war of liberation in
Rajasthan initiated by durgAdAs and caused much havoc by attacking and
taking several Mogol outposts and driving them out of much of Marwar
which had been taken earlier by the Mogols. There were also great
uprisings of the bundela-s Chatrasal, prahAr singh and devI singh and
another rAjpUt bhagavant singh against the Moslems in this period. The
vaishya gangArAm raised the banner of independence against the Mogols in
Bihar and the rAjpUt gopAl singh chandrAvat joined with the marATha-s to
launch a series of attacks on the Ghazi-s.

shambhAjI was closely following these developments and he reasoned that
a pan-Indian Hindu alliance could bring the Mogols down. Awrangzeb too
feared that if the rAm singh, who had returned from Assam, joined hands
with his coethnics, who were up in arms against the Mohammedan
oppression, he could be cut off from Delhi. Hence, he sent off rAm singh
under a Mohammedan general to fight the Afridis in Afghanistan who had
risen in revolt against the Mogols. In the mean time Awrangzeb, took
away rAm singh’s son kR^iShNa singh to the Deccan where he was
personally leading the great Jihad. But he felt that kR^iShNa singh was
conspiring with the durgAdas and the marATha-s, so Awrangzeb
assassinated him by means of a Pathan servant in his camp. rAm singh was
completely broken by this and was shaken even further when Awrangzeb
next asked him to send his grandson viShNu singh to the Deccan – after
all his own father the famous and faithful general jai singh had been
assassinated by Awrangzeb by poisoning him. So around this time shaMbAjI
sent two letters in Sanskrit to rAm singh asking him to join the Hindu
cause and rise against Mogols. This plan followed exactly along the line
shivAjI had laid out earlier, when he tried to induce rAjputs to rise
against the Mogols in the North. Thus, it gives a glimpse of the
pan-Indian Hindu unity against the Mohammedans that the marATha-s had
envisaged.

“vayaM hindUkAH asmAn bhavanto yadAj\~nApayanti tad vashyaM vidheyam iti
tarhi prakR^ita viShaye shrImadbhir mukhyatAm avalaMbyai tasya
yavanAdhamasya sAMprataM sakala hindUkAH sattva shUnyAH
shrI-prAsAda-bhaMgAdi dharmopaplavepi svadharma rakShaNAkShamAH
svadharmahInA iti manyamAnasthaMs karShaM tathA kShatriya shabdaabidheya
viparyathaM tathA
shruti-smR^iti-siddha-varNa-ashrama-dharma-prajApAla-rUpa-rAja-dharma-viplavaMchAsahiShNavaH
svakosha-desha-durgAdiShu vidhR^itAnAdarA duShTa yavANadhipa
pratidvaMdvitayaiva akabara-durgAdAsau svadeshe sthApitau
yavanAdhipa-saMbaMdhinaH senAnAyakaH mA kechit kArAgR^ihe sthApitAH
kechid dravaM gR^ihItvA mochitAH kechit dharmeNA kechid asmat sainikAnAm
utkochaM datvApayAtAH evaM vidhA tat senAnAyakA aprayojakAH asmin samaye
yavAnAdhamaH kArAgR^ihastho vidheyaH shrI sthApanAdayaH sarvepi dharmAH
pravartitvA iti manasi dhR^itvA tadanukUlam AcharaMa iti vidAM kurvantu
tatra bhavantI bhavantaH |”

“We Hindus are weaklings to be ordered around and devoid of an essence,
so believes the Mohammedan ruffian (Awrangzeb). The destruction of
temples, religious conversions and the idea that we lack the dharma we
cannot be borne by us who are known to be kShatriya-s. The shruti and
the smR^iti and the ordinance of varNAshrama dharma cannot be desecrated
and we cannot neglect the royal duty of taking care of our citizens. We
are prepared to sacrifice our wealth, land and forts etc in waging war
against the evil lord of the Mohammedans. With this resolve we have
offered for two years shelter for Akbar and durgAdAs. We have killed
many generals of the Mohammedans, imprisoned others, released some after
extracting ransoms, others out of kindness and others escaped by
bribery. Thus, the Mohammedan commanders have proved to be useless
against us. Now the time has come to put the Mohammedan rogue
(Awrangzeb) himself in prison and restore our holy sites and reestablish
the practices of dharma. We have firmly decided in our mind to execute
all this in the near future.”

These bold words of shambhAjI make clear the ultimate objective of
svarAjya of shivAjI – the end of the religion of peace and return of
dharma.

A point to note in this letter:  
“anya\~ncha hADA durjana-siMhaH kIdR^ik tasya koshAdi sarvaM bhavadbhir
asmAbhiShcha j\~nAyata eva paraM tu tena koshAdisthAne dhairyam eva
matvA .asmal likhitaanusAreNa katham upaplavo vihitaH sa bhavadbhir
adUravartibhiH shruta evAsti itosmAbhir vidhIyate yat tat vidhIyata
evedAnIM akabara-durgAdAsau gurjara-deshaM prati preShyete…”

“There is another point. We both know how wealthy and endowed the hADA
chief durjan singh was. But he sacrificed his wealth and valiantly
raised the uprising at our instigation and you being so near must have
seen all of it. From our side we are planning to send Akbar and durgAdas
to invade the Mogol domains in Gujarat.”

This shows that there was probably coordination between the marATha-s
and the rAjpUt-s of Bundi in their uprising against the Mogol yoke.
Finally, in the letter shambhAjI mentions how they must prevent the
Iranians under Shah Abbas from interfering in the affairs of prince
Akbar because this would only lead to increased Moslem interference in
India.

Footnote 1: MG Ranade states the rAmachandra paNDit was AbAjI’s son, but
most marATha sources to my knowledge state that he was nIlo paNdit’s
son.

Footnote 2: The chemist who was a master of the byways of Bhaganagari
led us on another occasion to another temple of mAhAkAlI (called the
mAhAnkAlI temple) in the heart of the city. It was buried in the
property of a Nawab after the murder of the brAhmaNa brothers. After
independence and the end of the Islamic tyrant of Bhaga, a moderate
Moslem donated the land where the temple material was discovered and
returned all temple artifacts that he was able to discover to the
Hindus. After this the shrine was revived by purchasing more of the
surrounding land from some moslems. However, this fact rankled the inner
city Moslems, whose affinity to the Mogols remained undiminished. The
non-jAmadagnya vatsa told us that the temple was being targeted by them.
In 1998, in supposedly independent India, a Moslem mob attacked the
temple and destroyed the image of the deity.
