+++
title = "The making ofxa0identities"

+++
It is important that Hindus as a part of their defensive strategy
anthropologize their rivals – this act of reverting the gaze on them is
also critical to redress the balance of power. An important aspect of
this is the analysis of the formation and the deconstruction of
identities. Identities take a particularly important role in the
analysis of the West, the Mohammedans and China. In particular, “soft”
power-projection by the West revolves around deconstruction of others
identity while reinforcing and remodeling their own through selective
historical narratives. So an analysis of these processes is critical to
understand the framework of the dangers confronting the Hindu. Firstly,
it should be noted that Hindus are a key target for identity
deconstruction. The strategy being used for this is one of cognitive
dissonance. On one hand Hindu modal behaviors, tendencies and physical
appearances are caricatured and discouraged as being “uncool”, whereas
there is strong projection of the mlechCha mode being the “in thing”.
Not unexpectedly there is some reaction to this from the Hindu masses in
the Occident. Hence, on the other hand, this reaction is given official
recognition via an allowed channel namely that of South Asianism. This
South Asian identity is primarily aimed at deconstructing the powerful
and ancient Hindu identity and replacing it with something shallow. By
its very name the despicable term “South Asian” also effaces the
centrality of the predominantly Indo-Aryan (Hindu) culture emanating
from India to the distinct identity of Asia itself. Instead, it tries to
equalize India with with many other modern states in the subcontinent
and place the high Hindu culture on equal footing with the barbarisms
passing under the name of the religion of peace. Hence, it is strongly
advised that every self-respecting Hindu in the West eschew
participation in anything that goes under the banner of South Asian and
instead affirm his Hindu identity. Another point to note is that that
South Asian identity has been further subverted to be used as a decoy or
a means of subterfuge by the religion of peace to achieve its objectives
of “stealth Jihad”. Thus, anyone adopting the South Asian identity is
ultimately contributing in someway to the grand project of the
marUnmatta-s.

Even as these deconstructionist forces are active on the Hindus, the
mlechCha-s led by those from the madhyama mlechCha-varSha in the
krau\~nchadvIpa are embarking on reaffirming their own identity, which
we have termed the leukosphere in these pages. At the heart of it lies a
confluence of the race-based leukotestate identity with the
kIlita-pretamata. The importance of this may be noted in the fact that
the mlechCha-s helped the Qing ruler to annihilate the preta-mata
lookalike started by the “Chinese brother of the preta” amongst the
chIna-s. The mlechCha-s realized that if the demographic balance of the
pretamata shifted from them to the chIna-s then it could potentially
undermine their very identity. Another key aspect of this identity
project is that it actually cuts across political lines in the west
though its manifestations might look dissimilar to the undiscerning eye.
Three major manifestations might be noted: 1) The manifestation based on
the overt expression of the preta-mata. In this manifestation the
superiority of the mlechCha-s is supposed to come from their adherence
to the preta’s words, given their belief that the preta, when alive, was
the parama-rAkShasa himself. 2) Another manifestation holds the view
that the shveta-varNa-s are a superior people because they are the best
in intelligence, beauty and strength of all the races. This is
epitomized in the work of Charles Murray who holds that view that
everything of worth in human endeavor was due to the mlechCha-s and the
preta-mata. 3) The final manifestation is that of the liberals (overt or
covert Marxists) who believe that they have a higher “moral standing”
than everyone else. While the frank pretAcharin wishes to save the
heathens by bringing the religion of love, the liberal wishes to bring
to them the glories of democracy (or is it Marx and Engels
gift-wrapped?) and biology-defying, society-rending egalitarianism.
While these manifestations might strongly oppose each other they are
rather united in their beliefs and characterizations of the Hindu and
related organic civilizations (as opposed to those based on memetic
diseases). So it is important to dissect this the emergence of this
collective identity of the leukosphere.

Until as recently as world war-2 there were strong national identities –
English, German, Dutch, American, Spanish, Portuguese, French and
Russian. They had fought each other brutally, spilling much blood. There
were several internal fault-lines in addition – in England the
Anglo-Saxon British fought the Celtic peoples on island and eventually
subjugated them with much brutality. In North America the slave-owning
southern confederacy and the northern union fought with much ferocity.
The Spanish and the Americans fought a major naval war resulting the
loss of the former’s island possessions. When the European nations were
attempting territorial claims in India they were at war with each other
and lacked any unified leukospheric identity. The Hindu rulers clearly
saw this situation as what it was – for instance, the peshva bAlAjI
nAnAsaheb saw an opportunity in using the English to tie down French so
that he could complete the crushing of the latter. Finally, there were
the world wars which were essentially intra-European conflicts that
spread over a wider theater. Even after that the West has still remained
at war with the Russians to this date. This suggests that the
leukospheric identity has a fractured foundation – much weaker than that
of the Hindus. This is a point Hindus need to emphasize to turn the
table on their detractors. This fractured identity of the leukosphere is
also important when Hindus tackle the issue of unifying identity in the
historical sense. Often Hindus whine that the mlechCha-s have divided
them using the “Aryan invasion theory”, linguistics and philology and
the like. Unfortunately, hardly anyone among these Hindus, who lead Don
Quixotic charges at AIT and linguistics, realize that the the same
linguistic gaze can be powerfully turned on to Europe. Firstly, while
whole of India is unified by a single clearly defined lineage of
Indo-European, i.e. Indo-Aryan, Europe has an whole assembly of IE
languages which are rather distinct from each other – Romance, Celtic,
Germanic, Greek, Slavic and Baltic in addition to some minor ones. So
there is no common denominator for an “EU” other than being partially
militarily unified under the Roman banner. Likewise, if a mlechCha tries
to invoke the presence of other language families like Dravidian and
Austro-Asiatic one simply needs to point to Hungarian, Finnish and
Basque. After all the Basque are still fighting for their own state and
want to retain a distinct identity\! If the mlechCha considers the
Austro-Hungarian empire a natural development in his lands then what is
so surprising of Indo-Aryan and Dravidian coexisting for ages in
bhAratavarSha?

In another direction they also want to imitate the making of identity in
the UK by stating that “Indian” identity is the way to go, as in the
assertion: “I am Indian before I am Hindu.” There is really no need for
such artificial nationalism – after all an unified identity in the UK is
still tenuous despite all the Anglo-Saxon attempts to subsume the Celts.
Still Scotts, Welsh and Irish retain a significant strand of their
ancestral identity. The Hindu does not need this — even in the periods
of great regionalization, their identity allowed Hindus to crisscross
bhAratavarSha as per their wishes. It should be realized that in
comparison to the deep and organic roots of Hindu identity most of those
which have developed in the west are relatively shallow and artificial.
To apprehend their emergence let us take two examples:

1\) *The Germanic identity* The Germanic people are one of the most
expansive branches of all the Indo-European speakers. However, they
developed late. When other Indo-Europeans like the Hindus, Iranians,
Greeks, Tocharians and Romans were already rather advanced in their
civilization the Germanic branch did not have much to show (other than
the great southward invasion of the Teutones and Cimbri, a little before
100 BCE, to threaten Roman lands; the early history of the Germans is a
fascinating topic which we shall attempt narrate on another occasion).
However, after most of these former IE cultures aged the Germanic branch
had so remarkable an efflorescence that one of their languages has
become that of common usage throughout the world. But through much of
the early historical period their identity was rather fractured. They
appear to have identified themselves only by their tribe, though their
larger phylogenetic unity was clearly visible to the external gaze of
the Romans (e.g. as recorded by Julius Caesar and Tacitus). It was
Tacitus who composed a famous tract the Germania giving an account of
the Germans around 98 CE. Between 100-200 CE in mainland Western Europe
(those of Scandinavia had not even entered the gaze of the rest of
humanity) the following German tribes were recorded: 1) The northernmost
were the Anglii from whom we have acquired the language of the current
yuga. 2) A bit to their south west were the Frisii. 3) To their South
were the Chauki, the Chasuarii, Chamavi, Tencteri, Ubii, Bructeri,
Marsi, Chersuci. 4) To the southeast of the Anglii were the Langobardi
(long beards) and the Reudigni. To the deep south were the Hermunduri,
Marcomanni, Chatti and Mattiaci. 5) Further east, between the Baltic Sea
and the Black Sea were located the Rugi, Gotones (Goths), Venedi. 6) The
south of the above closer to the course of the Danube were located the
Burgundi, Quadi, Vandali, Cotini and the Bastarnae. Such was the throng
of German peoples who terrified the Roman world. Based on Tacitus’
explanation it is clear that very name Germanus is a Roman coinage — it
was originally the name of a group of Germanic tribes who invaded the
Gauls from the east after crossing the Rhine and routed them in battle
in what is now eastern Belgium. Having driven out the Gauls they settled
there and came to the attention of the Romans, who applied that name to
all the related tribes whom they were to soon encounter. Thus, the
identity of most Germans of the age was that of one of the above tribes,
rather than “Germanus”. The Latin Germania was rediscovered and
published using the printing press in Nuremberg in 1474 CE and in 1519
CE Beatus Rhenanus wrote a commentary on it establishing the connection
between the tribes of Tacitus and the medieval Germanic people. This led
to the emergence of a unified German identity — in essence projecting
the German commonality perceived by the ancient Romans on to the
medieval people of the land. Tactitus was an objective observer and he
noted the rough valor in battle of the German tribes and their generally
honorable conduct. By 1848 CE these observations on the ancient German
tribes were projected on the modern inhabitants of the land and became a
part of their perceived glorious identity coming down unbroken from the
ancient times. This found expression in constructions like the Valhalla
of Ludwig-I where the artificially created pan-Germanic identity was
reinforced by installing a Greco-Roman style shrine for great “Germans”.
By the 1920-30s all this took an ugly turn with the political forces
among the modern inhabitants claiming them to be the purest and the
greatest of all races. The only evidence for an ancient Germanic
identity came from a Latin manuscript of Tacitus (the Codex Aesinas)
that was housed in Italy with an Italian nobleman. So the Nazi commandos
tried to raid his residences to take the manuscript to Germany, but
failed in the attempt. This incident in itself encapsulates the irony in
the way the making of Germany identity proceeded in modern times. The
English, though one of the original Germanic tribes, appear to have been
shielded in part from the developments on the continent and seemed to
have been left out of this creation of German identity – yet another
illustration of the relative superficiality of this identity.

2\) *The leukosphere or white identity.* In the 600s of CE the English
king Oswald of Northumbria, a new convert to the religion of love
decided to wage holy war on both other coreligionists like the British
king Cadwalla and the heathen Saxon king Penda, a worshiper of Odin and
Thor. Oswald was the victor of many brutal wars, killing Cadwalla in due
course, though his holy war on the heathen Penda ended in him being
hacked to pieces on the battlefield. His brutality notwithstanding he
was made a saint as he had fought the heathens on behalf of the
pretamata – a reminder of innate deception typical of these memetic
diseases, the preta and the rAkShasa mata-s. About 100 years down the
line came the dreaded German holy warrior Charles-I (Charlemagne) who
imposed the religion of love with utmost brutality on other German
people. Likewise, Charles waged holy wars to spread to spread the
memetic disease of the pretamata to the western Slavs and the Avar
khaganate. In the process practically exterminated the archaic
Indo-European culture of the Germans and the western Slavs. He seems to
have even found some kind of resonance with his fellow holy warrior from
the religion of peace Harun al Rashid in Baghdad with whom he exchanged
gifts. He is fondly remembered by the descendants of his victims as the
“father of Europe” and his tall, fair, blond haired image still
provides them with their ideal of a puruSha. These events encapsulate
the emergence of the precursor of the identity under discussion. In
essence, it was the artificial identity of the pretamata that was
stuffed down the throats of the unwilling heathens of Europe.
Subsequently, the same identity forged the European alliances against
the Islamic Jihad. But over time it receded to the background with
fragmentation and local identities taking precedence. Fast-forward
several centuries ahead to when the United States was born. Its elite
had their deep cultural moorings to England, despite seeking political
independence from it. In its war of independence it had succeeded in no
small measure due to the aid offered by France. Thus, in its very birth
the US had links to European powers that had long been rivals. Within
the North American continent it was at war with the natives and was
being steadily settled by other European peoples. On the whole, the
birth of the US was a success story – it had beaten the mighty English
who were victorious against most other nations of the world. It had
built a formidable navy in a short time and projected power far away in
the North African coasts by smashing the Moslem fleet in the Barbary
War. Its successes also lead to introspection about its own place in
history and identity. Given its origins and peoples, it had no need to
adopt a narrow identity pertaining to a particular European nation
despite its links to Britain and France, but sought to forge a new one.
In this situation, two things came to the fore – the sub-current
identity of the pretamata, which had been submerged in fragmented Europe
and the white racial identity. The former was particularly strong as
they needed something to replace the regional allegiances of Europe to
their respective kings. So the rAkShasa spelt with the capital G took
the place of the king or Kaiser. The latter emerged as a result of their
encounter with the “other” in the form of the natives of America who
were locked in a life and death struggle with them and the slaves they
had shipped in from Africa to ply on their fields. Their military
triumphs against the natives, as well as elsewhere in the world, along
with degradation of the Africans to a lowly position, gave them a
feeling of a superior white identity. Indeed, even their great
intellectuals like Thomas Jefferson, who advocated free-thinking on
religion, upheld these core aspects of the developing identity. This
becomes clear when one examines his “Indian Removal Plan”. His main idea
was to enforce the *pretamata* on the natives at the expense of their
own traditions and force them to adopt “*Western European culture*” and
eventually assimilate into the white identity of the US. Failing this
they were to be driven westwards or exterminated.

The events surrounding the American civil war, often acting in different
directions, led to further strengthening and recalibration of the white
identity. The civil war resulted in a strong sense of white identity
being reinforced in the southern states. In the north while the
prevailing mood was for universal rights it was not as if the white
identity had been given up. In fact, non-English European immigrants,
primarily Germans and Irish joined the union’s cause, providing it with
the much needed manpower in the war against against the southern states.
Now the important role played by these European immigrants meant that
upon victory of the union they were to play a major role in the north.
This again meant that the white identity was a more suitable one than an
English one. In particular the Irish had earlier not been considered
white enough, but now they slowly gained that status and reinforced a
much wider identity based on generic adherence to the pretamata and
being of lighter complexion. Even through the civil war battles to
suppress and exterminate the natives of the land continued, further
reinforcing the white identity as one of superiority, relative to the
free tribes who refused to accept the white ways. The post-civil war
period saw the rise of white movements that attacked blacks in the
southern states. This resulted in blacks going north for finding better
and safer work opportunities and fell in a competition with the Irish
who occupied similar working class niches. This also contributed to the
strengthening of white identity further. Finally, with the failure of
post-civil war reconstruction and rise of racial tensions the white
identity strengthened greatly and now resonated with the ideas of
supremacy, which were also current in the German identity movements.
However, its American flavor, instead restricting glory just for the
Germans, extended it to all light-skinned people of European decent who
followed the preta-mata. The strength of this identity in the US is
attested by the opinions and actions of the post-civil war American
president Woodrow Wilson and the roaring success of the blockbuster
movie during his reign titled the “Birth of a Nation”. It also explains
why the apparently genuine efforts of the American presidents like Grant
and Coolidge to improve racial relationships and non-white rights were
not very successful. Eventually, with the American victory in world war
2 and the conquest of Germany, this white identity (of course with the
pretamata subcurrent) also came to guide the European unification and
establishment of the leukosphere through the recognition of the white
colonies of Australia, New Zealand and some degree South Africa as
brethren.

Thus, rather than being something very deep and ancient, as some Hindus
mistakenly believe, this identity is a rather shallow one of recent
provenance. The shallowness of the white identity, like the modern
German identity, is revealed by its need to appropriate other peoples
identities and achievements as their own. The tale of how both these
groups appropriated the ethnonym of my people does not need any further
elaboration here. But we may turn to some other examples, namely the
appropriation of Greek and Roman achievements as their own. For
instance, in his work “Wisdom of the West”, Bertrand Russell
appropriates Greek scientific and mathematical achievements as
collective property of the west, and this indeed is the norm in modern
America. Hitler thought that the yavana warriors in Thermopylae
certainly had some German connection. During the height of the battle of
Stalingrad he hoped his field marshal would not surrender but die
fighting as a fitting enaction of the Spartans being hammered by the
Iranians at Thermopylae. The same yavana-s were also claimed by the
Americans who made a movie to mark their hostilities with the Islamic
nation currently occupying the land of the Iranians of yore. They use
terms like senate and senator emulating the Romans. Yet, no where do we
find the Greeks or Roman claiming such a grand white identity. If
anything Hellenistic civilization was destroyed by the founding
principle of white identity, i.e. the pretamata, despite the valiant
efforts of Julian (To realize the importance of the pretamata to this
identity note the fact that Panjabi Americans, who might barely make the
cut on the skin color metric, were still able to gain the admiration of
those with leukotestate identity by converting to the pretamata).
