+++
title = "kaumara mantra-s of as per the vaikhAnasaxa0shruti"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh3.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TE0r_w2GkzI/AAAAAAAAB3Q/S_HsF2qH3I0/s800/skanda.JPG)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/LLIMbk6xazy7UmTFcGSsTg?feat=embedwebsite)

The kaumAra-shAsana holds that its mantra-s are of two types name
shruti-prakR^iti and Agama-prakR^iti. The former mantra-s are those of
vaidika origin. The [rahasya
trishati](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/09/15/kumara-trishati/)
is said to specify mantra-s of both the classes.

bhUtapatir gatAta\~Nko nIla-chUDaka-vAhanaH || 34/287  
The terminal quadrantistich of this shloka “nIla-chUDaka-vAhanaH”
encodes the shruti-prakR^iti-mantra known as the [aShTAkShari
vidyA](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/30/the-code-of-the-ashtakshari-vidya/)
(AV-Vulgate 20.132.16)

vachadbhU rudrabhUsh chaiva jagadbhUr brahmabhUs tathA | 35/291  
bhuvadbhUr vishvabhUsh chaiva mantramUrtir mahAmanuH || 35/295  
This shloka is said to specify shruti-prakR^iti skanda mahAmantra-s.
What is immediately apparent is that it encodes the six ShaDakShari
mantra-s that are associated with the [shaktyuta mUrti
yantra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/08/19/kaumara-yantra-s-according-to-kaumara-tantra-sara-and-kumaradi-mantra-samuchchaya/).
But what is the shruti-prakR^iti being referred here? The answer is of
considerable interest both in terms of the mantra-shAstra and also in
terms of understanding the early transmission of the kaumAra shAsana to
the southern country. The shruti alluded to here is the vaikhAnasa
shruti. The vaikhAnasa mantra prashna (6.24.1-25.1) gives the six basic
mantra-s for the vaikhAnasokta skanda yAga that is performed on the
bright ShaShThi in the months of phAlguni, aShADha and kR^ittika:

jagad-bhuvaM bahuto hutaM yajad-bhuvan \[vachad-bhuvan\] namas te astu
vishva-bhuve svAhA || 6.24.1  
jagad-bhuvo .adhipatis senAnIr mayUra-priyaSh ShaDAnanA\~NgAraH
sa\~njayAha namas te .astu sukhAvahAya svAhA || 6.24.2  
subrahmaNyo bR^ihaspates sutAyAsya padma-yoneH yasyAtmA vahane vahati
svAhA || 6.24.3  
subrahmaNyo rudra-bhuvo brahma-bhuvaH bhavodbhavo mamAmR^itAya svAhA ||
6.24.4  
jagad-bhuvas subrahmaNyaH kR^ittikA-sutaH ShaShTikAya svAhA || 6.24.5  
jagad-bhuvo yo yajad-bhuva skanda-vishAkha-netA havyam asmAt ShaNmukhAya
svAhA || 6.25.1

Then the offerings are made to the kula of skanda-mAtR^i-s (the mantra-s
are given after the durgA homa mantra-s in the VMP 6.27.1-28.1):  
nandinyA mUlavatyA jagato vasatyA jyeShThAyA astu suhuta(g)M hutam
svasur devyA dharitryA rajata-priyAyAs svAhA || 6.27.1  
Apo vivesha prajayA brahma-dArAs skanda-prabarhaM bharaNe vidma devyAH
veginI devI sharma deyAt sadA nas svAhA || 6.27.2  
shAkhA-bhUta sushAkhayA divo bhettum ayUyujat dhAtA devyA yajAma
homAgryAM tatra vAhiny udetu svAhA || 6.27.3  
devI pravAhiny anishaM pAti-bhUta(g)M sarvaM Chando vikIrayan bhajato me
shivaM dhattAM jayA vR^ittaM jarayatv Adhim eShA svAhA || 6.27.4  
bisinI bhUtA jananIvA sR^ijanty utAvanItA brahmaNy adhy upAste tAM
vidyutA(g)M samyag u tarpayAmi svAhA || 6.27.5  
pravidyutAyA sumano-dharA chAmuM vira\~njaty ata eSha panthAH
tasyAbhavat vindu-karAnura\~njo juhomi sA no shivadA vidheyA svAhA ||
6.28.1

arghya is offered with:  
tat-puruShAya vidmahe mahAsenAya dhImahi | tan naSh ShaNmukhaH
pracodayAt ||8.1.195.1

In the first mantra the editions prepared by the kuMbhaghoNaM
vaikhAnasa-s as well as that by the American scholar Resnick read as
“yajad-bhuvan”. However, at least one vaikhAnasa from the Tamil
country reads this as vachad-bhuvan. The reading vachad-bhuvan is also
seen in the form of this mantra preserved within the subrahmaNya
pratiShTha of the shaiva saiddhAntika tradition. Hence latter reading
could have also been a valid, especially given that it specifies the
base of one of the six ShaDakShari mantra-s in its typical form (OM
vachadbhuve namaH ||). In the sextet of ShaDakShari-s one of the 6
mantra-s is typically given as “bhuvadbhuve namaH ||” in later tAntrika
sources. In all manuscripts and the oral tradition of the vaikhAnasa-s
the cognate name is read as bhavodbhava. This corresponds to the same
name used in the mantra “sadyojAtaM prapadyAmi…” which is a skanda
mantra in the gopathokta atharvavedIya skanda yAga. Similarly, the bali
mantra deployed in the bodhAyanokta dhUrta homa of the classical
taittirIyaka-s uses the name bhavodbhava. These points suggest that the
original name was probably bhavodbhava, which was transformed to
bhuvadbhuva to fit the form of the remaining mantra-s to constitute the
ShaDakShari sextet. While mantra-s related to rituals to skanda and
ShaShThI were widespread across different shAkhA-s in the late Vedic
period, the earliest indications of the kaumAra mUla ShaDakShari-s are
currently observed only within the taittirIya tradition. An indication
that these mantra-s were based on “bhU” is supported by the form the
ShaDakShari of the classical tattirIyaka-s for offering oblations in the
dhUrta homa: “bhuve namaH svAhA ||”. But what makes the vaikhAnasa
mantra-s important is that they are the earliest indication of the
complete base forms of the ShaDakShari sextet. Further, this set of six
mantra-s specify the 31 kalA-s of the kaumAra mantra-shAstra that are
used in the sarvA\~NganyAsa, just as the kalA-s of the pa\~nchabrahmA
are used in the shaiva tradition.

The origin of these celebrated kaumAra mantra-s in association with the
vaikhAnasa-s is also consistent with other elements of kaumAra worship
recorded in their tradition. As we noted
[before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/02/19/vaikhanasa-childhood-rites-pertaining-to-kumara/),
the vaikhAnasa-s invoke kumAra during the nAmakaraNa blessings and in
their specific ritual of the child’s first outing, where it is taken to
the kumAra shrine. These points are of particular interest when
considered in relation to the fact the vaikhAnasa-s were the earliest
innovators within the taittirIyaka tradition who adopted the iconic
worship of viShNu in temples. They appear to have moved to the south
carrying with them an early form of the vaiShNava-mata and appear to
have been involved in the emergence of early viShNu shrines in south
India during. From a historical perspective, we find a geographical
association between the iconic worship of viShNu (in the pA\~ncharAtrika
form and probably also in the vaikhAnasa form) and that of kumAra at
several sites where early temples have been recorded: 1) Mathura in
Aryavarta and 2) The region centered on Nagarajunakonda during the
Andhra, ikShvAku and viShNukuNDin period in dakShiNApatha. In light of
these observations it appears likely that the vaiShNava-s were in
proximity with the kaumAra-s in this period. Even earlier evidence for
such a link is also seen in the early kaumAra myths recorded in the
mahAbhArata. For example, in the kaumAra narrative of mArkaNDeya (the
oldest extant narration of the kaumAra myth) one of the names of kumAra
is vAsudeva-priya. Similarly, in the narrative of the [discomfiture of
prahlAda](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/08/07/the-fall-of-prahlada/)
we find that viShNu and kumAra have an “understanding” and recognition
of each others might.

Today in the drAviDa country most kaumAra shrines are officiated by
saiddhAntika shaiva-s. However, there are reasons to believe that this
is unlikely to have been the case in earlier times: 1) the worship of
kumAra was already in place even before the saiddhAntika-s had become a
dominant force in the Tamil country. There are pallava kings with
kaumAra names even before the first pallava to receive the saiddhAntika
dIkSha (In fact we find viShNu and kumAra to be the main deities in the
names of the early pallava-s, much like the rulers further north in the
Andhra country. A similar association is also seen in the inscriptions
of their later rivals, the chAlukya-s, e.g. the Surat copper plates of
shryAshraya shilAditya.). 2) We find that kumAra was a prominent deity
in the relatively early layers of drAviDa poetry. The dating of the
drAviDa anthologies is controversial. However, as KAN Shastri noted, we
find that the pallava-s are hardly noticed in the early drAviDa
collection termed the eTTuttokai (the 8-fold collection), which includes
the paripATal. Though the paripATal is considered to be one of the
latest texts in this collection, it is still likely to have been
composed in large part before the pallava dominance of the drAviDa
country and its proposed dates of \~250-400 CE seem likely. This was
certainly before any south Indian ruler known to receive saiddhAntika
dIkSha. The paripATal has two prominent deities kumAra (8 poems) and
viShNu (6 poems), again reinforcing their old association. The exquisite
kaumAra poems of this text encapsulate versions of the mythology known
from various sources in the devabhASha and importantly mention the
pANTiyan ruler’s visit to a kaumAra shrine near Madurai (identified as
the original temple at tiruppara\~Nku\~Nram). 3) The survival of the
skanda-sadbhAva tantra in the Tamil country. This is an early kaumAra
tantra with iconographic features typical of the gupta age, which does
not show any saiddhAntika influence. This suggests that there is memory
of a pre-saiddhAntika system of temple worship of kumAra.

In the north in the post-harShavardhana period there appears to have
been an explosive expansion of the mantramArga shaiva streams at the
expense of the kaumAra shAsana (perhaps even catalyzed by the former via
emphasis on negative myths). Hence, in the north the saiddhAntika-s
largely sought to absorb kumAra within the shaiva frame work rather than
explicitly promote him. For example, in the Chandrarehe stone
inscription (verse 10) from the kalachuri kingdom of Tripuri the
saiddhAntika Acharya prabodha-shiva deshika is compared repeatedly with
kumAra, who is described as faithfully carrying out the duties in
worshiping his father shiva. Following this absorption, in the north we
find that there was a decline in the popularity of kumAra along with the
concomitant rise of vinAyaka (as assessed by inscriptions). Finally, the
Islamic depredations largely ended his memory in large parts of the
North. But in the south due the strong presence of multiple kumAra
shrines from even before the establishment the saiddhAntika-s he was not
displaced, but simply co-opted via the action of the saiddhAntika
deshika as a sarvAdhikArI. An important player in this process was the
great saiddhAntika scholar aghorashiva deshika (1100s of CE) who
composed a manual known as the subrahmaNya pratiShThAvidhi, which
provides the kaumAra temple installations under a saiddhAntika
framework. In this framework the ShaDakShari sextet is combined with the
faces of the 5 brahma mantra-s:  
OM ishAna-mUrdhAya jagadbhuve namaH |  
OM tatpuruSha-vaktrAya vachadbhuve namaH |  
OM aghora-hR^idayAya vishvabhuve namaH |  
OM vAmadeva-guhyAya rudrabhuve namaH |  
OM sadyojAya-mUrtaye brahmabhuve namaH |  
OM sarva-vaktra bhuvadbhuve namaH |

Likewise other saiddhAntika elements are worked into various aspects of
the kaumAra ritual.

In light of the above discussion the links of the kaumAra shAsana to the
vaikhAnasa-s assumes considerable significance. It appears likely that
an offshoot of the vaikhAnasa-s or a related parallel stream of
brAhmaNa-s specializing in the temple worship established the system of
kaumAra temple worship in south India. Like the vaikhAnasa-s who bore
the temple worship of viShNu to the south this group is also likely to
have built on the household iconic worship of kumAra as specified in the
general taittirIya tradition to develop it for temple worship. It is
possible that Mathura was a common center where the temple worship
developed among both the vaiShNava-s and kaumAra-s. From there these
groups appear to have pushed further south together reaching the region
around Nagarjunakonda and finally the Tamil country. This would explain
the origin of the early of the skanda shrines in the southern country
along with those of viShNu referred to in the songs of the paripATal.
Finally, it may also explain the faint folk memories that the main
vaikhAnasa shrine at Tirumala is alternatively a kaumAra shrine. Indeed
the vaikhAnasa officiants appear to acknowledge this in their
aShTottara-shata-nAmAvali of ve\~NkaTeshvara, where he is called:
“kArttikeya-vapudhAriNe namaH |”. It is not impossible that at some
point there was also a presence of the vaikhAnasa associated kaumAra-s
in this place.
