+++
title = "The mystery goddess of the shu~Ngaxa0period"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S11JyYMhMsI/AAAAAAAABPM/SpnM5r47ml4/s400/camera1.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/ipRtDgH6FJQ5sG5OaZxliA?feat=embedwebsite)

Many a time memes expressing themselves in the philological medium and
those that express themselves in the material medium of art and
architecture share several common motifs. Yet these two sets of memes
can show a striking disconnect in many phases of history. This aspect is
only all too well-known in the great problem of the Indo-European
homeland and subsequent migrations. The vast land of bhArata is home to
several such memetic disconnects that puzzle the student of
unadulterated heathen thought. We have earlier discussed the remarkable
case of the horned deity. In terms of material evidence this meme widely
propagated throughout Eurasia through cultures transcending various
language superfamilies. It is also encountered in one of the earliest
textual traditions, namely the shruti, starting from the R^igveda itself
— there is the term tigmashR^i\~Ngin which occurs in the veda. Yet, the
horned deity of the SSVC is an enigma, who cannot be unequivocally
linked to any of the hoary textual traditions that survive in bhArata.
On the other hand there are many motifs shared between the texts and the
material depictions over vast distance in space and time . His
ithyphallic form, tricephaly, and yogic Asana are motifs that appear
much later in both the material medium as well as in texts in the
context of the deity rudra who is of vedic provenance. But there is no
direct evidence linking these shared motifs in these temporally
separated expressions in a clear phylogenetic scheme.

Likewise, the powerful goddess depicted above is a great enigma of Indic
expression. Around the shu\~Nga period following the demise of the first
mauryan-s we see an enormous number of depictions of this goddess
throughout North India. While her first images started emerging in the
va\~Nga country, it has now become clear that she was widely depicted
throughout northern India probably all the way to Afghanistan — which
corresponds to the western thrust of the shu\~Nga-s in driving out the
yavana AkrAnta-s. While va\~Ngadesha produces some of the finest
examples of this goddess, especially in Chandraketugarh, there are great
replicas available from Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and further Northwest and
Southwards. They are found even in the old kaumAra-kShetra of Mathura
along side some of the earliest kaumAra images. One can see numerous
different images of this deity from around north India at Naman Ahuja’s
website (the latest student of this mystery goddess) or in the book of
the white Indologist Bautze or in the Chandraketugarh website or the
museums of Kolkota, Ashmolean at ukShatirtha or the Metropolitan in
navyarkapura. There may at least a hundred or more of these pratima-s
still around all from around 200-50 BCE. But who is this might devI?
Clearly her identity is somewhat unclear to modern observers, who have
offered various opinions: 1) A yakShiNI; 2) “mother goddess”; 3) woman
with barbaric hairdo (Harle \!); 4) woman with hairpins; 5) apsarA
pa\~nchachUDA (late Stella Kramrisch); 6) durgA; 7) shrI; 8)
royal/dancing woman; 9) the vedic deity sinIvAlI \!. More importantly
despite the obvious stereotype in her depictions many works have failed
to recognize the different versions of her even within the Gangetic
Doab. So it appears that the continuity or the links to the material
depiction of this deity have been lost (we will return to the issue of
her identity later).

Yet, as in the case of the Indus horned deity, we see a number of motifs
associated with her which are pervasive in Indic or even Eurasian
heathen thought. Firstly, the depictions very plainly convey her
essential nature — she is an erotic warrior goddess. This essential
motif is itself pervasive across time. In the Bronze Age Sumerian and
Semitic worlds we have Innana and Ishtar/Ashtart who shares not only the
above attributes but also some iconographic features with our Indic
goddess: The prominent depiction of the yoni as well as weapons which
are shown like rays. In the case of Ishtar the weapons usually are shown
symmetrically on both sides, while in the case of the Indic goddess they
emanate from the hairdo either symmetrically or only on one side.
Nevertheless their pose of standing face on with the weapons radiating
from the upper part of the body is very similar. At least some weapons,
the trident, the staff and arrows are shared by both of them. Both have
a special banner or scepter which might bear a star-like pattern (at
least centrally in the case of the Indic deity). Sometimes on both their
cases this symbol might be shown on top of the head. Another special
iconographic similarity between these two deities is that they might be
depicted between two pillars while showing their grace to their
votaries. In one of the Middle Eastern epics it is explicitly mentioned
that Ishtar/Innana has a large headgear. Now both she and our goddess
might be depicted with prominent headgears. Both these goddesses share
an affinity for big felines — the Middle Eastern goddess rides a lion
whereas our version might be depicted with a leopard/tiger and in some
cases perhaps with a lion. In many cases Ishtar is shown with wings.
While this feature is not common in our goddess, there is a terracotta
fragment from Chandraketugarh which I believe is the same goddess with
wings.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S2TD870wCLI/AAAAAAAABQM/FeJt8XlpYpk/s400/ishtar.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/wptypRqPaXNDfQT8mrthRg?feat=embedwebsite)

Ishtar/Innana: note the trident, weapons radiating on either side and
the lion

Many of these pervasive motifs that are shared between these goddesses
in the medium of material representation from two parts of Asia over a
period of more than 2500 years are also seen repeatedly emerging in
memes transmitted in the philological medium in the Indo-Aryan world.
Throughout the Eurasian world the great goddess was often
trans-functional and also warrior. So in itself this motif of the
warrior goddess is seen throughout much of Bronze Age Eurasia – Ishtar,
sarasvatI and her Iranian ortholog aredvI sUrA anAhitA and Athena. But
as a specifically erotic warrior goddess we see the meme reoccurring
many centuries later in the crest jewel of the shrIkula texts – the
lalitopAkhAyana, which describes the great deeds in war of the goddess
kAmeshvarI (she is also specifically termed shR^i\~NgAra-nAyikA and
shR^i\~NgAra-rasa-saMpUrNA to emphasize her erotic nature) who was
generated by the gods to end the kAma pralaya and slay bhaNDAsura and
his hordes. In the Middle Eastern lore the descent of Ishtar to the
netherworld was supposed to result in a situation similar to the
kAmapralaya of the lalitopAkhyAna. Her affinity for large felines is
also a pervasive motif in the textual medium. It emerges right in the
shrutI itself. The supreme goddess is described thus in a famous sUkta
of the atharvA\~Ngirasa-s:

siMhe vyAghra uta yA pR^idAkau tviShir agnau brAhmaNe sUrye yA |  
indraM yA devI subhagA jajAna sA na etu varcasA saMvidAnA ||  
yA hastini dvIpini yA hiraNye tviShir ashveShu puruSheShu goShu yA |  
indraM yA devI subhagA jajAna sA na etu varcasA saMvidAnA || (AV-vulgate
6.38.1-2)  
Here she is associated with lions, tigers, cheetahs and leopards (of
course in addition with the elephant, the horse and human).

This motif continues in some of the early hymns to the trans-functional
goddess as durgA or AryA.  
E.g. the AryA stava-1 in the harivaMsha states:  
siMhair vyAghrais samAkulA | (8b)  
Thus, both in the Middle East and the Indo-Aryan world this link between
the great goddess and the large cat is rather persistent.

Some of the earliest incantations devoted durgA are seen as inserts into
the mahAbhArata and as parts of the harivaMsha where there are at least
two major AryA stava-s. These stava-s have some relationship with the
emergence of her worship in the late sections of the bodhAyana gR^ihya
parishiShTha-s (durgA-kalpA) and correspond to the fact that her (as
kumAri, a name used in all these texts) worship in shrines in the city
are mentioned in the arthashAstra of viShNugupta. Further, her earliest
stava-s describe her as being associated with vAsudeva and saMkarShaNa
(i.e. identification with ekAnaMshA), being the daughter of nanda (i.e.
association with Mathura) and being worshiped in vindhyAchala where the
vindhyA range intersects the Gangetic region. The association with
Mathura is also clearly related to the kaumAra angle: In one case she
takes over a deed original performed by skanda, i.e. the killing of
mahiShAsura. Secondly she is described as ShaShThI, revatI, pUtanA (\!
in the harivaMsha itself) and shakunI-devI — all skanda-mAtR^ikA-s. This
trend continues in the early skanda-purANa vindhyavAsinI section
(Nepal/Bhattarai recension) where she is described as generating various
skanda-mAtR^ikA-s as her assistants in the war against sumbha and
nisumbha. Given that the archaeological finds of our mystery goddess are
from the Gangetic belt and Mathura (including the archaeological
association with early kaumAra finds), and these stava-s and viShNugupta
point to her worship in that region, we should examine these stava-s for
any motifs related to the mystery goddess. There are three major
stava-s: 1) to durgA in the mahAbhArata by yuddhiShThira before going to
virATa’s land; 2) to AryA in the harivaMsha by vaishampAyana in the
viShNu parva; 3) to AryA in the harivaMsha by aniruddha when he was
trapped in bANa-s abode. There is an additional recension (recorded much
later: 703 CE) of the 2nd of these stava-s preserved in metrical Chinese
translation by the chInAchArya Yijing. Of these it appears that there
many unique motif matches in the stava from the mahAbhArata, although a
few more are obtained if include all of the stava-s together.

We list these matches below; although some of them are very generic:  
From the durgA-stava of the bhArata:  
pUrNa-chandra-nibhAnane – one with a full moon-like face. The terracotta
depictions try to provide a clear view of the face the deity to meet
this description.  
pIna-shroNi-payodhare – one with full hips and breasts. The shu\~Nga
depictions are rather unequivocal in illustrating this point.  
mayUrapichCha-valaye keyUrA\~Ngada-dhAriNi- one with bangles of
sapphires and wearing upper arm ornaments and epaulets. I agree with KM
Ganguli’s opinion that mayUrapichCha here means the gem rather than the
peacock feather itself. The attribute valaya is rarely used in later
literature, and is one item that is very prominent in the iconography of
our shu\~Nga era deity.  
bibhratI vipulau bAhU shakra-dhvaja-samuchChrayau- Bearing two arms like
indra’s flag poles. While these stava-s may talk of chatur-bhuja, and
aShTAdasha-bhuja the dual suggests that there was also a conception with
two arms, which is consistent with our deity’s image.  
pAtrI cha pa\~NkajI ghaNTI … pAshaM dhanur mahAchakraM vividhAny
AyudhAni cha- Of these set of attributes we encounter the vessel, the
lotus, the bell and perhaps the chakra in a banner and of course
“vividha Ayudha-s”.  
trishAkhaM shUlam udyamya dAnavAn vinikRntasi – trident – an attribute
very frequently seen in our goddess.  
pAdau nUpura keyUrair ghaNTAbharaNa-bhUShitau – legs with anklets, a
feature always seen wherever the legs are preserved in the images.  
kuNDalAbhyAM supUrNAbhyAM karNAbhyAM cha vibhUShitA-The prominent
ear-ornament alluded to here are very much a feature of our goddess.  
mukuTena vichitreNa kasha-bandhena shobhinA- elaborate headdress and
hairdo mentioned here are very specific feature of our shu\~Nga
goddess.  
bhujaMgAbhoga-vAsena shroNi-sUtreNa rAjatA|  
vibhrAjase cAbaddhena bhogeneveha mandaraH ||  
This verse mentions snake dress or ornaments, which I have suspected to
be present in some depictions of the shu\~Nga deity, though I must admit
these are not very clear (e.g. the lower right hand side of picture
above at higher magnification shows the scales of the snake, see
original from Ashmolean Museum). But importantly the verse also mentions
the shroNi-sUtra or the brilliant hip-girdle which is one defining
feature of this deity.  
dhvajena shikhi-pichChAnAm uchChritena virAjase- The erect banner of
peacock feathers. This one is seen in a few depictions of the shu\~Nga
deity, e.g. the one on the lower left-hand side in the picture above
(original in the Metropolitan Museum).  
mahA-siMha-rathArUDhe mahA-shArdUla-vAhini- having the lion and tiger as
vehicles — association with big felines.

The AryA stava-1 of the harivaMsha:  
mayUra-pichCha-dhvajinI– Same as above  
kukkuTaish-ChAgalair-meShais-siMhair-vyAghrais-samAkulA |  
The first three animals are kaumAra animals which appear to have been
absorbed by the devI, the while the last two are the big felines as
above.  
trishUlI paTTishadharA sUrya-chandra-patAkinI |  
The weapons and the flag with the sun and moon symbol. We at least see a
sun-like symbol in some of the banners of the shu\~Nga goddess.  
nakShatrANAM cha rohiNI- Of the stars you are alpha-Tauri. This is a
hint of a stellar connection, which is also seen in Ishtar. It is
possible that some of the banners/standards of our goddess bear a star
on them.

These are the matches – some distinctive and some generic. Yet there is
one somewhat puzzling feature. In all the three stava-s the devI is
clearly described as:  
kaumAra-vratachAriNi ; “kaumAravratam AsthAya”; “brahmacaryaM”;
“brahmachAriNI”; “brahmachAriNIm”;  
This is consistent with the yaj\~nopavIta seen on some of the shu\~Nga
images. At the same time it also means one who is unmarried/celibate.
This attribute is apparently contradictory with her erotic image on that
is some pervasive in the shu\~Nga depictions. There is only one apparent
exception to this (see below). Now all the stava-s are not averse to
explicitly naming her association with other “makara-s”: e.g.:
sIdhu-mAMsa-vasA-priye– one fond of rum, meat and fat;
surA-mAMsa-bali-priyA– one fond of offerings of beer and meat; “madirAM”
and “surAM” – personifications of various liquors. But only one of them
(the harivaMsha AryA stava-1) to my knowledge touches on the erotic
aspect and that too fleetingly:  
kanyAnAM brahmacharya-tvaM saubhAgyaM pramadAsu cha |  
You are the chastity of maidens and also the conjugal bliss of erotic
women.  
It is possible that this last aspect was down-played in the canonical
texts but much more prominent in the lay religious expression. Thus, if
we were to accept the reasonable match in epithets of the early stava-s
to AryA and the iconic depictions of the shu\~Nga goddess, then we may
conclude that they are indeed the same.

There are few other points regarding the shu\~Nga icons that we might
further look into. In several icons the shu\~Nga deity is shown as a
holding a bag of money or disbursing kArShApaNa-s to votaries. This has
been used to identify the devatA as shrI. However, we should note that
in these early AryA stava-s she is explicitly identified as shrI, so
this aspect is not incompatible with the connections with AryA noted
above. The version in the Ashmolean museum from Tamluk in the va\~Nga
country is unique in having four beings on the thighs of the goddess.
The figures of beings are very small – they appear male and are seated
in squatting pose, but anything beyond that is hard to discern what they
represent. We do not have any immediate memetic evidence from the
stava-s themselves regarding this point. It is possible that they
represent children and are depicted as being born. In this regard
clearly the harivaMsha stava-s describe the goddess as the mother of
kumAra (siddhasena). A much latter text the vyapohana stava of the
shaiva saiddhAntika-s has the following line in the description of
mahAdevI:  
naigameyAdibhir divyaish chaturbhiH putrakair-vR^itA |  
One accompanied by the four divine sons starting with
naigameya(nejameSha). Is it possible that this textual motif has a link
to the iconic motif in the Tamluk exemplar? At present the data remains
limited to fix such a connection.

Overall, we feel that the evidence does point to the same female deity
being depicted throughout north India in this period from around 200-50
BCE. The greatest congruence in motifs is currently seen between the
iconography of this goddess and the early textual description of AryA,
suggesting that this identification is the one that should be cautiously
accepted. More generally the motifs related to the goddess are seen in
memes transmitted by both textual and iconic means spread across a wide
swath of space and time in both in bhArata and the rest of Eurasia. This
highlights a key issue often ignored by archaeologists and philologists
alike. The appearance of a motif in one of their favored media does not
imply that it is the first appearance of the motif in the memetic
sphere. Some early observations regarding the persistence of various
memetic motifs in bhArata were made by DD Kosambi, a learned but
misguided and subversive thinker from the city of my youth. However, his
adherence to baseless and delusive ideologies inherited from his father
resulted in him not correctly grasping their history. These indeed need
to be revisited with a proper evolutionary framework that should take
heed of what  happens in the study of biological evolution and
paleontology.
