+++
title = "Potentially interesting tyrannosauroidxa0scraps"

+++
Recent dinosaurian discoveries are emphasizing cosmopolitanism against
the earlier belief of regionalism triggered by vicariance. The discovery
of Brusatte et al that Shaochilong, Chilantaisaurus and Fukuiraptor are
carcharodontosauroids showed that this derived lineage of allosauroids
comprised of the two clades, neovenatorids and carcharodontosaurids
proper had achieved global distribution over the Cretaceous. Further,
the discovery of the enigmatic Middle Jurassic Shidaisaurus suggests
that the allosauroids had emerged as a distinct clade by then. Thus both
in temporal and spatial terms the allosauroids were a widely distributed
clade. Similarly, the discoveries of early pre-Archaeopteryx troodontids
like Anchiornis from earliest age of the Upper Jurassic and the Middle
Jurassic tyrannosauroid Proceratosaurus and earliest upper Jurassic
tyrannosauroid Guanlong indicated that these coelurosaurs had undergone
a major radiation by this time. In spatial terms, the Rahonavis and a
slew of South American dromaeosaurs, starting with Unenlagia, showed
that the dromaeosaurs had attained worldwide distribution. Similarly,
large sauropods of the macronarian clade appear to have achieved
worldwide distribution by the Cretaceous. This suggested that at least
in theory the clades of the Middle Jurassic would have spread all over
the world when the continents were still amenable to being crossed.
Consequently, we would expect to see these clades globally even in the
Cretaceous, if local extinctions did not disrupt their distributions. In
light of this, the tyrannosaurs were indeed anomalous in not being
present in any of the southern continents – they had emerged by the
mid-Jurassic, they were long-lived and even seemed to be highly
successful predators in other parts of the world. So, why not in the
South? I had long suspected that we might find a Southern lineage of
tyrannosaurs and the first glimmer of hope in this direct has emerged.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh5.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S65VnYo1yCI/AAAAAAAABV0/qUmklpNOkns/s800/panoply_pubes.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/ljtH1LJGex6iS64w7_jm7A?feat=embedwebsite)
 A panoply of theropod pubes (modified from Benson et al.)

The fossil reported by Benson et al is hardly pretty – it is simply just
a pubis (NMVP186046) from the Dinosaur Cove site in Australia that has
earlier yielded the hypsilophodont Leaellynasaura and the enigmatic
fragmentary theropod Timimus. But based on a number of features they
claim the following:  
1\) coelurosaur affinities based on a transversely narrow,
parallel-sided pubic boot.  
2\) It is specifically linked to the tyrannosaurids by a rugose lateral
surface adjacent to the pubic tubercle.  
3\) Specifically tyrannosaurid rather than basal tyrannosauroids
affinities based on the large pubic boot with a prominent anterior
expansion. It is distinguished from allosauroids, where the pubic boot
is transversely broad and from ornithomimosaurs and oviraptorosaurs that
have an anterior expansion but a small pubic boot.

Thus, they conclude that the Australian pubis is from a tyrannosauroid
more derived than Raptorex and closer to the late Cretaceous large
tyrannosaurids. However, in size it is estimated to be only roughly the
size of Raptorex. Thus, by extension it likely to be another small sized
representative of the short armed clade of tyrannosauroids. In this
context, it is of interest to note that Brusatte et al note some
synapomorphies in Sinotyrannus with Proceratosaurs. This suggests that
this scrappy form might indeed be a tyrannosauroid and that the more
primitive tyrannosauroids might have achieved large sizes earlier than
the derived two-finger clade. Indeed, it is possible that the North
American Dryptosaurus is another independent large form from the more
primitive long armed tyrannosauroid radiation. Of course this claim of
Benson et al is based on a scrap and could well prove wrong if better
remains are discovered.For example, let us consider one alternative
explanation. From the above image it is clear that the megaraptoran
allosauroids like Aerosteon had anterior expansions similar of the pubis
to those of derived tyrannosauroids. However, they were distinguished by
Benson et al from the tyrannosauroids on the basis of the greater
transverse width of the structure in the megaraptorans. However, we know
that the Australian pubis is from a small animal. So it is not
impossible that the smaller megaraptorans, perhaps a form like
Fukuiraptor, developed narrower anterior expansions convergently. If the
anterior expansions aided in supporting the sitting posture then a
smaller animal could possible make do with a narrower expansion. Given
that convincing megaraptorans have been reported from Australia this
alternative is not far-fetched.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S65VxwNo7YI/AAAAAAAABVQ/3wkT3u2Z_1A/s800/continental_drift.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/vytgbRXvWlgldzrZcarUQg?feat=embedwebsite)
 Paleomaps provided by Ron Blakey, NAU Geology (click to original to
magnify)

But if they are right then it has major implications. Firstly, it shows
that the tyrannosaurs were after all not limited to the North. Secondly,
since it comes from the Albian it suggests that Raptorex’s age might
indeed be correct being a slightly less-derived sister group of the
tyrannosaurids. Finally, it suggests that that for a good part of their
existence the derived tyrannosauroids where probably small-bodied and
hence not preserved well in the fossil record. If the Australian pubis
was indeed a tyrannosauroid then there could also be a potential
biogeographic puzzle at hand. The simplest assumption, as stated above,
would be that the clades emerging by the middle Jurassic attained global
distribution by dispersing across the Pangaea that was fragmenting (See
paleomap above). However, the Australian pubis is claimed to be not just
any tyrannosauroid by a rather derived one close to the crown
tyrannosaurids. Now, under the simple dispersion theory this would mean
that the highly derived representatives (i.e. more derived than
Raptorex) of the two fingered clade had also emerged by the middle
Jurassic. Though not impossible, this to me seems a bit anomalous as all
the derived forms that we have are from a much later period. Now there
are some other such tantalizing North-South faunal connections suggested
by the dinosaurian scraps from Australia: 1) We have the most enigmatic
Serendipaceratops known from just the ulna from the same region of
Australia as the purported tyrannosauroid pubis. Though fragmentary,
most would agree that the Australian ulna is very similar to the ulna of
Leptoceratops from the northern Hemisphere. Like the early crown group
tyrannosauroids early crown group ceratopsians like Leptoceratops are
also found in Asia. 2) Asiatic Fukuiraptor and Chilantaisaurus and
Australian Australovenator illustrate another such comparable
North-South connection. Based on our current knowledge of the fossil
record we would assume that the conventional Pangaean dispersal during
the middle Jurassic would have resulted in the primitive forms assuming
global distribution, followed by independent evolution on the separating
continents.

But the connections we are finding are between relatively derived forms
in the North and South, rather than between primitive forms. This raises
the possibility that there were alternative North-South dispersal
routes. One possibility is that of a long island-hopping journey. In
this scenario the forms from Asia travel through a series of island
archipelagos through Europe to North America and then similarly to the
South American landmass. From here they could have potentially made it
to Australia via Antarctica. This scenario, while a bit wild, is
supported in part by the report of fragments of neoceratopsians and the
enigmatic bizzare-toothed hadrosauroid Tethyshadros in insular Europe.
These finds suggest that “archipelago-hopping” might have at least taken
these as far as Europe from Asia. Another even more blasphemous
suggestion may be made. If one looks at the paleomaps (above) one sees a
possible chain of islands connecting Asia to Australia formed by the
tectonic plate junction in the extreme east. This could have been there
even in the late Jurassic and early cretaceous and provided a possible
exchange route through island hoping and some floating (at least for
small forms). At least some of the deinonychosaurs could have also used
flight to navigate this low-lying island chain. While this sounds like a
rather drastic or even improbable suggestion, in the least attempts to
falsify it should be made using independent geological data.
