+++
title = "Turtle origins: A flawed return to the parareptile theory by the morphologists"

+++
We have repeatedly discussed on these pages how molecular phylogenies
have consistently shown morphological phylogenies to be outright wrong.
The examples are many, and we need not rehash them again. A few
researchers, including us, have seen this incongruence as an interesting
problem worth deep analysis – it has profound bearing on evolution of
developmental programs, and also has a big role in understanding how
morphological features evolve. If pursued further it has the role to
illuminate the problems with morphological cladistics and perhaps even
provide a means of improving it. Some morphologists have been very much
awake to the conflicts of their results with molecular data and tried
hard to redo their analysis to reach consistency. For example, none of
the mammalian morphologists had even the vaguest idea of Afrotheria, but
some of them now are recovering it via reanalysis of the characters used
in their studies in light of the unequivocal molecular support for this
clade.

Unfortunately, other morphologists continue to operate in a more
misleading fashion that does not lead to improved understanding of the
problem at hand. One such case is a recent paper published by Lyson et
al on turtle origins. The authors on the Lyson paper include Bever and
Bhullar who just last year had published a paper presenting
morphological support for the turtle-archosauromorph linkage ([see
earlier
discussion](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/05/31/azhendosaurus-the-early-archosauromorph-radiation-and-a-new-position-for-turtles/)).
Another author is Joyce the describer of
[Chinlechelys](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/10/12/turtle-shells/)
who also seemed to support the archosauromorph-turtle link in that
paper. Finally, we have Gauthier who has been a pioneer in modern
vertebrate cladistics. Now these same morphologists make a regressive
U-turn to the turtles as parareptiles hypothesis. In this sense they are
recapitulating earlier works that consistently grouped the turtles with
different “parareptiles” (in “” because the term parareptiles for the
clade becomes a rather bad one if turtles were nested within them
because they are reptiles\!). Laurin and Reisz in a well-illustrated
paper 1995 claimed that turtles were related to the procolophonids among
the parareptiles. On the other hand Lee then claimed that they were
nested within the pareiasaurs, which were a sister group to the
procolophonids and the nycteroleterids among the parareptiles. Now Lyson
et al claim that the turtles are a sister-group of that most enigmatic
parareptile Eunotosaurus. In this proposal they are only restating, with
the cladistic smoke-screen of objectivity, an idea pioneered nearly a
century ago by the astute but dogmatic student of reptilian anatomy,
[DMS Watson
(1914)](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/03/19/amniotes/).
Unfortunately, Eunotosaurus is poorly known – all the detailed accounts
of it are in obscure journals that are very difficult to procure. Nor
are Lyson et al are not very illuminating in their discussion of this
animal. They list as synapomorphies: 1) broad T-shape ribs; 2) 10
elongate trunk vertebrae; 3) cranial tubercles; 4) wide trunk. Now based
on these synapomorphies they claim that Eunotosaurus from the late
Permian of South Africa, separated by 44 million years from the first
known turtle, was a stem turtle.

Now these synapomorphies simply cannot be pitted against the much larger
set of synapomorphies from:  
1\) the nuclear DNA-encoded protein sequence alignments that
unequivocally reject all phylogenetic hypothesis other than the
archosauromorph status of turtles (e.g. just to name one comprehensive
study: Iwabe et al. Sister group relationship of turtles to the
bird-crocodilian clade revealed by nuclear DNA-coded proteins. Mol Biol
Evol. 2005 Apr;22(4):810-3)

2\) An independent dataset from complete mitochondrial genome sequences
(to name one study: Rest et al. Molecular systematics of primary
reptilian lineages and the tuatara mitochondrial genome. Mol Phylogenet
Evol. 2003 Nov;29(2):289-97)

3\) The presence of a specific class of beta keratins including multiple
ortholog groups that are uniquely shared with archosauromorphs but
entirely missing in lepidosauromorphs ([We have made this observation
and discussed it
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/03/20/how-far-back-do-feathers-go/)).

These sets of synapomorphies taken singly or together overwhelmingly
reject the turtles as parareptiles hypothesis, especially that of Lyson
et al, which tries to garner support for this linkage with the above
synapomorphies. The synapomorphies of Lyson et al are rather facile as
they are ones which could easily emerge through convergent evolution in
unrelated lineages. Further, it should be noted that Lyson et al do not
include or analyses the great diversity of archosauromorphs that [we had
discussed in the earlier note on this
subject](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/05/31/azhendosaurus-the-early-archosauromorph-radiation-and-a-new-position-for-turtles/).
Without including them and claiming to find turtles to be related to
Eunotosaurus is hardly an objective test of the archosauromorph position
of turtles. They also curiously state that fossils cannot be used to
calibrate points in the molecular clock where both the morphological and
molecular trees do not recover the monophyly of a group. If this is so,
are they insinuating that Proganochelys and modern turtles are
paraphyletic? In conclusion, Lyson et al is a regressive example of
morphological phylogenetics at work, and simply put is flawed.
