+++
title = "The tyrants pilexa0on"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S7NwjwDJMtI/AAAAAAAABX8/1nal_2mZIkg/s400/proceratosaurids.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/5BW1d2zybzU738jnmtsiSw?feat=embedwebsite)  
The procession of proceratosaurids: the elongated naris and the
premaxillary process are a very distinctive feature of this clade of
tyrannosauroids. The adaptive significance of this type of naris in
light of the work of Witmer might be worth exploring.

After the supposed Australian tyrannosaur (the title of which paper
inspired this post) we now have a Russian tyrannosaur. I wanted to have
an extension to that post to cover the early tyrant reptiles which have
suddenly become more common than they were just an year ago. But I
waited for the Russian paper and it was worth it. When the rather
scrappy Sinotyrannus from the early Cretaceous of China was announced,
it was not immediately clear if its tyrannosaur tag was correct.
However, after that I finally completed the reading of the massive
Rauhut monograph on the basal tyrannosaur Proceratosaurus from the
Bathonian age of the Middle Jurassic. In course of reading this paper
and understanding Guanlong somewhat better it struck me that the chIna-s
led by Ji had done a good job and Sinotyrannus might indeed be a
tyrannosauroid related to Proceratosaurus and Guanlong. Then there was
the work of Bursatte and Benson that suggested that more formally
addressed this problem and indeed adduced support for a connection
between Proceratosaurus, Guanlong and Sinotyrannus. Though only the tip
of the snout and fragments of the arm, spine and pelvis were preserved
in Sinotyrannus it is clear that it was a large dinosaur no lesser than
8 meters in length. In contrast, all other early tyrannosaurs till the
early Cretaceous where much smaller (\~2-4 meters) in length. This
suggested that before the derived two fingered clade achieved large
sizes, it was the proceratosaurid clade that might have attained large
size and probably became the apex predator in the famous Jehol ecosystem
of the Early Cretaceous.

More support for the extensive radiation of the proceratosaurid clade of
tyrannosauroids had come to light with the discovery of the Kileskus
aristotocus from the Bathonian age of the Middle Jurassic of Siberia by
Averianov et al. In this well-illustrated paper they describe scrappy
remains of a basal tyrannosauroid that appears to have close
relationships with Guanlong and Proceratosaurus. Thus, we now know that
throughout the northern continent of the middle Jurassic we had a
lineage of abundant Proceratosaurid tyrannosaurs. These continued into
the middle-late Jurassic (Guanlong) and into the early Cretaceous
(Sinotyrannus). However, whether they lasted even later is rather
unclear – the fragmentary Dryptosaurus could still be a member of this
group despite Carr’s phylogeny not supporting this. It also appears
likely that the derived forms closer to the two-fingered clade had also
diverged early from the proceratosaurids by the middle Jurassic. In
support of this is quite likely that Iliosuchus from the Jurassic was
closer to the two-finger clade than the proceratosaurids. It is not
clear if Dilong was a sister of the proceratosaurid clade or to the
remaining tyrannosauroids. The latter position appears plausible though
Averianov et al. recover the former. Finally, it is not clear where the
fragmentary Tanycolagreus from the late Jurassic falls with respect to
the proceratosaurids. The most distinctive feature of Kileskus is its
narial anatomy and this is shared with other members of the
proceratosaurid clade – Proceratosaurus, Guanlong, Kileskus and
Sinotyrannus. The exact biological significance of this remains largely
unclear but is vaguely reminiscent of the elongated narial morphology of
some earlier pre-dinosaurian archosaurs. As per Averianov et al the
proceratosaurids are defined by: 1) A sagittal crest formed by the
nasals starting at the nasal premaxilla junction. 2) An elongate naris
exceeding 20% of skull length. While I agree that this elongate naris is
a critical character defining as a fraction of the skull length is
clearly restrictive. Sinotyrannus has the same type of naris but may not
fit this \>20% criterion. I think a ratio of major-minor axis of the
naris is a better definition. 3) Short ventral margin of the premaxilla.
4) Depth of the antorbital fossa ventral to the antorbital fenestra is
much greater than the depth of maxilla below the ventral margin of the
antorbital fossa. This last character might suggest that these animals
did not have adaptations to inflict a strong bite as seen in the large
Cretaceous tyrannosaurs.
