+++
title = "What should theyxa0teach?"

+++
The prolix Balagangadhara of Ghent in a talk available on YouTube brings
up the question of teaching bhAratIya viShaya-s in mlechCha
universities. In this regard we have earlier discussed the California
textbook case the role of the activist indologists in it. We have also
talked about the view of malla rAjIva and his theory of U-turns and the
subversive activities of various indologists. But, through all of this,
the question of Balagangadhara stands as to what should take the place
of current indological productivity. Most discerning Arya-s agree that
der Narr aus Harvard and the mahAnagnikA from Chicago should be rendered
irrelevant. But there are still some many uncertainties about the
details. Should all indology programs or their proxies, such as all
manner of “South Asia Studies” be shut down? Given the funding situation
for academics in the mlechCha-desha some feel this would happen as a
matter of course. Of course, the mlechCha-s realize that lowly as these
wretched South Asia Studies are they are still a source of trained
soldiers for their subversive objectives in jambudvIpa. Hence, they
would let these live as long as they serve the objectives of the
mlechChAdipati-s, though they might choke other lines of research in the
field. Now let us take the case of an indologist in a private college in
Northeastern krau\~nchadvIpa. In the 1990s he was a reasonable, sincere
student of bhAratIya viShaya-s concentrating on shaiva texts and
rituals. He received relatively paltry sums for these studies and did a
reasonably good job in terms of scholarship and objectivity. He,
however, received larger bags of kArShApaNa-s from the DoS for preparing
works on “Hindu fundamentalism”. With the glint of gold aligning with
both his left-leaning attitude, not uncommon in a mlechCha college
academic, and his patriotic calling he got busy producing pamphlets
condemning Hindu nationalism. Not surprisingly, in course of these
writings he did not pass the opportunity of hurling some muck at the
“evil brahmins” – after everything bad must be due to us. One wonders
if he might describe his own cognate political institutions and leaders,
say Ron Reagan or for that matter even Thomas Jefferson with the same
holier than thou language he reserves for the Hindus. His is just one
example – a student of shaiva issues being remodeled as a South Asianist
to provide services for the propaganda wing of the mlechCha state
machinery. So, if the funding situation were left to be as is, it does
not matter what we think should be taught by indology professors at
mlechCha institutions, but it boils down to what the DoS finds useful
for its psyops.

This then leads to two questions: 1) Should those Hindus who can impact
the funding situation (e.g. think of the money Infosys recently donated)
do anything about the situation of indology? 2) Once the decision is
made to provide funding independently of the DoS and the mlechCha psyops
systems how should we structure the indology teaching?

To get to this bottom of this let us again turn to the pitAmaha of
American indologists Daniel Ingalls. He was certainly a man of great
brilliance and understanding. He was a US patriot serving as an
espionage agent in Asia in various capacities during the American quest
for world dominance. Other than his anti-Japanese action, his main
action as a secret agent was in Afghanistan, in part laying the ground
work for the future American designs on that region. But, more
importantly, he was also part of the American team in Afghanistan
helping the English rAj to prevent Indians trying to liberate bhArata by
gaining help from the Germans and Japanese. In this he was aided by
another American academic Richard Frye who is well-know for this
historical research on central Asia. Outside of military service he was
well-off as a heir to his family business in the travel industry. His
initial education was not in Sanskrit but in the Greco-Roman classics
and poetry and he a good background in mathematical representations of
logic and geometry (he worked as mathematics teacher in his days as a
spasha). As a consequence Ingalls had certain key characteristics that
differentiated him from other typical academics, especially in the
business of indology: 1) As a patriot he, importantly, had no identity
crisis, which was making him seek India and Indic thought as a means of
filling an identity vacuum. A corollary to this was his immunity from
the now common Malhotran U-turn – being grounded in his own svadeshya he
had no need to go elsewhere and then rediscover his previously missing
identity with a vengence. 2) He was a relatively wealthy man with his
own business and was pursuing academics out of interest rather than
necessity. Thus, he was a capitalist, a pragmatist and political
conservative and was not swayed by the Marxism that was so typical of
his colleagues and successors. Hence, he disagreed strongly with Kosambi
on Marxist interpretations, while collaborating with him on issues
concerning saMskR^ita. 3) He served his country militarily, at times
working against the interests of our rAShTra, but he studied Indic
thought rather objectively in the spirit of mutual respect. When it came
to learning shAstra-s he realized the importance of doing so directly
from Hindu scholars in India rather than doing so in absentia in the
comforts of the US (Here, one may contrast him with Jan Gonda who did a
pretty good job of acquiring an encyclopedic knowledge of saMskR^ita and
Javan in absentia). So he journeyed to Kolkata to study navya nyAya
directly from one of its last savants kAlIpada-tarkAchArya who upheld
the intellectual traditions of the great vAchaspati mishra or he went to
Pune to study with the jaina muni jambuvijaya.

These characteristics helped him develop as a genuine scholar of Hindu
thought – he was able to appreciate the advances of navya nyAya, while
at the same time he was also able to appreciate saMskR^ita poetry for
what it was. He did not try to reinterpret it through the lens of
western constructs. It is because of this he was able to penetrate one
of those great poetic works of Anandavardhana, the devI shataka.
Reciprocally, traditionally grounded Hindu academics (i.e. not the
secular types) such as shatAvadhAnI gaNesh feel a resonance with Ingalls
(mentioned in his interview by Balagangadhara). By all accounts his
teaching of saMskR^ita was said to be top class resulting in about 50
graduate students getting PhDs in course of his career. His
recommendation most of us would second – to get a grasp of the devavANI
read the kathasaritsAgara and the mahAbhArata closely. Thus, at face
value it would appear that we need the ideal indologist to be like
Ingalls and funding his program would be a worthy investment for someone
like Infosys or Mahindra.

I freely admit that there might be certain truth to this. Yet, we have
no Ingalls around today, and the ground reality with his students is far
more troubling. A notable number of them have ultimately hostile
attitudes towards the Hindu system while professing overtly to be its
friends.

continued…
