+++
title = "Origin mythologies from the upperxa0penisula"

+++
R and me were wandering in the mAhArATTa country after having rid
ourselves from the curricular entanglements. We rode on our “ashva-s”
past the prickly pear that stood between a low encasement of Deccan
basalts and the most ancient temple of rudra in our regions. Having
swiftly exited from the urban sprawl we reached those desolate lands
were there were only the harshest of plant life was seen in the form of
the jujube trees, the yucca’s dagger, acacia, prickly pears and an
occasional neem. There were enormous termite mounds. There was one
particularly enormous one at the base of a jujube tree. R informed that
the kR^iShNa shUdra said that a rAkShasI lived in that tree/termite
mound and was particularly afraid of approaching it. We approached it
and found several offerings scattered around. R narrated to us a
particularly interesting story about the rAkShasa. This story reminded
us immediately of the origin mythology of the kApu-s from southern India
that we had learned of from a learned Andhran scholar who introduced to
us by the makhin:

“AdireDDi was the first of the kApu-s, a lineage of the fourth varNa in
the Telugu country. He had wife named AdiammA. They had seven sons. The
last of their sons was elenAgi-reDDi. He made an earthen li\~Nga and
worshipped rudra therein. Due to the aid borne by rudra he became the
chief of a village. Then he became a leader of seven villages. His elder
brothers became jealous of him. To try to finish him off, they gave him
the large agricultural land around munnimodakamAnu near shrIshailaM and
induced him to migrate there with his bullocks and cattle. In the middle
of that land was a large tree around which was an enormous termite
mound. In that tree the great god rudra had placed a brahma-rAkShasI who
guarded the territory. The brothers asked elenAgi-reDDi to cut the tree.
He worshiped rudra before doing so, who gave elenAgi-reDDi an axe
weighing 111 Kgs. Due to aid of the deva, elenAgI the founder of the
kApu-s could lift this gargantuan axe and with it brought down the tree.
Six rakSha-s attacked him right away but he managed to kill them with
his axe. The rAkShasi complained to rudra at shrIshailaM, but he told
him that he had chosen the kApu as the new owner of the land.

In kailAsha umA had a pet ram and an ewe. They soon proliferated and
started soiling the pleasure groves of rudra. So rudra dug a hole
through nAga loka drove the sheep through that hole. One day while
elenAgi-reDDi was tilling his field he hit the slab of rock that barred
the aperture to nAga-loka. He lifted up the rock and opened it up. Sheep
started rushing out and rudra appeared to him and asked him to take care
of the sheep and not look back else the sheep would stop coming out.
After a while elenAgi tiredly looked back and just then he saw a golden
ram and ewe coming out. They vanished immediately. At this point rudra
asked him to move to the port of kalyANa with his sheep. But there the
chAlukyan king found the sheep to smell bad and dirty the place so he
kept the kApu chief out of the city. He wandered as a pastoralist for
twelve years in the forests of the rAShTraka-s. Then rudra told him that
certain events would happen by which elenAgi could settle down in
kalyANa and that he would be initiated into rAsAyana by his grace.
\[Here the story takes a detour to introduce the siddha revaNa: footnote
1\]

In the Andhra country (located in the modern Kurnool province), in the
brahminical lineage of archanAnas Atreya was born revaNa \[This detail
was added by the narrator and was not in the original kApu narrative\].
As youth he studied and mastered the shaiva shAstra \[Footnote 2\].
After he had completed his education he went to North India to visit the
shaiva maTha at champA (Chamba in modern Himachal). There lived a
practitioner of the rasAyana tantra-s known as carpaTi. In the vicinity
of his laboratory was a great buffalo herder. One day he left his
beautiful wife in charge of his house and left with his retinue to have
a holy bath. While he was away charpaTi arrived at his house singing
praises of the bhairava
\[[bayaNNa](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/06/24/a-local-pantheon-of-mallanna/)
in the kApu narrative\] and asked the buffalo-herder’s wife to serve him
food and she did so. A little later her mother-in-law suspected what had
happened and abused her severely. She ran away from the house and went
over to charpaTi’s dwelling to become his consort. By her goddess-like
presence charpaTi became a siddha \[Footnote 3\]. In his northern
journey revaNa ran into charpaTi and they debated on the shaiva shAstra.
Then revaNa was initiated by the latter into rasAyana and asked to
practice it further. Practicing rasAyana, revaNa returned to the south.
While visiting kA\~nchI in the Tamil country he was told that the idol
of viShNu at kA\~nchi was unstoppably shaking. He went to the temple and
reinstalled the image and it stopped shaking. He then performed many
other alchemical acts and released women captured by brahma-rakSha-s,
inviting the interest of the choLa king. The choLa king’s daughter named
durgA was awed by his skills and married him. United with her he
achieved rasa siddhi just as his teacher. Wandering with his consort he
reached the forests near kalyANa where he ran into elenAgi-reDDi who was
tending his sheep. revaNa taught elenAgi mantra-s and rasAyana.

One day one of elenAgi’s sheep died. So he skinned it and went to offer
the skin for sale in kalyANa. However, the citizens were in no mood to
take it because just then the vR^iShbha of their shiva temple had died.
They were trying with their singing devotional songs and dancing to
revive it. elenAgi went away to a reservoir near the city and made a
pyre to cremate his sheep. The smell from the burning sheep aggravated
the citizens even more who came out and started abusing elegnAgi, who
said he was worsening matters when they were trying to revive their
bull. He remained unfazed and said he only wished to help them and
offered them the sheep skin and said he could also help with his powers.
They taunted him and said if his rasa-s and mantra-s were truly
effective he should revive his sheep. Remembering his guru revaNa he
cast some rasa powders into the pyre and applied his mantra-s. A ram
jumped out of the pyre ran on a rampage in the city breaking everything
down. The king himself fled the city and took refuge atop a rocky
eminence outside the city. The ram bashed the rock and made the king
tremble. He called to revaNa for help, who arrived and struck the ram
dead with his rod. revaNa asked the king to accept elenAgi into the city
and buy his wool and butter. Now elenAgi became the frontier guardian of
the city and was given the title vIradeva.”

elenAgi was prolific and had several sons. Those of them who went to his
agricultural lands were the classical agricultural shUdra-s. The kApu-s
who inherited his shepherd ways became the pastoralist shUdra-s. These
followed the ways of revaNa in worshiping deities with mantra-s. Those
among them who started consuming mutton and drinking liquors became
pastoralist avarNa-s. Those who gave up the ways of revaNa and instead
adopted vIrashaivaM became vaishya-s. It is striking to note that a
similar origin mythology is preserved among various shUdra groups of the
southern states. We had earlier mentioned a similar tale among certain
[reDDi-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2003/09/01/masi-reddi/).
Similar tales are also found among the kuruba shepherds who trace their
origin to the kApu-s who lost their varNa.  
……  
Footnote 1: The siddha revaNa was assimilated by the exclusivist
vIrashaiva-s and accepted as a major figure in their system. However his
origins are very distinct from the vIrashaiva system – he was shaiva of
the mantra-mArga with a particular focus on the rasAyana school. This is
supported by his saMskR^ita works on chemistry. The earliest Tamil work
attributed to him is also not a vIrashaiva work but a lexicon. The above
tale from the Andhra country and the narratives from Maharashtra also
strongly support his rasa siddha origins. It was mainly in the Karnata
country and somewhat later in the Tamil country that he was taken up as
a vIrashaiva figure. He has become the locus of insertion of many
anachronistic and grandiose tales that describe his siddhi-s.

Footnote 2: While the Andhra narrator was unclear as to what this shaiva
shAstra was the saMskR^ita work siddhAnta-shikhA from the Tamil country
states that he mastered the saiddhAntika tantra-s.

Footnote 3: We realized that the “goddess-like presence” in Andhran’s
narrative is probably a “sanitized” description of the need of the dUtI
or the kAkinI for a rasa-sAdhaka to become a siddha. There is a parallel
narrative in a Tibetan description of siddha-s. The tamil charitraM
mentions charpaTi’s tAntrika practice of yoga with the cowherd’s
(kovaLan= drAviDa word for gopAla) wife leading to his siddhi.
