+++
title = "The mlechCha brain behind the sword arm"

+++
It is hardly pleasant to talk about geopolitical issues concerning
Hindus these days. Yet, from time to time those urges of the arm-chair
general are hard to curb. I received from the sources articles by Vishal
Agrawal and Rajiv Malhotra whose names do not need much introduction in
aware Hindu circles. As the usual disclaimer I must state that I have
formerly disagreed with them in internet fora on issues pertaining to
varNAshrama-dharma, Indo-European linguistics and the origin of the
Arya-s of India, the value of old Hindu philosophy, “whiteness studies”
and other issues. Yet, when it comes to the larger Hindu struggle
against our enemies their efforts as warriors at the front must be
appreciated. Both of them have recently written long articles that are
worth glancing through for the uniformed Hindus to learn about the
situation staring down at them. My main purpose of the putting a few
words here is to highlight what lies below the surface. Submerged though
these forces may be, they threaten the Hindu wildebeest like the ghora
makara-s in rivers of the savanna much like ashvattAman and vikarNa
threatening the pANDu host in the eddies of kurukShetra.

Firstly, Agrawal tackles Doniger that mahA-bhaga-bhakShakI among the
white indologists, whereas Malhotra addresses the latest in the ongoing
attacks on Hindu sadhu-s (pAShaNDa-s or otherwise). Let us rehash a few
points to start: Doniger is a successor of a dhUrta known as Mircea
Eliade who created a mass of obfuscation that was passed off as
scholarship the mlechCha universities. She has been able to exploit this
smoke screen set up by Eliade in the academia to boldly peddle her
prurience as scholarship. On the other side she, like Sheldon Pollock
and Robert Thurman, is also the descendent of the American scholar
Daniel Ingalls, whom we briefly touched upon on these pages in the
context of his pAshupata studies. But if we study these academics
stemming from a common yoni we see a striking divergence of career: 1)
Doniger can be described simply – a frustrated old puMshchali. 2)
Thurman is a middling scholar but generally well-disposed towards the
traditions of dharma. 3) Pollock is the most interesting of all the
American Indologists alive today, but surprisingly the least known to
the average Hindu, despite having been given the padma-shrI puraskAr by
the secular government of India. On one side Pollock is the opposite of
Doniger – he is a solid scholar who has pursued key avenues of Hindu
thought that were begging to be pursued. When I first started looking
into these lines of Hindu historical development there was no Indian or
western student pursuing them. Then I discovered Pollock and, to give
due credit, found him to be taking the course that needed to be taken.
In fact Pollock’s studies cut down several fantasies of some of the
white Indologists including Doniger (as Agrawal has correctly noticed)
and the German gang. However, Pollock is no saint – in fact despite
seeing the truth before his face (and perhaps privately acknowledging
it, for he appears neither schizophrenic nor dumb) he spins of web of
well-crafted obfuscations to deface Hindu history.

Let us look at a well-known example from Pollock that has been
repeatedly quoted by other Hindu-hating dasyu-s in raising rabble about
Hindus and their political institutions.  
Pollock wrote an essay on the historical awareness and interest in the
rAmAyaNa among the Hindu elite (rAmAyaNa and the Political Imagination
in India, Journal of Asian Studies, Vol 52, No.2 1993). Here Pollock
claimed that the rAmAyaNa has been a key part of the Hindu awareness and
has inspired Hindu political systems for at least a 1000 years. Even as
Pollock was making this claim, other assorted mlechCha Indologists and
Hindu haters claimed that the interest in Ayodhya was due to Ramanand
Sagar’s popular Hindi TV serial on the itihAsa. Now various Hindus
pointed out that Ramanand had little to do with the popularity of the
rAmAyaNa and the popularity of his TV serial was because the epic is one
of the first things a real Hindu learns in his life. Several people saw
Pollock’s position as supporting the Hindu position that rAmachandra’s
life and thereby Ayodhya had been important to the Hindus even before
Babar had demolished the temple to build his eye-sore of a “disputed
structure”. Filled with indignation, Lorenzen, a mlechCha well-known for
his studies on kApAlika-s and kAlAmukha-s, declared the essay of Pollock
to be “deeply flawed”. This shows how the mlechCha-s are sensitive to
even the slightest chance of the Hindu position being reality. However,
Pollock, as a true-blooded, Malhotran U-turning mlechCha clarified that
his article was woefully misinterpreted and that it was really meant as
a critique of Hindu nationalism and of the “instrumentalization” of the
rAmAyaNa for political dominance and manipulation by the Hindu elite.
Once he clarified the matter, Pollock’s article became dear to the
assorted South Asianist dasyu-s who have no better business than to
meddle in our affairs.  
Says Pollock:  
“If the rAmAyaNa has served for 1,000 years as a code in which
proto-communalists relations could be activated and theocratic
legitimation could rendered…it makes sense that it would be through this
mytheme par excellence that reactionary politics in India today would
find expression in the interests of a theocratization of the state and
the creation of an internal enemy as necessary antithesis.”  
There can be little doubt that Pollock is very clear in his conclusion
here. Yet, elsewhere in an interview to another Hindu-hater Pollock
states:  
“Of course, every imperial ruler shared the same basic goals. They
wanted to beat up a lot of people and take their money. But they all did
it in different ways–Augustus and Darius said they did it because god
was on their side, whether Jupiter or Ahura Mazda, and he had granted
them the title to the whole world. But no one in South Asia ever
appointed a divine real estate agent–it’s a very important distinction
in the history of political thought.”

So the man is master of what our yavana cousins called eristics\! This
is his device of obfuscation of Indic history by talking both ways and
trying to present the facts and at the same time be a true-blood member
of the mlechCha academia that gangs up against Hindus to sign
instruments like the vatsala-patrikA.

Here I am just presenting a political and not a scholarly analysis of
Pollock. To briefly mention scholarly issues, as Agrawal points out
Pollock is totally wrong when he saw the rAmAyaNa as being
“instrumentalized” in the foundation of vijayanagara by the Hindu
elite. It would do him good to read the Sanskrit and vernacular
inscriptions of the Andhran shUdra chiefs of the kamma and reDDI jAti-s
in the great struggle against the turuShka-s to figure out what was
common the common inspiration with the kShatriya rAjput-s of northern
India. On another scholarly point Pollock is wrong again when he states
that pR^ithivirAja ChAhamAna “instrumentalized” the rAmAyaNa to create a
sense of otherness against the turuShka-s, thereby resulting it the rise
in popularity of the text in Hindu political discourse. Interested
students might take these up further to understand the details. Other
Hindus thought that when Pollock described many former German
Indologists as Nazis (including the predecessors of the modern German
gang, like the one in Harvard) he was doing them a favor. This was not
at all the case – in fact this was just a part of the larger canvas of
the well-know Euro-American academic tactic of painting Hindus as Nazis
and Al-Qaeda. For a flavor, I will just present a quote from a dasyu who
interviewed Pollock:  
“Although cosmopolitanism might be viewed as a solution to some
problems, a fear also exists that across the world people are forgetting
their own literary cultures and traditions and learning the cosmopolitan
English, absorbing themselves in Hollywood movies and Western goods.
This worry has prompted a backlash, from the violence of Al Qaeda to the
militant Hinduism of the ruling party in India, whose paramilitary
organizations were recently involved in a massacre of more than 2,000
Muslims in the state of Gujarat.”

All these lead us towards the domain considered by Malhotra – the
concerted action against Hindus in mlechCha academia and its extension
to geopolitical action. Despite notable differences between themselves
in method, scholarly rigor and theoretical frameworks these mlechCha-s
scholars converge on one point – being dharma virodhin-s. Doniger and
vatsala might hate each other but they sound the same when talking of
“Hindu fundamentalism” and the like. The American Pollock might accuse
the German Indologists of being Nazis, but, as the vatsala-patrikA
incident indicated, he might join hands with the Germans, and also a
motley crowd of Dravidian chauvinists, pretAcharin-s and Dalit saboteurs
in trampling on Hindus. This is also true when viewed in the larger
American political context. As we have seen before the Euro-American
academia is a refugium for the Marxists. The majority of Euro-American
academics are overt or covert Marxists – the like to call themselves
liberals to fool others but this is merely a self-flattering tag they
give themselves. Marxism is a tremendous psychological dependency for
these academics, because it helps them feel superior to others. But when
it comes to Hindus they are aligned in opinion with the fundamentalist,
reactionary and authoritarian GOP, to use their preferred language and
labels. As we have seen before socialism, which animates these
Euro-American academics, is merely a secular version of Abrahamistic
thought (remember the dreaded words “secular, socialist…” in the modern
constitution of the republic of India?). Both religious Abrahamisms and
its secular sister Marxism are prone to committing genocides on people
who refuse to accept their one size fits all world view. When they
encounter a superior and un-yielding rival worldview in the form of
dharma, which more consonant with the natural world, they naturally feel
threatened. Thus, we see them aligning in their war against dharma,
whatever the differences within themselves. Importantly, the dominant
pretAchara-oriented mlechCha-rAjya sees the socialist academics as
weapon that can be use against the dharma.

Now, the concerted attacks against the Hindu sAdhus, AchArya-s and
“god-men”, like the one that was recently seen, are something where
this alignment of vectors is very apparent. Now for an educated,
textually and/or ritually inclined and educated Hindu most of these
“global guru-s” are not very important because they have their own
“local teachers” who educate them in the shruti, kalpa, Agama, dharma,
darshana and sAhitya. Yet, the social significance of the “global
guru-s” cannot be understated when we come to the Hindu masses and the
confused modern Hindus. Some of them are members or offshoots of
different medieval sampradAya-s of the bhakti-mArga (e.g. the
gauDIya-s), other upholders of the traditions of the shAstra-s (e.g. the
sha\~NkarAcharya-s), still others yogin-s of all hues, and yet others
pAShaNDa-s encouraging differing degrees of nara-stuti and neomorphic
traditions without proper foundations. Now this element of nara-stuti is
a continuation of an old strain in Hindu tradition that was first
effectively used by the tathAgata to present himself as the R^iShi of
the true shruti and also as one who is “above” the devatA-s. This
attraction of the lay Hindu masses towards nara-pUjA is a major problem
for the pretAcharin-s because they are busy trying to peddle their own
nara, whose shava hangs from a shUla. But then a charismatic living nara
is any day more potent for the masses than one who dangled on a shUla
two thousand years ago. So the followers of the preta-mata try their
best to bring down the various pUjya nara-s operating in bhAratavarSha
or in mlechCha desha itself.

Now for a detour: In our late school or early college day our friend ST
used to perform a hilarious routine of impersonating a Hindi film
actress by wearing large eye-glasses, and singing a catchy tune while
appearing to sway under the influence of oShadhI-s or mAdhvI-pAna-s.
That lyric used to incorporate a neo-mantra of the gauDIya vaiShNava
tradition. While I am neither proponent nor exponent of the
bhakti-mArga, the question did arise – is the Hindu bhakti mArga the way
of substance abusers?

While this may seem like just a frivolous on-screen depiction, the
reality is that there were several academic papers written (in the
1970-80s) that were aligned with this picture and painted the gauDIya-s
as dangerous to the mental health of mlechChas. Now, irrespective of
what we might think of the gauDIya-s, this was clearly part of a
concerted attack where the academics were aligned against a group of
Hindu origin along with the rest of the mlechCha apparatus, including
participation in court cases against them. Now the same pattern of
coordination between the academics and extra-academic forces came up in
the action against muktAnanda after his seduction by shveta-striyaH. Now
this coordination of the attacks is what Malhotra emphasizes in his
latest article, where he shows how nityAnanda was targeted rather
systematically by the antagonistic forces. This type of coordination has
the signature of only two groups the preta-mata and the dAti-mudgarau.
It is interesting to note from the vatsala-patrikA incident during the
California textbooks affair how the white Indologists and their sepoys
showed exactly the same type of coordination, mobilizing pretAcharin-s,
Dravidianists and dalitists to launch a coordinated strike on the
Hindus. This organization, coupled with the fact they never organize for
any pro-Hindu cause,despite their claims of deep love for the Hindus,
suggests that they are indeed merely a wing of the larger mlechCha
structure bearing down on the pagans. For example, have you ever seen
white Indologists protest Islamic and communist atrocities in greater
India? In fact many of them depend on Nepal for the preservation of the
texts they use in their academic studies – Pollock for instance is well
aware of this. But have you ever seen them organize a protest or
participate in political action against the Nepali rudhira-dhvaja-s? No,
they are after all comrades, so what does it matter if they burn down a
library of Sanskrit manuscripts. But when it comes to meddling in Indian
politics, i.e. bringing down the Hindutva movement, they are at the
forefront spinning lies. No doubt the kAngress government gave Pollock a
padmashrI.

Apart from direct meddling, the leftist academics serve as the
intellectual resource for the attack on the Hindus – they have already
created material that shows the Hindu structures as depraved and
decadent. So there are ready references in the form of their works to be
used when such  incidents with an amukAnanda need to be given an airing.
It should be noted that this type of mlechCha scholarship is a part of
the psy-ops going on since the English conquest of India. Rabindranath
Tagore in his history of bhAratavarSha (1903 CE) states:

“From the invasion of Mahmud to the arrogant imperial declaration of
Lord Curzon, all the historical annals till yesterday, are only a mass
of strange mist for Bharatavarsha. These accounts do not give clarity to
our vision of our motherland. In fact, these only serve to cloud it.
These accounts throw a beam of artificial light on such a spot that in
our own eyes the very profile of our country is made dark.”  
This declaration by Tagore is a result of the subversion of historical
thought initiated by the Britons and continuing to date in the works of
modern white indologists and South Asianists (who by adopting this name
want to deny the very name of India). As a result the Hindu masses labor
under the weight of implanted Abrahamistic constructs (secular or
Christian or Islamic). Several centuries ago the jaina polymath Acharya
hemachandra, in order to attain siddhi of a certain mantra performed
yoni sAdhana with a vaishya woman. This was recorded in his hagiography
and no one made a big deal of it. A century ago vivekAnanda was closely
associated with a mlechCha woman (sister niveditA); thereafter Aurobindo
was associated with an Algerian Jewish woman; people did not make big
deal of it. What has changed today – the implant has succeeded in
subverting the Hindu mind.

“If you tell them these things they will say you are a conspiracy
theorist”
