+++
title = "Pitch of male vocalization"

+++
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-OqIQgwt4T0s/Tq2LaOq1ApI/AAAAAAAACQ0/RAK0x7Pyb20/s400/African_Baboon.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/DKW_B9xNXF2e-M57EHXeGA?feat=embedwebsite)  
A primate male at his peak with his weaponry

The densely peopled lands of bhArata, where resources are limiting and
intra-specific competition is intense, one has some of the finest
opportunities to savor the ethology of the third chimpanzee. Many moons
ago when we had just transitioned to college we observed that several
males were taking the puff unconstrained by the strictures that
characterized school life. We observed, that such smokers typically drew
a bevy of women around them. We were discussing cause of this effect
with kalashajA. Our own reasoning went along the lines of the handicap
principle: The puffing we reasoned was signaled to the females that the
individuals had good genes as they were apparently functional despite
imbibing toxins. On the other hand aurvasheyI argued that the typical
female would simply not see handicap in smoking and that the handicap
principle worked only for the guys who imbibed far more injurious
substances such as “iodex” or kerosene. Instead, she hypothesized that
smoking damaged the vocal cords and upon healing they were left with a
lower pitch and that females were attracted towards males with
low-pitched voices. Of course neither of us tested these hypothesis and
at best continued to gather anecdotal observations. To be fair,
kalashajA made an attempt with langurs about 3 years after that
conversation during her month’s foray into some forest in Madhya
Pradesh, but was unable to come up with statistically significant
results beyond some evidence for sex differences pitch of vocalization.
More recently, we revisited the issue of pitch in primate vocalizations:
there have been several studies showing that the screeches of lion
tailed monkeys and Japanese monkeys, the grunts of baboons, and the
screams of chimpanzees and bonobos just like our own vocalizations are
sexually dimorphic. For example, the vowel-like grunts of baboons, like
human vowels are uttered at lower pitches by males than females. So the
the lower pitch of male vocalizations probably go back to the common
ancestor of catarrhines at which point the sexual dimorphism in size
became pronounced. Coming to the issue of sexual dimorphism in pitch, it
is clear that the male pitch responds to testosterone due to steroid
receptors in the vocal folds initiating a distinct developmental program
at puberty (thickening and lengthening) and the descent of the larynx is
greater in males reaching its maximum depth at puberty. Thus, the pitch
can theoretically convey the testosterone status of a male and thus be
subject to selection by females because they are on the look out for
males with higher testosterone.

On the other hand an alternative, though related, effect can occur: As
voice pitch indicates testosterone status it might signal to other males
the aggressiveness of a male (proxy for testosterone status) in the
course of male-male conflicts. Secondly, as the descent of the larynx
also decides the pitch and energy of the vocalization, bigger males are
likely to have a longer vocal tract resulting in a lower pitch higher
energy sounds; thus, pitch could also convey the size of males and
thereby his threat potential to other males. Given these factors
selection for lower pitch in males could be a consequence of the
pressures from male-male conflict – indeed, low pitched high energy
vocalization is a well-known contributor to dominance behavior. This
leaves us with the question of did lower pitch in males evolve due to
female driven sexual selection or did it arise as consequence of
selection from male-male conflicts? In the latter case the females are
merely cuing on to it because they are seeking indicators for males
likely to be successful in male-male conflicts. Ethological studies in
both western societies and the hunter-gatherers of the Hadza tribe in
Africa suggest that males with lower pitched vocalization sire more
children. Further, females who are breast-feeding infants tended to
prefer higher-pitched men – suggesting that they perceive potential
threat to their genes from high testosterone males in this period.
Finally, low-pitch was found to be positively correlated with high
testosterone, propensity for aggression and to some degree with size and
in males. So the available data does strongly suggest that lower pitch
is related to reproductive success and is a proxy for male fitness and
conflict capability in humans, but this does not answer whether the
difference evolved under female selection or male-male conflict. Given
the evidence from vocalizations in dominance behavior in baboons and
other monkeys, the phylogenetic argument would be that lower pitch
primarily arose in the context of male-male conflicts, and female merely
use it as an indicator to choose males who would emerge successful in
such conflicts.

However, we further suspect that female use of voice pitch in mate
selection in Homo sapiens might be placed under the framework of the
theory of Gauri Pradhan and van Schaik. They postulate:  
*“Females maximize their fitness when they can freely choose their
mates, but males are expected to use sexually dimorphic weaponry not
only to displace other males, but also to overcome female preferences
and thus acquire matings by force whenever they can. Females should
therefore avoid coercive males and avoid using weaponry as a criterion
for male quality wherever possible, and rely on male viability
indicators that cannot be used to coerce females (i.e. ornaments).”*  
In catarrhine primates, like the baboon, the langur, orangutan, gorilla
and chimpanzee, males possess formidable sexually dimorphic weaponry
that can be used in coercing females. But apparently after the
divergence of the chimpanzee from the line leading to Homo there appear
to have been certain subtle changes in social organization and notable
changes in morphology in the latter that resulted in greater female
ability to prevent mating attempts by non-preferred males. This
conferred fitness benefits to females in being able to more freely
choose males and thereby set off a selection against choosing by
weaponry and selection for choosing by ornaments. In this scenario male
vocal pitch was used as an ornament that did not enable coercion (as
against large canines) in mate choice by females, but at the same time
had value in male-male conflicts for its dominance function. On the
other hand, high vocal pitch in females signals greater femininity
(higher estrogen) to males and increases near ovulation signaling
reproductive capability to males. Thus, there has been a direct
selection for higher pitch in females by males.
