+++
title = "The proto-Australoid deep withinxa0us"

+++
Molecular biology is establishing that there might be an element of
truth in the quaint anthropological conjectures of Franz Weidenrich. The
Indian subcontinent is of enormous interest in terms of being a major
center for admixture of distinct human clades. Unfortunately its human
biodiversity has not be subject to molecular analysis to the extant one
would like. Two recent molecular studies respectively on the negritos
and their relationships with the Denisovans, the archaic sister group of
the Neanderthals, and on the genome of the Australian aborigine has
provided material of interest from the viewpoint of the peopling of
India. From these studies it appears that there were multiple waves of
human migration eastward after a single exit from Africa.

The paper by Reich et al presents the following model which is best
summarized by the admixture graph they obtain (below).

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-fipSe0UN_m0/ToQWAheYgtI/AAAAAAAACOY/Y3OUP5weBio/s400/Negritos.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/BNGxxLA_kwr13un8APiBGA?feat=embedwebsite)

The interpretation of this graph when combined with other data may be
done thus:  
In Africa the deepest branch of humanity are the Bushmen who broke off
from the rest of us around 110-150,000 years bp. After a long history in
Africa the amounting to a several tens of thousands of years a single
clade of humans left Africa via the West Asia. The human clade that left
Africa first encountered the Neanderthals, probably in the West Asia.
The mating between the Neanderthals and the Homo sapiens just coming out
of Africa resulted in an mixed population in which about 1.3 % of the
genome was contributed by the Neanderthals. Given that Australia and
Papua New Guinea (greater Australia) was already peopled by around 50,
000 years bp. This migration out of Africa was certainly before that
time \~50-60,000 yrs bp. The last Neanderthals are supposed to have
lived between 20-30,000 years bp, suggesting that at least in some parts
of Eurasia the Neanderthals and H.sapiens were interacting for several
thousand years. This might explain the Neanderthaloid features in some
early European H.sapiens populations. The out of Africa clade broke up
into three major branches: The exact order of bifurcation between the
three branches is currently ambiguous; hence, the three are collapsed to
a trifurcation in the graph. The first branch appears to have spread
widely through Asia and eventually contributed to the genetic heritage
of the original humans of Papua New Guinea and finally Australia
(together greater Australia) before 50,000 years BP. This wave appears
to have mated with the archaic sister group of the Neanderthals, the
Denisovans, in South-East Asia and up to 7% of their genome originally
came to be Denisovan in origin. This suggests that the aborigines and
Papuans are one surviving group of humans outside Africa for which we
are certain of substantial archaic Homo admixture, well over the
Neanderthal levels. The second branch is currently represented in an
apparently pristine form by the stoneage Onge tribe of the Andamans – a
negrito group. This branch clearly shows no Denisovan admixture. This
branch spread over the the Malay archipelago and became the second wave
to advance towards greater Australia. This wave diluted the
Denisovan-mixed first wave such that they came to be about 4% Denisovan
today. In light of the Denisovan admixture it is interesting to note
that certain archaic features are seen in the fossil Australians from
Kow Swamp. The 3rd branch gave rise to the classical Eurasians. Around
35,000 years BP this branch split up into Eastern Eurasians (Asians) and
Western Eurasians. The Asians pushed eastwards spreading through Asia
and finally advanced towards South-East Asia. Here in Philippines they
encountered a relict of the first branch which had mated with the
Denisovans but had no admixture with the second wave (ie. the branch
represented by the Onge). Their mating resulted in the formation of
Negrito tribes represented by the Mamanwa. This admixture between the
early Asians (wave 3) and the first wave with Denisovan admixture also
seems to have contributed to the Manobo tribe of the Philippines. In
Malaysia the Asians encountered the members of the second wave
(Onge-like wave) and mated with them resulting in the negrito tribes
like the Jehai. They continued moving east contributing to different
degrees to various populations of the islands of proximal Oceania except
the Papuans and Australians. In mainland Asia the Asians split up into
northern southern Asians with a branch of northern Asians moving into
the Beringia and from there eventually into the Americas to give rise to
the Paleoamericans.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-o0pbuX8pcqE/ToVk9BuVlJI/AAAAAAAACOg/owl6FDH1qQA/s400/Onge_ASI.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/RaECEZCgkZzGhUuBOrso0A?feat=embedwebsite)

So what about India in this picture?  
We may go back to the earlier work by Reich et al in which they had
shown that the Onge and the “Ancestral South Indians” (ASI), more
correctly proto-Indians, form a clade to the exclusion of others (See
above). The split between the ASI and the Onge predates the admixture of
the ASI and the ancestral north Indians (ANI). Like the Onge, the
Indians show no hint of Denisovan ancestory. This gives us the important
clue that the second branch of the above description moved into India to
contribute to the genetic heritage of the ASI. So the common genetic
heritage between the Indians and the Aborigines comes from the shared
connection of the second wave. One question arises: Did the second
branch, which gave rise to the ancestors of the ASI and the Onge reach
greater Australia and mate with Denisovan-mixed first branch or did that
mating happen somewhere else? First, there is no evidence for Denisovan
admixture in India, the Andamans or the Malaysian Jehai, all of whom
share a common ancestry in the form of the second branch. All Denisovan
admixture is only seen in populations eastwards from Borneo. Next, there
is no evidence for the second branch having mixed with the
Denisovan-mixed first branch in the Philippines. Thus it is clear that
the first and the second branch did not mix before the first branch had
mixed with the Denisovans. So clearly the admixture happened only
between a sub-population of the first and the incoming wave of the
second branch eastwards of Borneo. This also suggests that the second
branch took a route into South-East Asia that was different from the
first and the Denisovans before them. In all likelihood it was via
Malaysia and Southern islands in the Indonesian chain rather than via
the northern route including Philippines, which is likely to have been
the path of the Denisovans and the first branch. All the currently
sampled Greater Australian populations show the second branch admixture;
hence, it is clear that the first and second branch were already mixed
before they fanned into greater Australia. Based on this we might
tentatively conclude that the first branch was reached by the second
branch somewhere East of Borneo and South of Philippines resulting in
the admixture that gave rise to the proto-Australian. Thus, in this
model the proto-Australians themselves already had a significant second
branch genetic heritage, one shared with the proto-Indians. This makes
some sense in light of the so called “Proto-Australoid” morphological
features reported in several Indian tribes in physical anthropology.
This is also supported by the results of the K-means clustering
performed using the genetic variation data derived from the Aborigine
genome work.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-6hWRzgG4puc/TodqCrCblZI/AAAAAAAACOo/zX2ZoZmAnF0/s800/Kmeans_populations.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Ed8pd1e6Dxp8470pwY4tsA?feat=embedwebsite)

The next question of note is what happened to the ASI in India – did
they remain isolated till the “ancestral North Indians (ANI)” moved in
or did they mix with any other group? Both the above K-means clustering
from the Aborigine genome work and the PCA analysis from Reich et al’s
earlier work suggest that in part the ASI might have undergone admixture
at different points with Asians. One of these might have been a fairly
early admixture with a southern branch of Asians moving in via Northern
and central India, through eastern India into Burma and Indochina.
Asians also extensively mixed with the second branch and the first
branch or a mixture of the two throughout South-East Asia but probably
did not reach Australia itself.

In India, finally there was the influx of the western Eurasians or the
ANI. The main point showed by Reich et al was that the ANI form a clade
with the Europeans to the exclusion of the Caucasian Adygei. This is
likely to approximately correspond to the origin of the ancestral IE
people. This can be conservatively estimated as around 8000-6000 years
bp. The biggest admixture between the ANI and the ASI can be
conservatively estimated at 4000-3000 years bp. This suggests the major
western Eurasian wave into India is most likely the famous Aryan
Invasion. Most populations of greater India have an admixture of this
wave along with underlying proto-Indian and in several cases Asian
branches. The Indians are somewhat unique in combining the distinct
genetic heritages of more than one branch of the early out of Africa
radiation in their genome. Of course the degree of these inheritances
shows a clear correlation with varNa and tribal affinity – moving from
brAhmaNa to tribe via shUdra-s and avarNa-s there is a decrease in
western Eurasian contribution and increase in proto-India and Asian
contributions.

The distribution of the Denisovans inferred from the admixture data is
rather puzzling because there is no sign of them in the Asians, though
they were first identified in Siberia from 41,000 year old site. One
possibility is that they became extinct before the Asians ever came into
their current zone. But one must bear in mind that the history of the
Asians is complex in itself – the early Asians appear to have been
washed out by an explosive expansion of the more Sinitic variety of
Asian. This is suggested by the Y-chromosome haplotype D which is seen
in Tibetans, Japanese (including Ainu) and several non-Onge Andamanese.
The D haplotype bearing population needs to been investigated more
closely, and might represent a component of the old Asian wave. But the
lack of Denisovan DNA in Japan, all studied Chinese groups, non-Onge
Andamanese and South-East Asian populations suggests that they were
indeed gone even before these early Asians arrived. However, to get to
the islands of Philippines and the Indonesian chain the Denisovans
should have once been in Asia. It remains unclear as to what led to
their extinction. Greater India (including Shri Lanka) has been a land
where archaisms survive rather long. One remarkable case is the survival
of stone age technology of microlith manufacture among tribes in Madhya
Pradesh and the Veddas of Lanka. Most remarkably these MP tribesman were
making microliths resembling those from the Neolithic from porcelain
electrical insulators in the 1900s\! Indeed, in a similar vein even
archaic Homo species appears to have persisted rather long in India if
we go by their tools – there are no fossils other than the famous
Narmada cranium. In light of this one wonders if there was a distinct
archaic Homo species that persisted in India to mix with the ASI.
Plumbing the ASI genome might be interesting in this regard.
