+++
title = "On poposaurs"

+++
We had begun a narration of one of the most notable events in the
evolution of vertebrates, i.e., the radiation of the archosauriformes
after the Permian-Triassic transition. We held back from going ahead
with it because we became aware that a new comprehensive work was to be
published in this regard. Finally, this work by Nesbitt has been
published and with it have come several other major descriptions of
Triassic archosauriformes. There are many aspects stemming from these
papers that are worthy of discussion, but here we shall restrict
ourselves to the poposaurs. The poposaurs first came to be known with
the recovery by Mehl in 1915 of a fragmentary fossil from the Popo Agie
Formation, Wyoming. This fossil comprised of just a few vertebrae,
pelvic elements and femora and became the holotype of Poposaurus. Its
unusual morphology attracted the some of the famous paleontologists of
yore and led to a series of confusing hypothesis regarding its
affinities: Franz von Nopsca suggested that it was an ornithischian,
Friedrich von Huene felt it was a stegosaur and Edwin Colbert proposed
it to be a theropod. Finally, in 1969 the astute observations of [Alick
Walker](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/01/28/alick-walker/)
showed that it was a member of the crocodile-line rather than the
dinosaur-line of archosaurs. Just recently a more complete specimen of
Poposaurus was recovered and given a preliminary description by Gauthier
et al. This specimen covers most of the post-cranial skeleton though it
lacks much of the skull. The affinities of Poposaurus within the
[crocodile-line](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/12/19/crocodiles-in-the-shadow-of-the-dinosaurs/)
were further confused by the presence of other crocodile-line archosaurs
co-occurring with it, such as Heptasuchus and Postosuchus. So some
workers thought that Poposaurus was actually the same or related to
these forms. The new cladistic studies of Nesbitt have strongly
confirmed that it belongs to the crocodile-line and defines a
distinctive clade within the early radiation of this lineages. This
poposauroid clade includes: as its basal-most branch the engimatic
Qianosuchus from the Anisian (Middle Triassic) marine deposits; the
sail-backed forms Xilousuchus from the Olenekian age (early Triassic)
and Arizonasaurus from the Anisian age; Poposaurus from the
Carnian/Norian (late Triassic); the peculiar Lotosaurus from the
Anisian; Sillosuchus from the Carnian/Norian; the ostrich mimic like
Shuvosaurus (Norian) and Effigia (Norian/Rhaetian). Thus, it appears
that the poposauroid clade flourished for at least 50 million years
between from around 250 mya to 201.5 mya when most of the
crocodile-line, except the crocodiles themselves, was wiped out by the
Triassic-end mass extinction. The stability of the poposauroid clade is
also supported by its recovery in independent phylogenetic analyses by
Brusatte et al, Langer and Lautenschlager with similar topologies to
that recover by Nesbitt.

In addition to the above forms, a number of other forms appear to be
members of the poposauroid clade: One of the most interesting of these
is Yarasuchus from the Yerrapalli Formation near the Rechni village in
Andhra (Anisian age). Others include Bromsgroveia from the Anisian of
England, Hypselorhachis from the Manda beds of Tanzania (Anisian) and
Ctenosauriscus from the Buntsandstein beds of Germany (probably
Anisian). By the middle Triassic, or probably even earlier, the
poposaurs exploded across Pangea occupying diverse niches across the
world. Their Pangean distribution is supported by the recovery of
Yarasuchus in India, Qianosuchus, Xilousuchus and Lotosaurus in China,
Bromsgroveia and Ctenosauriscus in Europe, Hypselorhachis in Africa,
Poposaurus, Arizonasaurus, Shuvosaurus and Effigia in North America and
Sillosuchus in South America. This worldwide adaptive radiation of the
poposaurs was accompanied by the stabilization of several disparate
morphotypes which might have corresponded to the different niches they
occupied. We shall briefly consider some these below.

*Yarasuchus and Qianosuchus:* These two forms emerge as the basal-most
poposauroids in different phylogenetic analysis. Both possess certain
set of comparable features such as a long neck, small coracoid, curved
serrated teeth, leaf-shaped osteoderms and a deep tail. Qianosuchus was
found in marine deposits and features such as the deep laterally
compressed tail with prominent neural spines, and considerable reduction
of the osteoderms might be correlated with a marine lifestyle. However,
in contrast its well-developed hind limbs with little ability to splay
them laterally (note the prominent supra-acetabular crest on the ilium)
appear to be indicative of an erect gait. The skull was equipped with
dagger-like teeth with nine on the premaxilla that resemble those of
other predatory crocodile-line forms such as Saurosuchus, Prestosuchus
and Ticinosuchus. Such teeth are different from the more conical and
straight forms found in reptiles with a predominantly piscivorous diet.
Together these features suggest that Qianosuchus might have been
primarily competent as a terrestrial predator and it probably made
facultative forays into the sea for food. A similar possibility presents
itself with another crocodile-line archosaur, Ticinosuchus, which is not
a poposauroid. While showing predominantly terrestrial adaptations in
the skeleton, it was found in marine deposits along with its last meal
of fish. This suggests that several of the early terrestrial
archosauriformes were competent swimmers that probably hunted fish out
at sea. This proclivity might have favored the emergence (semi)aquatic
forms on multiple occasions during archosauriform evolution, as
suggested by the basal proterochampsids and phytosaurs in the Triassic
and the crocodiles later in the Mesozoic (The aquatic birds are kept out
of this enumeration because they appear to be a distinctive
re-acquisition of such a lifestyle via a different evolutionary path
followed by the dinosaur-line).

Yarasuchus, in contrast, shows no indications of a marine association
being found alongside a typically terrestrial fauna, which includes the
dicynodonts Wadiasaurus and Rechnisaurus, the prolacertid Pamelaria,
cynodont stem-mammals (known from teeth) and possibly a stem-archosaur
known from fragmentary remains that has been compared with Erythrosuchus
without much justification. However, the environment typified by the
Yerrapalli formation was certainly characterized by seasonal or
permanent water bodies as indicated by the recovery of lung fish
denticles/scales and a fragmentary fossil of a temnospondyl of
capitosauroid clade comparable to Parotosuchus. Sen proposed it to be a
facultative biped in its original description and this is not
incompatible with the evidence emerging from other poposauroids. Thus,
Yarrasuchus might mark the first emergence of one type of body plan in
the poposauroids namely that of a fleet-footed long-necked predator of
relatively small prey.

*The sail-backs:* Xilousuchus, Arizonasaurus, Hypselorhachis and
Ctenosauriscus are united into a sail-backed clade of poposaurs. The
clade is one of the earliest crown archosaur lineages to have been
currently identified, with Xilousuchus appear beside Fugusuchus, a stem
archosaur related to Erythrosuchus, and a fragmentary form perhaps
related to Proterosuchus. The exact function of their sails remains
poorly known. While some have suggested thermoregulation, the sporadic
occurrence of this feature across synapsids and archosaurs (both of the
crocodile-line and dinosaur-line) points more in the direction of it
being a potential intra-specific and sexual signal.

*Poposaurus and Bromsgroveia:* These appear to represent a distinct
clade of poposaurs that were agile bipedal carnivores that might have
tackled larger prey than the small-headed Yarasuchus. Gauthier et al.’s
detailed analysis suggests that Poposaurus was an obligate biped based
on its erect hind-limbs constrained by a supra-acetabular buttress and
extremely short forelimbs which they compare to the dinosaur
Coelophysis. Given the presence of an upright posture in the phytosaurs,
which are stem archosaurs, and the narrow-gauge tracks of early
archosauriforms of the crocodile-line, such as the Cheirotherium tracks,
it is inferred that all poposaurs were upright in their gait and
shortening of their forelimbs led to emergence of bipedal locomotion
possibly on multiple occasions. On the other hand, using similar logic
it might also be inferred that bipedalism was more widely distributed in
the crocodile-line with the rauisuchids proper (i.e. sisters of
Postosuchus to the exclusion of poposaurs, prestosuchids and crocodiles)
and perhaps ornithosuchids being bipedal. It this were the case then
bipedalism could have even emerged in the basal crocodile-line
archosaurs. Similarly, it is possible that the dinosaur-line was also
basally bipedal (inferred based on Scleromochlus, and the basal
dinosauromorphs, Lagerpeton and Marasuchus). This could be extended to
infer bipedalism at the base of archosauria with repeated return
quadrupedal gaits in both the lines.

*Lotosaurus:* While Lotosaurus is sail-backed form like those described
above, it differs from all of them in having peculiar jaws entirely
lacking teeth. This latter feature is shared in common with the
shuvosaur clade (see below), and Lotosaurus accordingly groups with them
in Nesbitt’s analysis. In this respect it marks one of the earliest
known appearances in archosaurs a structure that was repeatedly to
appear in both dinosaur-line and crocodile-line archosaur – the beak.
Studies of MSY Lee suggest a remarkable evolutionary link between the
presence of a caruncle as opposed to regular egg-teeth and the origin of
beaks. While both these structures serve a similar function in the
perforation of the egg-shell during hatching, the caruncle is a
transitory thickening and calcification of the epidermis, whereas the
egg-tooth is a true dentinous tooth. In Lee’s theory the caruncle
optimizes as a synapomorphy of amniotes and is seen in monotremes, the
tuatara, archosaurs and turtles. It has been lost entirely in the
therian mammals and in squamates has been displaced by the egg-tooth.
Consistent with this beaks emerge only the amniotes that retain a
caruncle (that is why no therian has a beak): Among synapsids it has
emerged in the enigmatic Dimacrodon, dicynodonts and monotremes like the
platypus. In the diapsids it is has emerged in the sphenodontians, and
multiply in archosauromorphs, such as trilophosaurs, rynchosaurs,
turtles, hupehsuchids and more than one occasion in the crocodile-line
and several occasions in the dinosaur-line. In the crocodile-line the
poposaurs and aetosaurs appear to represent two independent cases of
acquisition of the beak. In general the weight of the evidence seems to
support the Lee theory of the origin of the amniote beak: e.g. the
presence of a caruncle on both jaws in several lineages of birds
(associated with beak formation on both jaws), and the caruncle serve as
the initial center for beak keratinization. In any case it is worth
noting that the beak seems to have emerged independently far more
frequently in the archosauromorph lineage. In light of this, we suspect
that there was an additional predisposing factor that tipped the
archosauromorphs towards evolving beaks. Based on the phylogenetic
analysis of reptilian beta keratins we suspect that this factor might be
the emergence of an archosauromorph-specific clade of beta keratins (the
basal-most of the archosauromorph keratin clades).

*Sillosuchus and the ornithomimosaur mimics:* These forms are also
likely to have been obligate bipeds. Of these Shuvosaurus and Effigia
were strikingly convergent with the ornithomimosaurs, complete with
toothless beaked jaws. While they were much smaller forms, Sillosuchus
is a gigantic form reaching up to 10 meters in length. Sillosuchus is
interesting in that it preserves the pneumatic recess marking the
invasion of the air sacs into the cervical and dorsal vertebrae. This
supports the emergence of the air sac system prior to the archosaurian
radiation (note their possible presence in Erythrosuchus). The large
size of Sillosuchus suggests that these forms had probably acquired
herbivory, a feature potentially shared with Lotosaurus.

Thus it is rather remarkable that the single clade of stem crocodiles,
poposauroids diversified into so many different morphotypes and
corresponding ecological niches.
