+++
title = "The mechanical, the magical and thexa0fantastic"

+++
She said: “You had promised the robots of king bhoja even as we had
engaged in the mirth of the chUta-latikA and bhUtamAtR^ikA. The answer
to why vikrama had his vetAla while bhoja had his throne statues ? Did
you include the paramAra’s witch? ”  
The paramAra’s witch? Was it related to her code word to the special
world? In our mind flashed the verse of rAjA bhoja-deva:  
nashyad-vaktrima-kuntalAnta-lulita svachChAmbu-bindUtkarA   
hasta-svastika-saMyame nava-kucha-prAg-bhAram AtanvatI |  
pInoru-dvaya-lIna-chInavasanA stokAvanamrA jalAt  
tIroddesha-nimeSha-lola-nayanA bAleyam uttiShThati ||

Shaking off streams of drops of clean water from the ends of her curls
obscuring her face, crossing her arms as a svastika to determine the
extant of her fresh breasts, with the Chinese silk skirt clinging to her
firm thighs, bending slightly and casting a momentary glance at the bank
with her eyes, the young lass rises from the water.

The above is vintage bhoja with his hallmark alliterations and points to
a signature of the great rAjA – an ability to capture and convey those
subtleties of the object under consideration so as to allow its
recapitulation by another observant mind who peruses his work. This
holds true of whether bhoja is lavishing his attention on a pretty lass,
the festival of indra, a cicada, a matter of shaiva doctrine, or a piece
of technology. The rAjA composed a work of such portraiture which has
been lost, but several fragments of it were preserved by the Kashmirian
kavi jalhaNa. In this work, in his portrait of a leech, he observes how
the blood meal remains in the gut and can be squeezed out (something you
do before you dissect a leech). He then characterizes, with much
literary beauty, the oxidation of mercury into cinnabar and the
formation of amalgams with other metals. He similarly characterizes the
oxidation of silver and its eventual blackening. This quality of
bhoja-deva’s portraiture touched his successors in many distinct ways.
As an illustration let me point to three of my learned medieval
co-ethnics from the drAviDa country: 1) The illustrious rAjanAtha-I
diNDima in the Vijayanagaran court in his preface to the works of kAvi-s
medieval bhArata mentions bhoja-deva in the very first sarga as a chief
among kavI-s and specifically points to this ability of precise
recreation of the objective experience in bhoja’s portraiture as the
non-dual aesthetic experience or rasAdvaita. 2) rAjanAtha’s wife,
abhirAma-kAmAkShI, an eloquent poetess of her own right, is more touched
by emotional aspect of bhoja’s works and describes it to be nourishing
even as the sun is the energy giver for the people. 3) ve\~NkaTAdhvarin,
the convert to the rAmAnuja-saMpradAya (the author of a brilliant
travelogue of two gandharva-s), notes bhoja-deva to be one of the
greatest of his intellectual predecessors. He appreciates bhoja’s
ability at uncovering the vidyAsthana or the breadth of knowledge in a
given domain by way of illustrating it to the reader so that he might
experience it. Thus, we see that bhoja’s special ability in
pen-portraiture and his literary theory behind this was clearly
understood as being unique by my medieval co-ethnics, among others, who
closely studied his works. Yet, this facet of bhoja is something that
can only be understood by the erudite. It is largely lost on the less
educated, for whom he remains just a legendary ruler the like of which,
at best, very few have existed before and perhaps none there after.

Yet there is something more about bhoja that perhaps eluded even the
great kavI-s after him. The life and the interests of bhoja were
fantastic to them, an extraordinary flash in the twilight of the Hindu
sun. They saw this fantastic world of bhoja as being magical like that
of the other king in their memory, vikramAditya. But there was something
more than just the magical in bhoja’s world. It is this point we hope
touch upon.

vikrama’s magical world was the culmination of the sAdhana of a shaiva
mantra-vAdin – the mastery over a vetAla that would then serve your
purposes. With its subjugation, vikrama had access to enormous magical
capabilities that vetAla brought along. Even in the paramAra period
itself, kings of dhAra identified with vikrama. Hence, it is not
surprising if the later kavI-s imparted the same magical aura on
bhoja-deva who was seen as a fitting “successor” of the sAhasA\~Nka. But
what is often missed is that the fantastic element in bhoja-deva’s world
are his mechanical contrivances – perhaps forgotten behind the tragic
curtain that was beginning to be drawn over Hindu civilization, even as
his reign was inaugurated. These elements might include apparently more
down-to-earth technologies, like the air-conditioned pavilion, that
partly survived in the region, as suggested by the architecture of the
later bundelA rAjA-s. This type of pavilion is mentioned in the
introduction of his shR^i\~NgAra-ma\~njari, where bhoja and his learned
friends retire on a summer day for a literary discussion. From the much
later palaces of the region we learn that these air-conditioning process
involved interesting constructions that facilitated flow of air currents
into the building that were then cooled via passage over water. But
bhoja’s devices were evidently more elaborate with a water-power driven
yantra sending counter-current streams of water to enable more efficient
exchange of heat. But this is just the simplest in the array of
mechanical devices that adorn this pleasure pavilion of the paramAra
monarch. The next contrivance of note is one that filters light of the
blazing Bhopal sun to only allow a diffuse green glow in the pavilion.
But the most striking feature of the pavilion was its yantra-putrikA-s
or robots – bhoja mentions a rather impressive collection which included
those that played drums, those that poured water from their hands,
robotic tortoises and fishes in water and a clock that shows the
muhUrta-s of the day. Rather remarkable is also the pattanikA device
that bhoja-deva mentions in the shR^i\~NgAra-prakAsha. From its
description it appears like a “photographic” device which could take an
detailed image of person on thin piece of cloth – it is said to be have
been used by a man to recognize his woman, via her image that appeared
on the pattanikA. A mundane interpretation of the pattanikA can be that
it was a merely an imprint of the woman’s body based on the pigments she
had smeared on herself. However, it is clear that the pattanikA had the
function of a real image that could be used to identify her
specifically. It takes the place of the drawing made by a pen or brush
that is often mentioned in earlier India literature as means by which
lovers identify each other (for example in daNDin’s
dashakumAra-charita). So it is clear that the pattanikA was rather
unusual innovation, unique to bhoja, taking the place of the common
place drawing/painting of Sanskrit literature. So, was it a part of his
“science-fiction”, like his robot that was supposed to have human
speech ability or was it a real device ( one could think of a wood-cut
printing device, why would one need this when drawings/painting already
existed)? Unfortunately, we may not know because the like of this is
never again seen in Indian literature.

However, of the yantra-s we know more from bhoja’s own text, the
samarA\~NgaNa-sUtradhAra (chapter 31). This work preserves within it
some of the few surviving fragments of old Hindu applied physical
thought. One key point to notice is bhoja’s definition of a yantra: He
begins by stating that the solid, liquid, gaseous, thermal elements and
their underlying substratum space are by nature intimately connected in
existence, actions and movements. But one can regulate the interaction
between these elements in a specific way, and this results in what is
called a yantra (i.e. a machine). Then bhoja explains that a machine
might be decomposed into bIja-s or fundamental constituents which
correspond to its composition, i.e. it being the solid, liquid, gaseous
or thermal element in the machine. These yantra bIja-s by themselves are
not capable of any activity but when two, three or four distinct bIja
types are combined then a yantra capable of work might be formed. In
addition to the combination of the bIja-s involved the diversity of
yantra-s also arises from degree to which a particular bIja is used in
it, with the most vital component being its primary bIja. Thus, bhoja
states:  
bhUtam ekam ihodriktam anyadhInam tato.adhikam | anyadhInataram chAnyad
evam prAyair vikalpitaH | nAnA bhedA bhavanty eShAm kastAn kArtsnena
vashyati |

The solid bIja is described as encompassing at the first level the
materials used in machine construction such as the preferred metals
which are listed as iron, copper, silver, tin and their alloys, wood,
leather and fibers. In different combinations these comprise the next
level the structural components of the yantra and the simple machines
and vectorial elements in it (like levers, pulleys and cogwheels).

The gaseous bIja, primarily air, is capable of function when it is
contained in a tight chamber or when it interfaces with three simple
machine elements, that bhoja describes as bellows (expansion of
contraction of a containing membrane), a windmill or fan (production of
rotation) or a flap (production of oscillatory motion). He mentions four
technical terms as being the primary modes by which the properties of
gaseous bIja of a yantra might be put use: 1) uchChrAya: e.g. the upward
movement of the gas when confined beneath a liquid. 2) Adhikya: The
ability of inducing volumetric increase of a gas. 3)
atyantam-UrdhvAgAmitvam: explosive expansion. 4) ayAsya: fluidity and
ability to occupy space.

The liquid bIja is similarly analyzed with an emphasis on its properties
described by the following technical terms: 1) saMgR^ihIta, i.e., its
ability to accumulate in containers. 2) pUrita, i.e., occupying space.
3) datta – the ability of a liquid to be a uniform interface to transmit
force. 4) pratinodita – the resistance or reaction to compression.

The thermal bIja is present primarily as a source of power for the
yantra. Its main actions can only be elicited via the other three bIja-s
like by heating them to cause expansion, or by providing energy to the
system to favor mixing and finally aid in the dissolution of substances
in liquids.

Then the rAjA explains that the combinations of the bIja-s should be
such as to generate certain types of motions which might include (for
example via a liquid-gas interface) translational motion due to impact
(abhighAta), rotation (vivarta) and revolution (bhramaNa). This
analytical framework in bhoja’s work is a presentation of the ideas of
applied mechanics that had been developed as a result of the sAMkhya and
nyAya-vaisheShika thought in the late vedic and early post-vedic Hindu
world. It clearly shows that bhoja was serious about the yantra-s being
real mechanical entities rather than pure magical one as was imagined by
many later authors. It reinforces the evidence for the great
technological interest in the parmAra court which ranged from monumental
engineering (e.g. the largest artificial lake of the medieval world) to
the creation of yantra-s. While these yantra-putrikA-s were possibly
merely a culmination of an earlier tradition of their manufacture on a
limited scale in the ancient world, it also appears bhoja had a rather
ambitious take on them. We may describe this, in a sense, as even being
futuristic, as he seems to have held the view that these yantra-s could
be taken to their ultimate conclusion – i.e., the yantra-s that can
manufacture human speech. Indeed, in the shR^i\~NgAra ma\~njarI he
conceives robots that would imitate human speech when he is cornered by
his friends to talk about himself; he has the robot provide a
biographical account. Perhaps, his conception of the powered glider or
airplane that we encounter in the samarA\~NgaNa-sutradhAra was in a
similar vein. What were nature of his experiments with them? Of that we
know little. Thus, even the fantastic in the world of bhoja was
ultimately a mechanical one. Verily, it appears that the rAjA might have
been at home in the modern world with many of his yantra-s being really
present. There is no telling where this technological bubble in the
paramAra realm might have headed had it not petered out sometime after
bhoja-deva. Instead, all that survived in the Indic world was the legend
of the throne of vikrama which he ascended that was adorned by talking
images. To me there is no doubt that the choice of talking images was a
faint memory of bhoja’s conception of the talking robot that was to
embellish his court. But the lesson of a great civilization and its
technology ending with the rampage of the shashidhvaja remains relevant
for bhArata even today. If a man of bhoja’s ardor had devoted himself in
entirety to expelling the turuShka-s from the Arya-bhUmI he would
probably done so, but then he chose to do something of everything (After
all, he gave refuge to the last shAhIya trilochanapAla of gandhAra who
was driven out after a heroic struggle against Mahmud Ghaznavi and led
an army to expel the turuShka-s from pa\~nchAla and vAhIka in the 1020s.
Then again he led the Hindu forces to drive out the turuShka-s from
sthAnIshvara during Masud’s invasions in 1043). It is on this account we
at least know something of the width of Hindu thought and technology.
