+++
title = "Fragments of West Asian heathen thought: late survivingxa0Hermetica"

+++
To be read in conjunction with
[this](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/07/20/mantriform-incantations-in-other-cultures/).

Many moons ago aurvasheyI brought my attention to a curious news item in
an Indian paper – in small print it narrated a village conflict
involving the deployment of what might be termed “Islamized” tantra for
the lack of a better word. These practices are particular common in
rural areas in the Eastern side of the mahArATTa country, karnATa and
Andhra. Typically, these involve a package of pseudo-mantra deployments,
chemical, talismanic and astrological magic, with numerous Arabo-Persian
elements that elicit considerable fear among the plebeians of those
regions. Indeed fragments of such material has even found its way into
the Hindi section of the mantra-mahArNava, a mantra manual of recent
provenance. Initially, I found this material rather out of the limits of
my investigations on the history of tAntra-shAstra. But certain chance
events led me back to them, even as I unexpectedly discovered them to
hold fragments of heathen thought from late antiquity, just before its
catastrophic end at the hands of the second and third Abrahamisms. While
we were wandering through bhagAnagari in the long past times, we ran
into the Mohammedan K, who brought our attention to a body of
Arabo-Persian literature collected by the Mogol tyrant Akbar. Akbar is
supposed to have sent his agents all over West Asia, Egypt and Turkey to
obtain this literature as he is believed to have seen it as the most
important source of knowledge which explained the mysteries of the
universe. He is then supposed to have immersed himself in this material
even as Abu Fazl read it out him and the two apparently dabbled with the
practices from these kitAb-s with the hope of acquiring “divine” powers.
This literature primarily focused on mantriform, alchemical and
astrological practices that were supposed to have been revealed by a
certain Hirmis Malik Misr. Regarding this Hirmis, author of several
volumes of such material, we are told a curious tale: Hirmis is supposed
to have been a wise man who founded the religion of the Greeks and the
Egyptians in the times before the great flood. After the flood he is
supposed to have made an extra-terrestrial journey to the planets and
upon his return to earth he is claimed to have taught astronomy at
Babylon. Finally, he described as a being a prophet before the later
prophets of the different Abrahamisms. Right then it struck me that in
Hirmis we were witnessing a process of Islamic acculturation of one or
more heathen figures from the period that they normally condemn as
jahilya. Hirmis was clearly a promulgator of pre-Islamic knowledge, who
was being somehow legitimized by being cast into the mold of an
Abrahamistic prophet. Hirmis was clearly unknown to the poorly educated
unmatta as he was absent in the rAkShasa-pustaka. This, coupled with the
presence of mantriform and proto-scientific material in these texts
indicated to us that these Hirmis texts actually represent a body of
material of ultimately pagan origin. It also struck us that this
Arabo-Persian corpus was the direct source and in other cases the
indirect inspiration of the so called “Islamized” tAntrika practices as
those mentioned in the beginning of our note. However, at that point we
did not really see much beyond that.

Some years later we were reading about the syncretic Hellenistic cult of
the deity termed “megistos kai megistos theos megas” (the greatest and
the greatest great god), who was the Greek Hermes syncretized with the
Egyptian Thoth. Hence, this deity was also know as Hermes trismegistos
(i.e. thrice greatest). The Hermetic priests of Egypt, a sect of
neo-Platonists, between 0-200 CE developed a system of worship with a
corpus of accompanying texts in Greek which covered a variety of ritual,
medical, chemical and astronomical issues. The Hermetic system might be
caricatured thus: The god Hermes trismegistos emanates the “nuos” (may
be identified with pure undifferentiated consciousness) from him. From
the nuos is emanated the pysche (the subjective consciousness). The
powers of Hermes, the pleroma, is said to permeate these two giving rise
to the progenitor of the material universe, the sun, from which emanate
and revolve around it the 8 spheres of the planets, earth and the fixed
stars. From these spheres emerge various deities who control the
Hermetic universe. Hence, one of the important proto-scientific
contributions of the Hermetic priests was the heliocentric model. On the
whole the teaching of the syncretic neo-Platonic Hermes primarily
concern prognostication, interpretation of omens, use of plants and
other substances and, magical rituals on one hand, and the realization
of the universal, objectless consciousness on the other. Thus, in some
ways in mirrored the Indic tAntrika traditions with respect to with
respect to its laukIka and mokSha objectives. In the process of learning
about this neo-Platonic corpus we came to realize that the Hirmis texts
from the Islamic world, like the material collected by Akbar, was
actually in some way connected to the Hermetica of Greco-Egyptian
priests. We also understood the importance of the need for Hindus to
study Hermetica because: 1) It was a quintessentially pagan production
with noteworthy parallels to some of our own traditions; 2) The western
interpretation and translations of Hermetica had some deep-rooted
problems because they were greatly influenced by their Abrahamistic
conditioning and by the need to appropriate Greco-Egyptian traditions
for themselves. 3) Hermetica might have some bearing on the history of
science.

The first evidence for the syncretic cult comes from an inscription from
the temple of Thoth in Sakkara, Egypt, dated to 172 BC in both Demotic
Egyptian and Greek, which records a meeting of Hermetic ritualists. This
suggests that the fusion of Greek Platonic thought and Greek deities of
old Indo-European heritage (e.g. Hermes is a cognate of Indo-Aryan
puShan ) with the ancient Egyptian system of Thoth in early
post-Alexandrian Egypt gave rise to the syncretic Hermes cult. Although,
given Plato’s knowledge of Thoth it is possible that the pre-adaptation
for the fusion was already in place even before the Alexandrian period.
The Egyptian syncretic Hermes cult differed from other neo-Platonic
sects, such as that represented by Plotinus, in identifying the deity
emanating the universe with the sun, rather than Zeus. In this the
influence of the Egyptians is suspected, as suggested by the recent
publication of a pagan Demotic Egyptian temple scroll of the lecture of
the avicephalic god Thoth to a philosopher. On the other hand, we should
recognize that there were certain strains of Hermetica, such as the
Physica of Stobaeus, which apparently followed a system closer to that
of the more typical neo-Platonists \[Footnote 1\]. In light of these
observations, it is clear that the origin of the syncretic
Greco-Egyptian Hermetica needs further investigation. To add to the
complexity of the situation, we may also mention in passing that certain
philosophical ideas resembling those of Hermetica are already found in
an even earlier Indian source, the IshAvAsyopaniShat, which accords a
key place for puShan, the Indic cognate of Hermes \[we shall return to
the Indic angle a little further down\]. Beyond the part of the Hermetic
corpus with a predominantly philosophical focus, which has been studied
and translated by Western scholars, the magical, proto-scientific and
ritual literature has received little scholarly attention. Only when
these are considered would we get a more complete picture of the entire
scope of Hermetica or at least what survives of it. But even from what
we can currently study, it is clear that it was once a major system of
the western pagan world, whose significance is of considerable
importance to a student of heathen thought.

It is in this context the Arabo-Persian Hermetica might offer some
additional information. So, how did the Hermetica enter the Arabic
world? As we have seen before, after the death of the Roman emperor
Julian, the Hellenes found their situation increasingly compromised as
the pretAcharin-s started systematically destroying their temples and
schools (e.g. the 435 CE edict of Theodosius-II for the destruction of
all the religious sites of the heathens and the erection of a crucifix
atop them). Several heathen practitioners of the neo-Platonic system
fleeing from the attacks of the second Abrahamism found refuge in the
Sassanian empire (e.g. Carrhae, Harran in modern Turkey). Thus, the
neo-Platonic thought continued to survive within the Sassanian empire.
Given the interest expressed by the Sassanian emperor shApUr-I in
Hermetica around 250 CE itself, it is not unexpected that this system
continued to be valued in the Iranian regions when neo-Platonists
settled there to escape the pretamata. Around 620-640 CE there was a
phase of intense conflict between the Christian Byzantines and the
Sassanian, which considerably weakened both sides. It was then that a
new plague in the form of the third Abrahamism arose and completely
consumed the Sassanians and over ran a part of the Byzantine empire.
However, as the new Abrahamism spread rather rapidly under the initial
Kalifs and the Ummayads, it could not uniformly steam roll the heathens
in all its conquered territories. As a result pockets of heathens
survived in part of the Islamic empire continuing to preserve their
ancient traditions. By around 750 CE the army of Islam had brutally
suppressed much of the struggle of the conquered peoples in its west
Asian heartland. In the process it had either largely eliminated the
older languages like Greek and Egyptian or downgraded others like
Persian, Hebrew and Aramaic and replaced them with Arabic. But around
this time the Ummayads were over thrown by a new Arabic dynasty of the
Abbasids who founded a new capital at Baghdad. Now at the possession of
large empire, having largely decimated their pre-Islamic competition,
the Abbasids realized that they needed to consolidate the pre-Islamic
practical knowledge, especially in medicine, chemistry, astronomy and
mathematics into Arabic which had little more of its own literature than
the rAkShasa-pustaka and its associated “legalism”. So they set up large
effort for the translation and study of Greek, Iranian and Indian works
into their language. It was in this period that some Hermetica from
Greek and Iranian sources was translated into Arabic. In the early 800s
the Abbasid ruler al Ma’mun marched into Harran and forced the heathens
to choose one of the Abrahamisms or death. But the heathens camouflaged
themselves to escape the axe of Abrahamism – this lead to the cryptic
survival of the heathens in Harran till 1032-1033 CE, when the
Mohammedans launched a jihad to exterminate the heathens and destroy
their great temple \[Footnote 2\]. But it was this pocket of heathenism,
which in the Abbasid period gave a major direct input of Hermetica
(being its lineal inheritors) for the Arabic translations – this
material had a major role in the development of the so called “Islamic
science and mathematics” (e.g. the works of the scholar [Thabit ibn
Kurra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/08/28/the-makings-of-islamic-science/)).
This material was largely reworked as “secular” knowledge within the
Islamic framework – in a sense it paralleled the survival of Hellenistic
knowledge in West or its reacquisition by the west via Islam.

Regarding the heathens of Harran and other pockets we have some
information from a range of sources that offer a range of vignettes
regarding the last days of these West Asian heathen traditions,
assaulted on either side by virulent Abrahamisms. For instance, we hear
of the Byzantine tyrant Maurice seeking to convert the heathens of
Harran even though they were out of his reach. The very survival of the
Hellenes was seen as a potent threat to Isaism. So the Isaist preachers
adopted a strategy of subversion: They claimed that the ancient teachers
followed by the heathens were actually prophets who had prophesied the
“truth” of Isaism and that if they disbelieved these prophecies, they
disbelieved their own traditions. Hence, they were called upon to
convert to Isaism \[This is noted in a translation of a polemical text
“Prophecies of the Pagan Philosophers” from Syria by Sebastian Brock;
Footnote 3\]. However, the heathens, at least in Harran, were not taken
in by this subversion. From the Arabic sources we also understand that
the tradition of Plato was important among these heathens. We hear from
al Masudi that in the assembly hall of the heathens of Harran there was
an aphorism of Plato inscribed on the doorknob. He also mentions in that
context a teaching of Plato: “Man is a heavenly tree. The explanation of
it is that he is like an inverted tree: its roots are toward heaven and
its branches are toward the earth.” This bit of information suggests
that among the Platonic traditions, which were alive among these
heathens, this ancient metaphor of old Indic origin was current. In
Indic tradition find it first mentioned in the upaniShad of the kaTha-s
(KU 6.1) and expanded by kR^iShNa in his gItA (15.1-3). The other bit of
information we gain from the Arabic sources is that these heathens
venerated Hermes as the promulgator of their astronomical traditions. He
is termed Hirmis al Hakim (Hermes the sage?), which establishes beyond
doubt that the Arabo-Persian Hermitica from the Akbar’s library was a
survival or a continuation of the Hellenistic Hermetica.

Among the known Arabo-Persian Hermetica we encounter several interesting
elements that illustrate the breadth of this tradition: 1) There is a
text dealing with countering of snake venoms using various plant
products, incantations and images. One of the magical image charms that
was supposed to ward of snakes was that of an eagle holding a snake in
its claws. This is reminiscent of an identical image created by the
Pythagorean sage Apollonius near the race track at Byzantium – the wings
of this Apollonian eagle were supposed to be marked with the hours of
the day and twelve of them shone brightly when the sun was up. It was
demolished by the crusaders in 1204 CE when they took Byzantium.
Likewise, Apollonius was said to have made several other charms in the
shape of various arthropods and mammals to counter their injurious
effects. Apollonius was also described as “aristos astronomos” (the
great astronomer) and was supposed to have performed rituals to
planetary deities. Indeed the Arabic text states that Hirmis first
composed the text known as “Poisonous Animals”. Then he is supposed to
have imparted this to his student balInUs (Apollonius) with whom he
journeyed to al Hind and then they turned west to enter Iran. Here,
Hirmis appointed balInUs as the teacher of his lore in Babylon. There he
is supposed to have displayed his medical wonders. This suggests that
the Arabic counter-venom Hermetica traces its origins back to the
Apollonian Hermetica tradition. Several features of this work are
reminiscent of the Hindu garuDa-vidyA, which eventually coalesced into
the garuDa tantra-s of the shaiva pUrva-srotas. This makes it an
interesting point for those studying the evolution and transmission of
the garuDa vidyA-s.

2\) Another unusual tradition narrated in the Arabic text is that Hermes
either directly or via Plato transmitted to Aristotle the lore of charms
and spells. This was the last teaching of Aristotle which he transmitted
to his students on his death bed. In this teaching of Hermes via
Aristotle we encounter certain peculiar points that we shall briefly
touch upon along with their Hindu parallels where relevant. The secret
of talismanic charms is supposed to lie in the magical nature of
inverted words inscribed in them. This idea of magic via inverted words
has an ancient Hindu antecedent in the shaunakIya R^igvidhAna and
parishiShTha-s of the AV wherein the inverted gAyatrI or the pratiloma
gAyatrI is deployed as the kR^ityAstra. The magical power of speech is
also mentioned and attributed to teaching of Hermes to Plato. Further,
it is said that the making of talismanic charms needs to take into
account the nakShatra in which the moon is residing. This concept is
explicitly stated as being the opinion of the sages of the Hindus. A
list of nakShatra-s beginning with ashvayuji is provided (i.e. their
Arabic names), along with their appropriateness for performing
particular acts or their effects on particular people, animals and
objects. This type of astral magic is distinct from the predictive
astrology of the type expounded by the yavana jAtaka-s. Rather, they
resemble the endogenous Hindu astral magic and the oldest version of
this among the Hindus is encountered in the nakShatra kalpa of the AV
parishiShaTha-s (the much later varAhamihira builds further on this). A
closer examination indicates that the Arabic text has indeed been
derived from the Hindu nakShatra kalpa: For example, under the
description of the kR^ittikA-s (Pleiades; Dar al Thurayya) we read that
talismanic charms made under this constellation destroys goats, sheep
and cows and are also conducive for the successful use of chemistry and
fire. In the NK we read that if a planet enters kR^ittikA then it
destroys goats, sheep, cows and rats. Those engaging in keeping fire and
performing metallurgy are said to be under the control of this
constellation. Thus, the Hindu material appears to have be reinterpreted
in the context of talismanic charms. The talismanic magic is not
mentioned in this context in the Hindu text; hence, it is clear that the
West Asian heathens at some point incorporated Hindu astral magic into
the Greco-Egyptian talismanic Hermetica. On the other hand, for driving
an enemy from his station a talismanic charm is said to be made when the
moon is in Scorpio in the hour of Mars. Then a mantriform incantation is
written on a metal plate and it is buried outside the enemy’s place.
This practice with its use of the Greco-Egyptian constellation and hour
system appears to have been inherited from that side of Hermetica
attributed to the transmission via Aristotle rather than having an
immediate Hindu source. This has entered the subcontinent more recently
in the “Islamic” tAntrika bahAnA-type practice that we alluded to at the
beginning. The Arabic work also states that Aristotle had said that the
regents of planets and constellations should be invoked with complete
knowledge of their nature – a dilettante ritualist might bring down a
deity without knowing about them and could be killed by them.

3\) Interestingly, the Arabic text adds that as per the teachings of
Hermes the Hindus have amongst them most capable magicians and
illusionists and then a list of Hindu magical acts are described. Some
very unusual Hindu “yantra-s” are then described, which might have been
taught by Hermes to Apollonius after their journey to India. Indeed,
Byzantine sources allude to Apollonius making such charms. To my
knowledge, no such figures or traditions are present in any extant Hindu
tradition. Hence, it is not clear what exactly these charms refer
to.Nevertheless, we can see that the Hermetica preserved in the Arabic
sources have a lot of Hindu material that is not found in the extant and
edited Greco-Egyptian Hermetica. This suggests that there might have
been multiple points of interactions: The old parallels between the
Greek and Hindu works (e.g. Plato’s expression of Urdhva mUlaM adhaH
shAkaM or the rajju-sarpa nyAya in Carneades) represent an early layer
of transmission from Hindus or in some cases might even go back to the
shared Indo-European heritage of the Hindus and Greeks. We also have the
reverse transmission of yavana jAtaka and hora-shAstra to the Hindus
from the Greeks and certain syncretic developments like those between
the pAshupata-s and cynics. In contrast, later layers of Hindu material
appear to have been transmitted specifically to the heathens living in
West Asia, either in a single pre-Mohammedan transmission or multiply
before and also after the irruption of Mohammedanism, during the Abbasid
period. The concept of rAhu and ketu in the Arabo-Persian Hermetica
probably belong to a later transmission.

4\) The Arabo-Persian Hermetica has a zoological section that shows some
resemblances to the zoology of umAsvAti and could have been derived from
it or a related Hindu source.

5\) Hermes is said to have taught a strange formula that is used to
summon certain powerful ghosts: “tamaghIs baghdiswad waghidas
nufanaghdIs”. We have been unable to decipher what this is supposed to
mean. The Greek philosophers are supposed to have used that formula once
or twice an year to connect to ghosts that open the doors of unknown
wisdom. The text goes on to make the remarkable statement that Aristotle
got this incantation from Hermes and then he initiated Alexander into
this lore. By performing an “abhichAra” ritual with this incantation on
Alexander’s behalf he was able to secure victory for Alexander over the
Iranians. In a modern day abhichAra encounter we heard that the former
senAnI’s clansman was attacked with this incantation. A similar
(indecipherable to us) incantation is prescribed Hermes in an
“abhichArika” ritual which invokes Ares: “deghidius haghimdIs ghidyUs
miras ardighos hidghidys mahidas dahidmas”. These names are described as
the various facets of Ares. In this section, Hermes mentions that the
one who perfected this incantation and placed it in his consciousness
will realize his true nature. He says that it will then shine forth,
even as the stationary sun at the center of the heavens. The
consciousness is supposed to connect to the intellect and pull it
towards itself, even as as the sun pulls the world and holds the
heavenly sphere. These statements suggests that the heliocentric vision
of the Greco-Egyptian Hermetica had been faithfully transmitted to the
Arabic versions. This heliocentric view is stressed in many places in
the Arabic Hermetica. For example, it stated all the planets are
continually under the pull of the sun. The origins of these heliocentric
ideas are not clear – they could have been derived from Seleukos or
Aristarchos among the Greeks.

6\) Another interesting “abhichArika” rite prescribed by Hermes invokes
a set of three goddesses who is said to preside over the stars epsilon,
zeta and eta Ursa Majoris. These goddess are made an offering of yaShTi,
chandana and guggulu. While there is no equivalent Hindu or even Greek
ritual, which we are aware of, the use of oShadhi-s that are prominent
in Hindu usage is of note.

In conclusion, we find that the Arabic Hermetica contains a considerable
body of material that throws light on the aspects of neo-Platonic and
related West Asian heathen cultures that were ignored or lost in the
Western transmissions of these traditions. There is one point of
historical interest in this regard: Many Leukospheric appropriators of
Greek tradition have consistently painted the Pythagorean and Platonic
traditions as “rational” and “scientific” in contrast to their
“superstitious”, “mystical” and even vacuously wearisome Indian
counterparts. But the Hermetica surviving from the West Asian pagan
traditions points in a very different direction. Indeed, it appears that
the entire heathen belt from India to Rome, including Egypt (and perhaps
beyond) had a rather similar general outlook in the first 5 centuries of
the common era, before these traditions were snuffed out in the west by
the two Abrahamisms \[What is also commonly ignored is how closely the
two later strains of Abrahamism resembled each other and formed an
opposing block to the Eurasiatic heathenism\]. From the view point of an
intellectually and culturally shallow modern individual, who has
acquired but a veneer of scientific understanding, this matrix of
ancient thought might appear ghastly or even incongruous – but the
closer we look at it, the more it becomes clear that some of the sublime
pieces proto-scientific and mathematical understanding emerged right
from this matrix. Let us not forget that it was Proclus, one of the last
of the Greek hymn-composers (i.e. a R^iShi among the yavana-s), who
wrote the commentary on the first book of Euclid and the elements of
physics. Thus, it appears that varAhamihira was not really very
different from his yavana counterparts.

\~oO0Oo\~

Footnote 1: This suggested by the hymn to the gods by Stobaeus of
Macedon.  
Seven planets far varied in their course revolved upon the Olympian
plain;  
with them for ever will the Aion (cognate of yuga?) spin:  
Mēnē (the moon deity) that shine by night, \[and\] gloomy Kronos,  
\[and\] sweet Hēlios, and Paphiē (a name of Aphrodite) who’s carried in
the shrine,  
courageous Arēs, fair-winged Hermēs, and **Zeus the primal source from
whom nature comes**.  
Now they themselves have had the race of men entrusted to their care;  
so that in us there is a Mēnē, Zeus, an Arēs, Paphiē, a Kronos, Hēlios
and Hermēs.  
Wherefore we are divided up \[so as\] to draw from the all-pervasive
consciousness,  
tears, laughter, anger, birth, reason, sleep, desire.  
Tears are Kronos, birth Zeus, reason \[is\] Hermēs,  
courage Mars, and Mēnē sleep, in sooth, and Cytherea (a name of
Aphrodite) desire,  
and Hēlios \[is\] laughter—for it is because of him that justly every  
mortal thinking thing does laugh and the immortal world.

It may be noted that the Hermetic system of the seven planets is
referred to by Stobaeus. Though Helios has a prime place in the hymn, it
is Zeus who is described as source of all matter. Now the placement of
the gods in the microcosm of the body is a feature observed in
neo-Platonic thought that appears to have been particularly prominent in
the Hermetic stream. It is of great interest to note that this idea
mirrors a similar concept that appears earlier in India in a sUkta of
the taittirIya saMhitA (hR^idayaM mayi …).

Footnote 2: This late survival of heathen tradition in Harran has a
certain parallel to the lingering survival of heathen tradition in the
west. We have the remarkable and mysterious case of the Greek scholar
Georgios Plethon Gemistos (1355-1454 CE), who was hailed as the second
Plato. Though born as an Isaist, he rejected the Isaism and advocated a
full return to the old Greek polytheistic religion and neo-Platonic
tradition. He re-established images of the old Greek deities and
re-introduced their worship with the old Greek rituals and hymns. While
repeatedly attacked by the Isaists ( e.g. he is called a “poisonous
viper”), he resorted to camouflage to escape their attention.
Nevertheless, he was overly optimistic stating that: “that not many
years after his death Mohammed and Christ would collapse and the true
truth would shine through every region of the globe… and it will not
differ much from paganism”. Plethon also presented a clear pan-pagan
vision, recognizing the ancient homology among the heathen peoples: He
points out that among the Greeks the heathen tradition is based on the
lineage of teachings stemming from the ritualists of the temple of Zeus
and Gaia at Dodona, Iphitus who restablished the Olympic rituals and
athletics, and inspired sages like Polyides, Tiresias, Pythagoras and
Plato. Among the non-Greeks he states that the equivalent traditions
were those promulgated by Zarathustra and the Iranian ritualists in
Persia and the brAhmaNa-s in India. Now the point of interest with
respect to survival of the Hellenistic traditions in the Islamic sphere
is the way Plethon became a pagan. We should realize that in the
Byzantine empire itself the old Greek pagan tradition was all but lost,
and the knowledge of the Iranian and Indian systems was almost certainly
lost. Plethon’s reacquisition of heathenism was due to his training
under an interesting Jewish scholar Elissaeus from the Osman empire.
Though born a Jew, Elissaeus himself was a knowledgeable practitioner of
the old Hellenistic religion and was also learned in certain Iranian
traditions of the Zarathustrian ritualists. Unfortunately, Elissaeus’s
cover was blown and he was immolated alive at the decree of the mullahs.
It appears that Elissaeus had acquired his heathen tradition as a part
of the cryptic survival and transmission of old Hellenistic and Iranian
knowledge in the Islamic sphere, as seen at Harran. However, the absence
of Hermetica in the teachings of Elissaeus and Plethon suggests that
this was another late surviving tradition independent from that of
Hermetic heathens. Here the role of the Jews, like
[Rashid-ad-din](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/05/20/some-notes-on-rashid-ad-din-bin-imad-ud-dawla-abul-khair-and-his-times/),
in the gathering of knowledge of various peoples of the world, under the
Mongol Il-khans, might have resulted in them acquiring some of these
traditions.

Footnote 3: In India too the Isaist and Mohammedan subversionists have
deployed a similar strategy claiming that the Hindu texts were a prelude
to the truth claims of their respective cults and their cults were
actually prophesied in the Hindu texts\! Some moronic Hindus might be
taken in by such claims and softened for subsequent penetration by the
Abrahamists.
