+++
title = "Some comments on the biology of insulin resistance inxa0jaMbudvIpa"

+++
A recent paper by Metspalu et al in AHJG adds additional data to the
growing material on the genetics of the Indians. The paper has several
issues that are rather unsatisfactory – chief among them is the attempt
to meaninglessly hand wave on OIT and AIT. The AIT is sitting right
there in their data, yet they attempt to obfuscate the issue in somewhat
amateurish ways \[Appendix 1\]. But that is not something we wish to
discuss today because there is new work that might be published
relatively soon that will smash the OIT for good. However, their paper
does generate some new and useful data on positive selection and it is
possible relationship to the insulin resistance related conditions in
India. The spectrum of conditions that include hyperinsulinemia
accompanied by resistance of tissues to insulin, impaired glucose
tolerance, type-2 diabetes, hypertension, obesity, atherosclerosis and
coronary artery blockage define the well-known syndrome that afflicts a
large number of Hindus, especially those from the southern part of the
sub-continent. The data from this recent paper might be used as a
starting point to explore some of these issues in greater detail. The
authors recover several genes that are apparently under positive
selection in the subcontinent and superficially analyze their
significance. Of note, they point to the possibility that the selection
of certain alleles at several loci in the Indian population might have a
relationship with type-2 diabetes and obesity. In this regard they
conclude that: “*In this context, it is tempting to hypothesize that
past natural selection might have influenced genetic variation at these
loci to increase infant survival, a change that became disadvantageous
after changes in diet and lifestyle.*” However, they do not attempt to
actually investigate the biological implications of their results beyond
this and simply state that: “*Therefore, the loci we identify could be
theoretically considered responsible for some of the present type-2
diabetes epidemic in India, making them worthy candidates for further
functional examination. However, because relevant life-history traits,
lipid metabolism and type 2 diabetes are all complex traits and the
effect of natural selection would be expected to be fragmented across
multiple genes, it would be naive to expect that a relationship between
past selective processes and present-day disease would be
mechanistically simple and explainable by variation at a handful of
genetic loci.*” Thus, they pass up the opportunity to do some
interesting investigation regarding the biochemical properties of the
genes they uncovered. While it is true that the actual phenotypic
effects of the alleles that are positively selected in the sub-continent
have not be tested, it is still possible to evaluate the genes in light
of the various evolutionary hypothesis for the emergence of conditions
such as the insulin resistance syndrome (IRS).

One of the first evolutionary hypothesis presented for the emergence of
IRS has been the feast-famine or thriftiness hypothesis. This basic
premise of this was that in premodern societies (at some point, perhaps
going all the way back to the paleolithic phase) humans faced
alternative periods of abundance and scarcity of food, and lead a
physically active life due to the need to forage actively for
subsistence. In this kind of environment individuals who were able to
store fat were at advantage in tiding periods of “famine”. Hence, there
was a selective advantage to individuals who rapidly took up nutrients
during a “feast” phase, converted it to fat and hoarded it in the
adipose tissue. This advantage in the feast-famine environment turned
into disease in the modern environment with a constant supply of food
rich in fat, coupled with a sedentary lifestyle that did not impose any
requirement to utilize the stored fats. This hypothesis would imply that
certain genetic variants which predisposed individuals to IRS were
positively selected in the feast-famine period. As our acquaintance from
college days had pointed out, in practice there are several problems
with this hypothesis – firstly, there is no correlation between
geographical regions where food in limiting and IRS. Secondly, there is
no evidence that the arrow of causality proceeds from IRS to obesity
rather than the other way around. Importantly, in tropical India where
IRS is most prevalent, the food supply was relatively constant through
the year, unlike in populations such as the Eskimoes, Mongols and
Northern Europeans who have relatively lower incidence of IRS despite
much greater constraints in terms of circum-annual food availability.

A related hypothesis has been based on the observation that there is
significant association between low birth weight and IRS risk worldwide
across several ethnic groups. This hypothesis holds that scarcity of
nutrients during intrauterine development (which leads to low birth
weight) sends a predictive signal for lack future absence of nutrients
and tips the physiology in the direction of hoarding fat. In premodern
situations where this predictive signal was indeed likely to be true
this physiological shift resulting in fat hoarding is likely to have
favored survival. However, today it results in disease as the
intrauterine lack of nutrients is unlikely to mean absence of nutrients
in the future. While, this hypothesis appears reasonably consistent at
face value, it presents an internal contradiction when extended to the
modern situation – how is it that correlation between intrauterine
nutrient deprivation is not correlated with later starvation only in the
modern world? The only way out is to postulate that in the modern
scenario the low birth weight individuals are more likely to be provided
with greater amounts of nutrients in modern settings than in premodern
settings, where low birth weight was an honest predictor of scarcity.

A third set of hypotheses work from the view point of obesity. They
start from the observation that monogenic defects resulting in obesity
predominantly affect hypothalamic pathways resulting in impaired
regulation of satiety and food intake. Thus, hunger, satiety and food
intake, rather than metabolic rate or nutrient partitioning is key to
the emergence of IRS. Accordingly, it is posited that rather than being
a primarily metabolic disease IRS is a metabolic manifestation of a
neuro-behavioural disease. It is in this regard that our acquaintance
from college presented the so called soldier vs diplomat hypothesis: He
posited that insulin resistance is a socio-ecological adaptation that is
related to two phenotypic transitions, namely 1) a transition from a
r-selected to a K-selected strategy and 2) a transition from a more
muscle-dependent to a more brain-dependent lifestyle (soldier to
diplomat transition). Like the other hypotheses he proposed that this
adaptation developed in premodern societies but became pathological in
modern societies with greater availability of calorie rich food. He
supported the r to K transition by suggesting that insulin resistance in
the mother results in decreased fertility but heavier neonates. He also
interpreted the mutations in the insulin/IGF signaling pathway resulting
in increased longevity as a possible move from a r to a K strategy.
Finally, in support of the more brain-dependent strategy he suggested
that the increased glucose levels due insulin resistance might supply
more glucose for the brain to use. Even if this idea remains poorly
supported, he points to the fact that insulin resistance is
characterized by hyperinsulinemia and that insulin receptors are widely
distributed in specific brain areas such as the olfactory bulb, pyriform
cortex, amygdaloid nucleus, hippocampus, hypothalamic nucleus and
cerebellar cortex. Thus, the increase in blood insulin might act via
these brain receptors to positively affect spatial and verbal memory.

It is in the context of these hypotheses that the data from Metspalu et
al become considerably interesting. First, let us consider
Myostatin/GDF8 (MSTN) which might provide an explanation for a variety
of factors, including perhaps why Indians need to be philosophical about
their performance in athletic events such as the Olympics. MSTN is a
member of the TGF-ß family of cystine knot cytokines. Its evolutionary
history is a long one – being traceable to the basal animals such the
cnidarians (NEMVEDRAFT\_v1g196852; GI:156407906). It is preserved in
most animal lineages studied to date and shows a strong muscle-specific
expression pattern at least in vertebrates, arthropods and molluscs –
probably this holds across all animals with muscles. It negatively
regulates muscle development by signaling via the ActRIIB receptor. Its
role in muscle development came to light first in studies in rodents
where deletion of MSTN resulted in considerable increase in body size
with muscles weighing 2-3 times more than the wild-type animals.
Subsequently, it was seen that loss of function mutations in MSTN was
behind the “doubled-muscled” phenotypes of European cattle bred for
meat. Its equivalent role in humans was underscored by the dramatic case
of a German boy who showed extraordinary muscle development at birth and
by the age of 4.5 years was showing precocious strength and ability to
lift large weights. Several members of his family were noted for their
great physical strength and the boy’s maternal grandfather was known to
lift heavy stones. Analysis of the boy’s myostatin gene revealed that he
was homozygous for a mutation at splice donor site in intron 1, which
resulted in a mispliced MSTN mRNA producing a truncated dysfunctional
protein. Subsequently, the role of the myostatin mutation K153R has been
shown to be associated with decreased jumping performance in young
males. MSTN has also been shown to be under strong positive selection in
humans, with certain coding region SNPs affecting highly conserved
regions being present in greater than 14% frequency only in sub-Saharan
Africans. One wonders if at least some of these SNPs might be related to
selection for increased explosive muscular activity needed for sprinting
and short distance speed (something which sub-Saharan Africans excel
in). In addition to regulation of muscle development myostatin, also
appears to favor increased adiposity and insulin resistance. MSTN
knockouts show reduced fat accumulation and also decreased insulin
resistance. Hence, when MSTN is knocked out in agouti lethal yellow and
leptin knockout backgrounds there is a partial suppression of the
pro-obesity and insulin resistance effects. Thus, MSTN is an intrinsic
muscle-inhibiting, fat- and blood sugar-enhancing factor. The positive
selection at this locus in the Indian sub-continent should be seen in
the following light: Indian neonates weigh on average 700 g less than
European neonates and difference arises primarily from a reduced muscle
to fat mass ratio. The Indian neonates display relatively greater
insulin resistance and this effect is enhanced, with the average age at
which an Indian is diagnosed of IRS is significantly lower than in
Europeans (\~10 years earlier). The fastest Indian 100m runners are
often slower than club level runners in Europe. Indians have rarely
produced full pace (as opposed to medium pace) bowlers matching the
speed of either European or African origin players. Even if they do they
are much more prone to injury and slow recovery from it. Together these
issues suggest that in India MSTN has been selected for being more
rather than less active – consequently resulting in shortfalls in muscle
development/repair and increased adiposity and insulin resistance.

Why would there be selection for poorer muscle development, IRS etc when
the converse seems to enhance fitness in many ways. In a sense this is
an extension to question as to why the MSTN pathway emerged in the first
place? Though under laboratory conditions MSTN deletion has an
apparently fitness-enhancing phenotype, MSTN appears to have been
preserved throughout animal evolution and is strongly constrained in its
conservation across vertebrates. This suggests that despite the deletion
phenotypes, its loss or divergence is not much tolerated under natural
conditions. Why might this be so? We suspect that it might be explained
by considering muscles to be “parasitic”. protein hogs. So if their
development is not under a negative regulatory pathway they compete with
other organ systems for the availability of protein. If there is
saturating protein availability in food, then this might not result any
noticeable problem; however, when protein supplies are limiting there
could be deleterious effects on other organs. This idea is compatible
with the soldier-diplomat hypothesis because it favors brain development
to proceed unaffected even under protein-limiting conditions. However,
we suspect that this was not the original reason for the postulated
selection for the strengthening of the MSTN effect in India. The
invading Indo-Aryans are unlikely to have faced a protein limitation due
to their focus on dairy farming. On the other hand the proto-Indians
(the so called “ASI” of Reich et al) are likely to have faced protein
deficits, especially among the peninsular tribal cultures. After all,
even until recently the statistics suggested that more than half the
non-urban Indians face a dietary deficit in protein availability. This,
might have resulted in selection for an over-efficient MSTN signaling,
which might have allowed completely functional organ development under
low-protein conditions. Further, myostatin deficiency makes certain
muscles susceptible to contraction-induced injury and have reduced
force-generating capacity – this might be a major disadvantage in tribal
life, where stamina in certain muscular operations might have been
critical. This was possibly another reason for emphasizing the MSTN
system in certain Indian settings. In this regard, there might certain
specific stamina-related muscular activities, where even today the
Indian MSTN alleles might provide an edge. Of course, it should be
stressed that these are speculations that cannot be taken for granted
unless further testing shows that the MSTN alleles selected for in India
indeed acts in the above-suggested direction. Nevertheless, it is clear
that the MSTN selection might have been very critical for life in
ancient tribal India though disadvantageous today – better understanding
of this might give us some key clues with respect to resource allocation
to the muscles vs rest of the body. Here, one may also consider two
paralogous genes emerging in the Metspalu et al survey – POPDC3 and
BVES, which encode TM proteins with a C-terminal cyclic nucleotide
binding domain. POPDC3 is expressed in both the striated muscle tissue
and in certain brain regions. It is a a cyclic nucleotide-dependent
regulatory protein, which might play a role in muscle development.
Testing the interaction, if any, between variants at this locus with the
MSTN variants might throw light on the functional implications of
possible selection for altered muscle development among Indians. Another
neglected aspect that might be of interest is the relatively high
expression of MSTN in cranial and cervical ganglia – does it have an
additional neural function that is under selection?

The next gene that was found to be under positive selection in the
sub-continent was DOK5, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase
substrate with PH and PTB domains. It has been shown to function
downstream of the receptors for both insulin and the cystine knot nerve
growth factor GDNF. It is strongly expressed in the amygdala, dorsal
root ganglia and cranial ganglia and lies within a signaling cascade
that promotes neurite outgrowth. Outside the brain it shows prominent
expression in T lymphocytes in the blood. The GGC haplotype with SNPs
rs6068916, rs6064099 and rs873079 in DOK5 was previously shown to be
associated with obesity and type-2 diabetes in a northern Indian sample.
On the other hand, another study showed that increased activation of
neurons in the amygdala when exposed to hostile faces was correlated
with the C haplotype SNP rs2023454 in DOK5. These observations are of
considerable interest because DOK5 variants have the potential to
connect three major components of the soldier-diplomat hypothesis: 1)
Obesity/IRS; 2) the hostility perception and 3) regulation of the immune
system via expression in T-cells – given that the hypothesis postulates
that the immune system is directed from “outward” to “inward” focus
during the transition from a soldier to a diplomat state. One rank
speculation is that the positive selection in the sub-continent at the
DOK5 locus might have facilitated or accompanied the emergence of
agricultural civilization in northern India currently first attested at
the Mehrgarh site. In this case it is seen as reducing hostility
perception, while at the same time facilitating a more “diplomat” kind
of metabolism in the context of the emergence of the agricultural
civilization. If this speculation hold out to further tests, it might
constitute a potential genetic base for the soldier-diplomat hypothesis
of our acquaintance.

Metspalu et al also point to the key circadian regulator gene CLOCK as
being under positive selection in India. Knockouts of the CLOCK and its
paralogous partner BMAL1 result in diabetes mellitus and reduced glucose
tolerance. Based on this the authors speculate that it might have some
role in increased susceptibility for type-2 diabetes in the
sub-continent. However, there are several issues with this speculation.
The diabetes in the CLOCK knockouts results in a clear hypoinsulinemia
from reduced insulin secretion and defective islets of Langerhans;
however, the IRS in India is characterized by high blood insulin levels
accompanied by loss of responsiveness to insulin in several
glucose-utilizing tissues. CLOCK is also under positive selection across
many human populations and is under comparable strong selection in
Western Eurasia as India. So this is unlikely to be a India specific
phenomenon and might have begun earlier. Given its pleiotropic effects
on various other aspects of circadian physiology, it is not all clear as
to whether variation in this gene was selected for in the context of
pancreatic physiology or something else. Hence, we suspect this might
not necessarily be a key player in Indian type-2 diabetes
susceptibility.

GPHB5/OGH is another gene which emerges in the Metspalu et al survey for
positive selection in the sub-continent; it is ignored by the authors,
but might have a more important role. It encodes a cystine knot hormone
paralogous to the beta subunits of thyrotropin, follitropin, lutropin
and gonadotropin and signals via the thyrotropin receptor. It has been
observed to be expressed in the pituitary, hypothalamus and probably the
skin. Overexpression of GPHB5 has been shown to result in resistance to
diet-induced obesity, and reduction in blood glucose, insulin,
cholesterol, and triglycerides. Thus, the GPHB5 variants among Indians
is a potential candidate for the connection between obesity and IRS,
especially in response to extrinsic behavioral and immunological cues
routed via the brain. In this context it is of interest to note that
acute inflammation resulted in increased GPHB5 expression in the brain
and pituitary and it appears to be responsible for altered thyroid
hormone metabolism during illness (an example of it responding to
extrinsic cues). Thus, GPHB5 could be another candidate for genetic
basis of the soldier-diplomat transition.

.oOo.oOo.oOo.  
Appendix 1: Since some people asked me about AIT/OIT, at the risk of
repeating what we have said before on these pages let us go through the
details again. In figure two of their paper the authors present an
analysis with ADMIXTURE with 8 and 12 clusters
([Figure 2](http://www.cell.com/AJHG/image/S0002-9297\(11\)00488-5?imageId=gr2&imageType=hiRes)).
In the K8 analysis we have k5, which is shared by Indians, Iranians,
many Indo-European speaking Europeans, Central Asians, West Asians, and
Caucasians. It is found at similar levels in Northern and Southern
brAhmaNa-s and northern kShatriya-s. It is absent in Africans,
importantly the Sardinians (representatives of the Pre-Indoeuropean
inhabitants of Europe (aka proto-Europeans), East Asians and Papuans. In
India it is largely absent or low in the Austro-Asiatic Munda, eastern
tribes like Khasis, Nihalis, Nagas and Garos and also in southern tribes
like Paniyans, Pulliyars and Malayans. This corresponds in large part to
the “ANI” component of Reich et al’s work; we may call it the Arya
component. The other major component of interest among Indians is the
k6@K8, which is found in majority of populations from the Indian
sub-continent. This component is found at highest levels in Pulliyars,
Paniyans, Malayans, Gonds and also the Munda tribesmen, in whom there is
an additional east Asian admixture. This is in large part the “ASI” of
Reich et al’s analysis; we may term it the niShAda component. This
component declines both eastwards and westwards from the heart of India.
Outside India it is only present at low levels in Iranians, Central
Asians, Burmese and Cambodians. So in large part the Indians can be
genetically reconstructed as differential admixtures of the k6@K8 and
k5@K8 components – comparable to what was done by Reich et al.

Now given that k5@K8 is shared with Europeans, West Asians and
Caucasians in principle both OIT and AIT are potential explanation. If
OIT were the true explanation then we should see some proportion of
k6@K8 being distributed to all the recipient populations of the OIT
migration because all sub-continental populations share k6@K8. But this
is not the case – only the populations in the immediate vicinity of
India have k6@K8, consistent with Indian genetic material local
spreading to the immediate periphery of the sub-continent. So if OIT
happened it was confined to barely the immediate surroundings of the
sub-continent, which is inconsistent with the spread of Indo-Aryan and
Iranian, leave alone Indo-European. On the other hand k5@K8 is
consistent with the spread of people from the general vicinity of the
Caucasus to Europe, West Asia and the Indian sub-continent; several of
the recipient populations also appear to share languages of the
Indo-European family. This is basically AIT. It should be noted that
k3@K8 and k4@K8 represent respectively early European and early West
Asian populations that in Europe and West Asia mixed with the k5@K8
component. In India k5@K8 mainly mixed with the ancient Indian
population represented by k6@K8. The authors use a simulation to claim
that this admixture happened before 12,500 years. This result in our
opinion is flawed because of certain early West Asian variants seeping
into India and inflating the age of admixture. The k5@K8 signal in large
part comes from the “ANI” component of Reich et al. Using that data one
might conservatively estimate the age of admixture as being around 200
gens, which is consistent with an Indo-European influx into India
bringing much of the ANI genetic signatures.

With respect to the linguistic landscape of India we might make the
following comments based on the genetic data: The Austro-Asiatic Munda
languages were not endogenous to ancient India. Instead, Austro-Asiatic
speakers intruded from southeast Asia and penetrated deep into India,
while mixing with local proto-India tribal populations. From this
admixture emerged the Munda tribes who adopted the intrusive AA
language, while retaining several words from the proto-India language.
Given the dominance of the O2a Y-chromosome haplotype among the Munda,
shared with southeast Asian AA speakers, this is another example of the
father-tongue becoming mother tongue, whenever there is an male driven
intrusion (e.g. Spanish or Portuguese decimating local languages in the
colonial period). So there was no question of the Indus civilization
being Munda or even “Para-Munda” for that matter. What we observe is
that the common “inexplicable” vocabulary shared by IA, AA and Dravidian
in the sub-continent is dominated by the kA, kI, ku class of words.
Hence, these words belonged to the language X family proposed by Masica
and not to Dr or AA. It is now becoming increasingly clear that this
language X family was likely to have been a major language family of the
proto-Indians, i.e. those who were the carriers of the original k6@K8
component. The footprints of the language X family indeed mirror the
distribution of k6@K8 in cutting across the other linguistic families of
the sub-continent though the family itself is extinct today. This leaves
us with the question of Dravidian – was there a Dravidian invasion or
did it emerge in situ? The uncertainty in the ultimate origin of
Dravidian stems from how one treats the Brahui problem. If Brahui is
considered a late secondary dispersal, then it is likely that Dravidian
originated in peninsular India and spread upwards. Even if Brahui
suggests an initial western origin, we suspect that there was a major
episode of Dravidian expansion from peninsular India. On the whole we
are currently tilted towards the hypothesis that both the language X and
Dravidian families were representatives of the original linguistic
diversification in the subcontinent that later expanded greatly to
occupy large territories. But it appears that language X had a more
north-western “center of gravity” relative to Dravidian, which was more
south-eastern in its center of gravity.

Disclaimer: While we disagree with the authors’ conclusions on this
matter we have nothing personal against them. We describe their attempts
as amateurish because they reduce the Indo-European hypothesis to being
a mere speculation of Max Mueller; to the contrary it is a rather robust
hypothesis that has currently withstood all objective tests. It is also
abundantly clear based on this hypothesis that it was intrusive into
India rather than moving out of it. The only question is whether the
ancient spread of the Indo-European languages to India was accompanied
by a corresponding spread of genetic material. Unfortunately, the
authors hardly present this issue clearly.

***Further reading***  
Shared and unique components of human population structure and
genome-wide signals of positive selection in South Asia.  
Metspalu M, Romero IG, Yunusbayev B, Chaubey G, Mallick CB, Hudjashov G,
Nelis M, Mägi R, Metspalu E, Remm M, Pitchappan R, Singh L, Thangaraj K,
Villems R, Kivisild T.  
Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):731-44.  
PMID: 22152676

…  
Evolutionary origins of insulin resistance: a behavioral switch
hypothesis.  
Watve MG, Yajnik CS.  
BMC Evol Biol. 2007 Apr 17;7:61.  
PMID: 17437648

Genetics of obesity.  
O’Rahilly S, Farooqi IS.  
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2006 Jul 29;361(1471):1095-105.
Review.  
PMID: 16815794

…  
Human adaptive evolution at Myostatin (GDF8), a regulator of muscle
growth.  
Saunders MA, Good JM, Lawrence EC, Ferrell RE, Li WH, Nachman MW.  
Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Dec;79(6):1089-97. Epub 2006 Oct 10.  
PMID: 1718646

Exercise-training attenuates the hyper-muscular phenotype and restores
skeletal muscle function in the myostatin null mouse.  
Matsakas A, Macharia R, Otto A, Elashry M, Mouisel E, Romanello V,
Sartori R, Amthor H, Sandri M, Narkar V, Patel K.  
Exp Physiol. 2011 Nov 4. \[Epub ahead of print\]  
PMID: 22058168

Suppression of body fat accumulation in myostatin-deficient mice.  
McPherron AC, Lee SJ.  
J Clin Invest. 2002 Mar;109(5):595-601.  
PMID: 11877467

Myostatin mutation associated with gross muscle hypertrophy in a
child.  
Schuelke M, Wagner KR, Stolz LE, Hübner C, Riebel T, Kömen W, Braun T,
Tobin JF, Lee SJ.  
N Engl J Med. 2004 Jun 24;350(26):2682-8. No abstract available.  
PMID: 15215484

…  
A genome-wide association study of amygdala activation in youths with
and without bipolar disorder.  
Liu X, Akula N, Skup M, Brotman MA, Leibenluft E, McMahon FJ.  
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;49(1):33-41.  
PMID: 20215924

Evaluation of DOK5 as a susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes and
obesity in North Indian population.  
Tabassum R, Mahajan A, Chauhan G, Dwivedi OP, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.  
BMC Med Genet. 2010 Feb 27;11:35.  
PMID: 20187968

…  
Acute inflammation increases pituitary and hypothalamic glycoprotein
hormone subunit B5 mRNA expression in association with decreased
thyrotrophin receptor mRNA expression in mice.  
van Zeijl CJ, Surovtseva OV, Wiersinga WM, Fliers E, Boelen A.  
J Neuroendocrinol. 2011 Apr;23(4):310-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2011.02116.x.  
PMID: 21314737

Resistance to diet-induced obesity in mice globally overexpressing
OGH/GPB5.  
Macdonald LE, Wortley KE, Gowen LC, Anderson KD, Murray JD, Poueymirou
WT, Simmons MV, Barber D, Valenzuela DM, Economides AN, Wiegand SJ,
Yancopoulos GD, Sleeman MW, Murphy AJ.  
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 15;102(7):2496-501. Epub 2005 Feb
7.  
PMID: 15699348

…  
Disruption of the clock components CLOCK and BMAL1 leads to
hypoinsulinaemia and diabetes.  
Marcheva B, Ramsey KM, Buhr ED, Kobayashi Y, Su H, Ko CH, Ivanova G,
Omura C, Mo S, Vitaterna MH, Lopez JP, Philipson LH, Bradfield CA,
Crosby SD, JeBailey L, Wang X, Takahashi JS, Bass J.  
Nature. 2010 Jul 29;466(7306):627-31.  
PMID: 20562852
