+++
title = "bhavabhUti’s avifauna and flora"

+++
A good kavI of yore is supposed to have been a naturalist. We had
earlier given an example of this in the form of vAkpati’s
[characterization of the
kingfisher](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/30/the-kingfisher/).
Now we shall provide an example from the collection of bhavabhUti of
vidharbha, one the greatest poets of all times. Like vAkpati he was also
in the court of the neo-mauryan ruler yashovarman who was overwhelmed by
the great Kashmirian conqueror lalitAditya.

kAshmaryAH kR^itamAlam udgatadalaM koyaShTikaSh TIkate nIrAshmantaka
shimbi chumbana-mukhA dhAvanty apaH pUrNikAH |  
dAtyUhais tinishasya koTaravati skandhe nilIya sthitaM
vIrunnIDakapotakUjitam anukrandanty adhaH kukkubhAH ||

kAshmaryAH=*Gmelina* trees; kR^itamAlam=*Cassia* tree; udgata-dalaM=
spread-out leaves; koyaShTikaSh=lapwing; TIkate=hops up; nIrAshmantaka=
river *Bauhinia*; shimbi=pod chumbana-mukhA= touching mouth;
dhAvanty=run; apaH=water; pUrNikAH=hornbills ; dAtyUhais= purple
moorhens; tinishasya= of *Dalbergia* tree; koTaravati= with a hollow;
skandhe= branch; nilIya=settles in; sthitaM= situated; vIrunnIDa= tree
nesting; kapota=dove; kUjitam=cooing; anukrandanty= cries; adhaH=below;
kukkubhAH= red jungle fowl.

Here we get a remarkable description of the diverse avifauna of India
and some flora on a hot summer day. Any naturalist in India can identify
with this scene painted by bhavabhUti:  
From the Gmelina trees the lapwing hops up \[to seek the shade of the\]
spread-out leaves of the Cassia tree; The hornbills having barely
touched the river Bauhinia’s pods with their beaks retreat to get water;
A branch with hollow of the Dalbergia is made a residence by the purple
moorhens; even as the red jungle fowl standing below answers the cooing
of the doves nesting in the trees with its cries.

Thus, 5 species of birds and 4 species of trees are mentioned by
bhavabhUti in this verse. As an aside one may note that the word nIDa in
the above verse is a cognate of Latin nIDus and nest in English – a word
of proto-Indo-European provenance.
