+++
title = "yuddha-vyUha-s, mlechCha-s and vaNija-nIti in the last Hindu empire"

+++
The narrative of the final stages of premodern bhAratavarSha remains in
a rather misleading state, despite these times being much closer to our
own. In the modern phase (post-independence) tacit encouragement from
the occidentally oriented chAchAjI resulted in historical narratives
being dominated by Marxists. This trend was also covertly supported by
several external forces as a part of their program to keep the Hindu-s
ill-informed regarding their past. The main thrust of the Marxist
historians was to emphasize or even glorify Mohammedan, Christian and
heterodox Indic Weltanschauungen (e.g. bauddha) at the expense of the
voices of the majority who comprise rAShTra of bhArata. These Marxist
historians were in large part “anti-colonial”, in so far as they
condemned the English misrule of bhArata. However, in presenting a
history of the conflict with the mlechCha-s they adopted a very
selective view – for them MK Gandhi was a “useful idiot” in whom they
saw what ever they wanted. They also emphasized the confused and highly
misguided players in the freedom movement, like Bhagat Singh and
Subhashchandra Bose, due to their leftist tendencies matching those of
the Marxist historians (For example, see [shrI sarvesha tivArI’s
dissection of
Bose)](http://bharatendu.wordpress.com/2011/04/19/subhas-chandra-bose-5/).
At the same time they played down or even outright ignored the
Lal-Bal-Pal trio, Aurobindo’s bomb in Bengal movement, and many others
who represented the upwelling of the revived Hindu spirit. The
counter-currents to those of the Marxists have been varied in their
impact. The most coherent of these has been that spearheaded by RC
Majumdar who, with his able team, has in large part articulated a
palliative response to the narratives being forced down the Hindus by
the Marxists. For the Marxist historians the period just prior to the
British conquest of India was not a happy one – they saw it as a period
of decadence not only because the Hindus were resurgent vis-a-vis the
Mohammedan ruffians occupying the land, but also because they imposed
the western idea of feudalism on it – feudalism after all is Marxism’s
favorite whipping boy. Thus, they chose to largely ignore or
mis-characterize this period in their analysis. On the other hand, the
Majumdar team, Sardesai and some others composed better descriptive
histories of this period. However, there were certain lacunae in their
interpretation of the military angles bhArata-mlechCha conflict – these
lacunae we realized were a serious short-coming in: 1) properly
understanding the events that lead to the subjugation of India and 2)
the consciousness of Hindu identity that was and is under attack from
the very same hostile forces which subjugated it in the earlier
conflict. Among Hindu historians these lacunae in understanding arose in
no small part from the failings of the few pre-independence pro-Hindu
historians whom they followed to create the narratives of the military
encounters of this period. English historians naturally had a need to
enforce their triumphalist narrative of history on the Hindus. Thus,
even otherwise sympathetic, pro-Hindu English historians like Denis
Kincaid cannot be relied upon when it comes to the bhArata-mlechCha
saMgrAma. Hindu historians like Sir Jadunath Sarkar, while under English
rule, faithfully followed the line of their overlords in order to retain
their paychecks. Thus, Sarkar’s military history of India is one of the
most atrocious pieces of work that paints the Hindu as a true imbecile.
Unfortunately, post-independence, there was hardly any effort to correct
these gross misapprehensions, though Sir Jadunath himself completed this
U-turn on other issues. Ironically, one of the major corrective works in
recent times has emerged from the [hand of the Canadian historian
Randolf
Cooper](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/25/coopers-book-on-marathas/),
who must be commended for striking a fresh path \[This note is an
expansion of the previous one linked above, which collates the points we
wished to detail but did not have the opportunity in the earlier
version\]. While examining some of the sources of Cooper, we realized
that there was rich story of the military systems of the pre-modern
Hindu military organization that was either untold or poorly told. It
ran contrary to the common narratives regarding the history of the Hindu
encounter with the mlechCha-s and even threw light on the earlier
encounters of the Hindus with the Moslems.

**Military manpower management and military entrepreneurship**  
One of the major shortcomings of the earlier military narratives has
emerged from the false and even paradoxical characterization of the
Hindu military character by the English. At the heart of this
contradictory characterization lies the assertion that the Hindus by
themselves were rather incapable of military organization or management.
On one hand they were described as being innately soft or weak. Thus, we
hear from English apologists such as Charles Hamilton describing Hindus
as a “gentle, peaceable people, cultivating fine arts, who were
powerless against the martial vigor of the Mogol invaders”. He goes on
to describe the Hindu as “soft and effeminate” with an “abasement of
mind which is the necessary consequence of a long state of slavish
subjugation” that he attributes to “their constitutional apathy”, “
their mode of living” and “the delicate texture of their bodies”.
Indeed, to a degree such images have on occasions been internalized by
Hindus themselves as is amply clear from Jadunath Sarkar’s Military
history of India and more recently encouraged by the Anglosphere
\[Footnote 1\]. On the other hand, the English made it appear that the
manly culture of European military and discipline and hard training
could make a warrior out of even these soft Hindus. Thus, we have Major
Munro state: “*but the Europeans have since shown that rigid discipline
will make a soldier of a Pariar, the lowest of all casts.*” In yet
another contradictory twist, the English went on to propose the theory
of martial races. In this they characterized certain sections of ethnic
spectrum of India, namely the sikh-s and gorkha-s, along with Moslems as
martial races, who unlike the rest of the Indians were imbued with
innate military predilections. However, completely dismissing the
endogenous role of the guru-s and subsequent leaders like baNDa in the
case of the sikh-s and pR^ithivi-nArAyaNa-shAha-deva in the case of the
gorkha-s, the English claimed credit for identifying these martial
tribes and developing them into a proper military force – in a sense a
dehumanized asset for European use. Thus, the essential anecdote created
by the English was that the Indians were incapable of endogenous
military manpower management. They did not even have the concept due to
their Hindu ways in which a small kShatriya varNa alone had military
capability. It ultimately took the English to recognize the military
manpower potential both in the “martial races” and the apparently
non-military jAti-s and develop them for war. On a related issue they
also presented the Hindus as entirely lacking a culture of military
entrepreneurship – i.e., utilizing military manpower as an asset that
was available as a commodity that could be leveraged for business. Thus,
it is portrayed almost as though Hindus had no serious business model
for military organization before the coming of the English.

Nothing can be farther from the truth with regards to the inability of
the Hindu to mobilize across varNa or jAti lines. Hindu society was
structured in way that followed natural human tendencies and favored
compartmentalization of duties and division of labor. This provided an
intrinsic robustness to the system and avoided uni-dimensional
development. But this did not mean that traditionally the different
sections of society were not armed or were incapable of mobilizing when
a need arose. From the history of shivAjI, the founder of the mahArATTa
empire, it is clear that the he mobilized all the major social sections
for his army. Indeed, he recruited tribal pastoralists like dhangAr-s,
avarNa-s such as mahAr-s and mAh\~Ng (traditionally lowest ranked
jAti-s), shUdra agriculturalists like kuNbI-s, in addition to kohli-s,
kAyastha-s, mahArATTa-s and brAhmaNa-s. Nor was this practice an
innovation of shivAjI. Indeed, [as we have
seen](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/09/13/the-battle-of-haldighat/),
before him mahArANa pratApa siMha of mevAD also recruited widely across
jAti-varNa lines to form a national army to counter the Jihad of tyrant
Akbar – every one from brAhmaNa-s and mehtA businessmen to bhilla
tribesmen were organized into regiments by pratApa for this war.
Importantly, after his elite troops and officer ranks were seriously
depleted in the encounter at Haldighati, pratApa and his son amara siMha
were able to continuing fighting and win major victories by training and
fielding several new bhilla contingents, who proved to be an effective
fighting force. Nearly contemporaneous with pratApa was mahArANI
durgAvatI, the last of the chandrAtreya-s who was able to build and
field an effective fighting force comprised of the goND tribesmen
against Akbar’s Ghazi-s. Thus, the training of tribesmen or avarNa-s to
make effective soldiers was something which had already been pioneered
by Hindu rulers long before the Europeans.

Further, the ability to mobilize effectively across jAti-varNa lines was
not necessarily imposed by kShatriya rulers top-down. It happened in a
somewhat scale free-fashion over the country. The best example for this
comes from the mobilization effected by the agriculturalist shUdra
chiefs of kamma, reDDi and kApu jAti-s. They were able to create
effective armies from agrarian shUdra-s and kohli-s, pastoralists
(golla-s), forest tribes (kATTureDDi-s) and various broken up kShatriya
groups and tribesmen. This army was raised and trained with a matter of
5 years and was able to effectively turn back the tide of the Jihad in
parts of south India. This scale-free mobilization by the shUdra
agriculturalists was not a new response to the Moslem presence. A closer
analysis can trace its origins back to the system of the sAmanta-maNDala
that emerged in the period of mAhAsAManta dominance prior to the Islamic
onslaught. Thus, the sAmanta-maNDala system, far from being a form of
feudalism that undid the Indians, provided them with an intrinsic
robustness that allowed them to counter the Moslems once the top layers
of the scale-free structure had been knocked out. The reason this worked
was because the sAmanta-maNDala system encouraged scale-free development
of armies at every level of state organization, thus creating a
mechanism that selected for effective military talent long before a
European had set foot on the subcontinent.

The way the sAmanta-maNDala system worked it fostered the development
and management of military talent ground up from the local level all the
way to the empire. The basic unit of Indian political organization,
since at least the time of the Indo-Aryan unification of Indian polity,
was the village with its agrarian-pastoralist economy and pa\~nchAyata
system of local self-government. This system was prone to attack by
parasitic entities (described right from the days of the veda as
taskara, kulu\~ncha, va\~nchaka etc). The defense against such parasites
was organized at the village level and helped the emergence of
militarily proficient agrarian-pastoralist groups (the kApu jAti in
south India is an example of such). The nagara or the urban center on
the contrary had a different economy that was supported by the
channelizing of the produce from numerous grAma-s and also foreign
trade. Controlling the channeling was the domain of the sAmanta; his
success depended on the ability to keep the communication between
grAma-s and between grAma-s and the nagara safe. Another key function
for him was to provide backup for the grAma-s in the the defense against
parasites. This process fostered the development of military management
both at the rural and the urban level. A part of the process was the
ability to safeguard the pa\~nchAyata system from the stronger parasitic
entities such as the AkrAnta-s or the AtatAyin-s who may prey upon
villages that are in the domain of a given sAmanta. Hence, the sAmanta
had to develop both political skills of negotiating with village
strongmen (in south India represented by jAti-s like vELALar-s,
gauNDar-s, reDDi and kamma) and military organization skills that
allowed him to develop larger armies from that of villages. Thus, what
we saw with the development of the sAmanta-maNDala was the emergence of
niches for military manpower developers who could now decide various
power equations. This went beyond the system of mercenary soldiers of
the nanda period (an ancient feature of both Indian and Greek societies;
both Indian and Greek mercenary soldiers were a big force in the
Achaemenid armies), in that it was organized in a ground-up fashion and
comprised of extended networks of local soldiers, who also had
pastoralist/agriculturist secular functions. Thus, rather than inventing
military manpower management, the English were merely drawing upon a
much older system that had already been in place for more than
millennium when they first started utilizing it. In fact this local
management of military manpower did not escape the attention of the
Mohammedans. The Deccani sultanates and the post-Akbar Mogols made heavy
use of the traditional Hindu systems developed within the
sAmanta-maNDala framework, and the rise of shivAjI himself can be traced
back to such systems. After all, shivAjI’s ancestors were pastoralist
pATil-s who organized military man power on a local scale to safe guard
grAma-s and nagara-s (irrespective of their ultimate origin from
hoysAla-s or others).

One might argue that the English introduced training while these armies
of the sAmanta maNDala were irregulars. In our opinion even this is not
entirely right. As Cooper observed the vIrakal-s which document the
military actions of such local warriors already indicate the presence of
a disciplined army. Now, another much neglected source can be brought to
bear upon such this matter: in south India certain
pastoralist/agriculturalist epics have been preserved in the Tamil and
the Telugu languages that give insights into the military organization
centered on the grAma in general. These epics include the tambikal
kathai in Tamil (vELALar-s and gauNDar-s), the kATaMrAju kathalu
(golla-s and mAdiga-s) and palanADu kathalu (kamma, reDDi etc), both in
Telugu. These show that both the pastoralist and agriculturalist groups
spent considerable time in raising and training armies for military
expedition alongside their subsistence duties of farming and animal
husbandry. These groups were not surprisingly the source of man power of
several southern armies.The military training of local pastoralist
armies, which was raw material for military power brokers, might go back
a long way in Indian history: the mahAbhArata and the harivaMsha inform
us that kR^iShNa devakIputra with the help of his foster father nanda
raised an army of gopAla-s that he was able to use early in his career
to subdue the hostile nAga chief kAliya on the banks of the yamuna.
Later, he was able to bring this gopAla army to decide inter-yAdava
conflicts by defeating the partisans of kaMsa, after kR^iShNa
assassinated him. Finally, the gopAla army was lent to the kaurava-s as
part of striking an even agreement in the military showdown at
kurukShetra. We later see a similar [gopAla army of the
AbhIra-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/05/29/mysterious-king-shudraka/)
(a pastoralist tribe in central India related to the golla-s of Andhra)
playing a major role in the overthrow of the kShatrapa-s in western
India.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-DEJFzreNyVw/TpUYLlbzcJI/AAAAAAAACP0/8-7_US8BX8g/s400/kApu_vIrakal.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/lFi8YmPKW3o2KlOO7alR8g?feat=embedwebsite) A
vIrakal of a kApu warrior who fell fighting the turuShka-s

**Uniform, formation, holding line and firing in rank**  
A plethora of western authors have sought to create the fable that
certain military concepts such as uniform, fighting in formations or
holding line and firing in rank are innovations of western infantry that
the Indians were entirely unaware of until they received western
training. Cooper brings home this misconception in his work by pointing
to some of the ideas held by Wellesley. He had famously declared that
the “*Marathas were a nation of freebooters*” based on their use of
piNDArI-s (mahArATTI: peNDhARI). He also stated: “*I think it is much to
be doubted whether his \[Sindhia’s\] power, or that of the Maratha
nation, would not have been more formidable, at least to the British
Government, if they had never had a European, as an infantry soldier in
their service; and had carried on their operations, in the manner of the
original Marathas, only by means of cavalry.*” In essence he was
articulating his view (internalized by most subsequent historians) that
the native Indian armies were incapable of fighting infantry encounters
in the manner in which the Europeans did, and if they did adopt such
techniques they were rather useless at putting it to action. What we are
not often told are Wellesley’s own actions, such as his purchasing up to
10,000 pINDari-s to work on his behalf and his letting them loose in
karNATa and on the mahArATTa-s themselves. By the same token the English
also characterized the native Indian armies as being undisciplined on
grounds such as lack of uniform, ability to hold the line in the
infantry when under fire or even having the concept of firing in rank.
As an extension to their piNDarI style of warfare, even their ability to
deploy in formations during military encounters was doubted\! Indeed,
influenced by such ideas, Sir Jadunath Sarkar in his military history
that bAjIrao-I’s defeat of the Nizam at Palkhed was largely a
consequence of his piNDArI tactics.

Cooper correctly realized that the mahArATTa were not entirely a cavalry
force, nor was their dependence on piNDari-s a matter of pure choice,
and that much of the above mis-characterization of the Hindu armies does
not hold up when more carefully examined:  
1\) First, military uniform was not a unique premise of the Europeans.
The evidence from the dattAjI mAlkare bakhar shows that shivAjI was
already issuing standardized turbans and clothing to his enlisted troops
and this seems to have continued at least till bAjIrao. One can
ultimately trace the presence of military uniform in the subcontinent
back to the arthashAstra from the mauryan period. Thus, it cannot be
considered as being inspired by Europeans.

2\) The terrain of bhArata and its general unsuitability for breeding
high quality horses resulted in an emphasis on infantry since the
earliest times. However, given their Aryan heritage, the Hindu rAjan-s
greatly regarded the horse and always maintained a reasonable body of
cavalry. The Hindu infantry placed considerable emphasis on the long-bow
which proved rather effective against the Macedonian sarissa-armed
infantry that has been often cited as a predecessor of the “Western”
infantry style of warfare. In fact, Alexander and Ptolemaios had
personally tasted the cloth yard shaft fired from the Hindu longbow,
which essentially ended the former’s ambitions for the world empire.
This culture of using the long-bow had already inculcated in the Hindus
the precursor to the principle of fire by ranks – indeed Indian texts
have long described the constant showers of arrows maintained by
different kinds of archers in large scale combats. This mode of attack
had been rather effective through the middle ages even against the
Mohammedan marauders. We know from the depictions in Vijayanagara that
this technique was transferred to matchlocks \[Footnote 2\]. By the time
of last Hindu empire, that of the marATha-s, this infantry tactic was
already in place. From the marAtha sources and reconstructing the events
from the account of the French spy Francois Martin we see that a
preliminary form of firing by rank was probably used by the marATha-s
during shivAjI’s massive attack on Gingee. The Frenchman’s account
indicates that the marATha-s maintained a continuous small arms fire
along with heavy artillery fire which was heard as far as Pondicherry.
There after we again see evidence for firing by rank in shaMbhAjI’s
attack on the Portuguese army. Cooper points out that firing by rank had
independently been deployed in the 1500s by the Japanese samurai tyrant
Oda Nobunaga, so there is no reason to believe it originated with the
Europeans. Non-holding of line and fire from behind the tree line was
another Hindu tactic that was transferred from archers to the
musketeers. The marATha-s used this effectively against the British in
the battle of Aligarh, where they killed several English officers by
shooting them from behind the treeline with some of the best long
barreled flintlocks of the age. Another point which Cooper notes is that
the Maratha-s used the column formation before any possible European
inspiration. Indeed, the example cited by Cooper is that of bAjirao-I
deploying the column against tryaMbakrao dAbhADe – as a result tryaMbak
was shot and killed as he did not expect a heavy thrust right into his
ranks. This tactic of bAjIrao points to his military versatility – he
verily appears to have deployed a range of tactics that are previously
encountered widely dispersed in space and time. The column itself had a
long history in India and it is not impossible that bAjirao was well
aware of this: In the great bhArata war the bharadvAja hero droNa
deploys the kuru forces led by karNa, ashvatthAman and shalya in a
column (the sUchImukha-vyUha) to attack the pANDu-s on the 14th day. The
Indo-Aryan military manuals mention the sUchImukha turning into a
sarvatobhadra-vyUha when under attack by the ratha-s and ashva-s – thus,
the column becoming a square to face cavalry is an old concept that can
hardly be considered to be of French origin.

3\) Right from shivAjI’s time, the marATha-s always used an elaborate
combination of tactics involving both cavalry and infantry divisions.
The cavalry aspect of their warfare was a direct descendent of the Hindu
response to the large mobile Turkic cavalries that became a part of
Indian warfare with the Mohammedan invasions. The marATha-s began their
own program of horse breeding in the bhIma and godAvarI valleys
(bhiMthaDi and ga\~NgthaDi breeds) to make up for the shortfalls with
respect to the Mohammedans. But the marATha army, like other Hindu
armies before them, was never entirely cavalry. Often the tactic was to
launch an initial cavalry attack to force the enemy to retreat. If the
enemy was in the retreat mode, only then they deployed their infantry in
full force along and with their artillery, which Wellesley himself
admitted as being powerful. This mode we know was used effectively by
shivAjI’s commanders, his half-brother Anandrao and senApati haMbirrao
mohite. Alternatively, they used infantry in rough terrain – e.g., as in
[the battle of
Wai](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/02/the-death-of-hambirrao/).The
turning point in the history of India was the battle of Panipat where
the marATha-s lost some of their best commanding officers along with a
significant part of their army: “Two pearls have been dissolved, 27 gold
coins have been lost and of the silver and copper the total cannot be
counted”. Despite having some of the best guns in the world, which were
indeed inspired by French artillery designs acquired via Monsieur de
Bussy, the tactical errors cost the marATha-s dearly in this battle
along with some overall strategic failures in course of the North India
campaign. This loss, coupled with the serious monetary setback stemming
from it prevented the marATha-s from ever fielding a full-fledged
divisions on a large scale thereafter. As result, most marATha generals
fell back on the tactic that could bring a degree of success without too
much effort, namely the irregular cavalry. Only mahADjI shinde raised a
formidable rounded force again, the effects of which were widely felt by
his many adversaries, and the inspiration it provided continued to hold
good till the terminal rounds of the Anglo-mArATha wars and even the war
of independence of 1857 CE. Nevertheless, the loss at Panipat on the
whole seriously affected the marATha military system especially when
coupled with the early deaths of competent leaders like the two
mAdhavarao-s. What field marshal Wellesley faced was not the marATha
army in its best possible shape and yet the reality was that the battle
for India was decided by a whisker in the Anglo-Maratha wars of 1803.
The English characterization of the marATha-s as undisciplined warriors
emerges from several distinct causes, chief of which are:  
i) The marATha regular infantry units of several houses were greatly
depleted when they went into the second Anglo-Maratha war, so they had
to make most of their light cavalry and speed to counter the English.

ii) The mArATha tactics were interpreted in a prejudicial manner by the
English writers because it showed the English performance in very poor
light. One case is the battle of Aligarh where the marATha-s did not
hold the line to fire by rank on purpose because they realized that a
much better strategy, given the undermining of their position by the
subversive action of their European officers, was to shoot from behind
the treeline. This way they took a heavier toll on the English ranks,
even as the Americans had done in their revolutionary war. As Cooper
points out, the use of this tactic by the Americans is praised largely
because they emerged ultimately victorious, whereas the mArATha-s were
branded as being undisciplined and not capable of fighting openly.

iii) In several cases, the Indian forces found it prudent to take cover
when under fire rather than hold line for no apparent gain – they also
often lay on the ground and used their backpack to deflect fire from
hand-held guns. This way they preserved their men to fight another day.
The sheer frustration caused by this to the English led them to
denigrate the marATha-s. However, it should be noted that Wellesley
himself copied this strategy when faced with the heavy fire from the
marATha-s in the battle of Argaum. The English now spun this around and
interpreted it as the military genius of their field marshal. In the
battle of Kharda, where savAi mAdhavarao’s united marATha army fought
the Nizam, the English realized that they stood no chance in saving the
Nizam against the superior marATha artillery and infantry. So John Shore
hastily retreated to save as many English assets as he could even as the
Nizam was being thrashed. This was not described as an ignominious
retreat of the English troops and inability to hold line, but as a
stroke of strategic genius. Indeed, the battle of Kharda is a good case
to show what the united marATha army was just 8 years before the second
Anglo-Maratha war and how the English really would have not stood a
chance had they faced such an army.

**Leukospheric identity, vaNijanIti and the perimeter strategy  
**If the marATha-s were really not inferior in military technique and
technology then why did India get ultimately colonized by the
leukosphere? We believe the answer lies much more in the realm of the
grand geopolitical strategy than anything else:

1)The marATha-s were in a sense meritocratic employers who employed
Hindus, Moslems and Europeans largely based on performance and ability.
In this sense they are similar to many Indian corporate employers and
Indian academics with their own groups in Euro-American academia. The
truth is the Indians were not ethnocentric enough, whereas the Europeans
were just beginning to evolve a sense of white identity. The Indians did
not realize this point when they employed European officers. In a sense,
the Hindus were acting similar to the Iranians who employed a large
number of Greeks even as they fought the Greeks themselves in the
Greco-Persian wars. Similarly, Hindu leaders were by nature genuinely
secular when it came to secular issues. As the army was being seen as a
secular affair, it did not preclude them from employing Moslems and
Christians – they simply did not give much thought to the ultimate
consequences of such actions. Hence, the Indian armies were exposed to
the grave danger of subversion from within. While a few white soldiers,
like the American colonel Boyd, were faithful to their Hindu employers,
most others were untrustworthy – both French and English soldiers in the
marATha army easily either went over to the English ranks or simply
failed to perform. This subversion seriously compromised the marATha-s
as seen in the battles of Aligarh and Assaye. So the marATha “equal
opportunity” military hiring, in particular the inability to understand
the leukospheric identity, completely backfired on them. This was
entirely unlike the Greco-Persian wars were the Greek soldiers on the
Iranian side remained largely faithful to their employers. This point it
is important because, unlike the heathen Greeks or Iranians with an
innate meritocratic outlook, similar to that of the marATha-s, the
leukosphere was developing its identity under the framework of
Christianity. So the white soldiers saw themselves as fellow European
Christians who could cooperate against the dark skinned heathens. It
needs to be emphasized again that the Hindu shortfall in this regard was
not due to the lack of Hindu identity as the leukosphere would like to
claim, but simply due to the Hindu failure to properly read the
developing identity of the “other” in their payroll.

2\) The English are a nation of traders\! Indeed, a key ability of the
English was to purchase loyalties for money. When armies get
professional they lack a sense of identity – verily the English realized
this well and exploited it to their advantage by buying off soldiers,
often on the eve of major conflicts. Central to the English ability to
purchase was their controlling the sea lanes and thus the global trade
system. At the same time they worked to systematically undermine Indian
manufacturing. Thus, they could mobilize the profits from their colonial
ventures elsewhere to support the Indian project that was being sold as
a very rewarding investment.

3\) The above point leads naturally to the most important issue – by
controlling the trade routes by sea the English could develop a
perimeter strategy in which they could hem the Hindus on all sides using
their control of key coastal centers – Bombay, Madras and Calcutta.
Thus, the marATha-s came to be naturally surrounded by the English, who
could indefinitely keep themselves supplied by sea, even as they cut off
the Hindu communication lines inside the country. They completed the
perimeter strategy by the third Anglo-Maratha war and this more or less
doomed the first war of independence in 1857.

In reality few Hindus realize that all these issues continue to be
central to the geopolitical strategy pursued by the leukosphere
vis-a-vis the Hindus. They have pursued the perimeter strategy in long
distance to create inimical states around modern India – Taliban, TSP,
TSB, communist Nepal, a subverted shrIlankA, chIna occupied Tibet,
Islamist Maldives and Christianized Northeastern states. Importantly,
even today most Hindus simply do not realize the way the white boys club
operates and they foolishly keep buying all the nonsense they dish out
in the name of professionalism, liberalism, democracy and modernism.
Finally, with the iron grip on the world trade and monetary systems they
continue to mobilize resources for projects in the subcontinent.
However, we live in interesting times and might have opportunities if
only we knew how to see them.

\~\*\~\*\~\*\~\*\~  
Footnote 1: The west calls upon India not to retaliate against insults
to its sovereignty or national security, but rather show restrain when
assaulted by Mohammedan terrorists. Recently, US senator Mark Warner,
commended Manmohan Singh and India’s “restraint in the face of
continuing terrorist attacks as nothing short of remarkable and keeping
with the *best traditions* of India.” Thus, softness is still encouraged
by the West and foisted upon Indians as a part of its continuing
colonial venture in the subcontinent. We may also speculate that this
softness cultivated MK Gandhi’s world view. Perhaps, its most bizarre
manifestation was in connection to the peculiar sexuality MK Gandhi is
noted to have exhibited later in his life – he wanted to appear as a
female mother figure – a state of non-threatening effeminacy. We may
infer from his writings that this directly stemmed from his misguided
understanding of the Hindu tradition of ahimsa, which in turn was
perhaps an internalization of the soft image imposed on the Hindus by
the English conquerors.

Footnote 2: A version of such an archaic Vijayanagaran infantry gun was
present in the collection of arms of our coethnic AdinArAyaNa who was
the commander of the thoNDaimAn of the drAviDa country in the 1700s.
