+++
title = "The unknown mahApaNDitA"

+++
When we heard from MM of her great exploits we immediately felt a
kinship with her at three levels. This kinship we refer to does not
merely arise from the fact that she was our co-ethnic but from something
much more viscerally embedded in the psyche. Her secular tale is known
to a few people, though even that is largely forgotten by most of her
own co-ethnics, let alone the larger mass of brAhmaNa-s or more
generally followers of the dharma. But what MM told us was her
hagiography that remained with us, much like the question: was 1857 a
futile endeavor? It is that hagiography we seek to record.

It was a community whose moorings had been shaken by the incubus of the
English rule, and the death and short life spans that characterized the
land in the first half of the 1900s – reeking with a strong sense of
foreboding of the growing age of the kali. Her struggling family
supported by a widowed mother drawing off ancestral possessions was no
different. Even as a kid she was distinct from the remaining women –
some what unconventional, more like the men of the community. She
expressed a rather “blasphemous” view before the age of five of wanting
to learn the shruti. This of course was no, but she persisted with it
hanging about in the vicinity of the pAThashAlA and acquiring its
knowledge in the secret. On the other side she insisted on going to a
secular school to acquire western education and the AMgalika bhASha.
Reluctantly her family indulged this fancy of hers. Once in the secular
school her brahminical intellect towered even over the males of her
class. Here natural facility with the devabhAShA caught her brAhmaNa
teacher’s attention, who started giving her additional lessons. He
introduced her to the common fare – kAvya, alaMkAra and the like through
which she breezed without much difficulty. But what surprised him was
her independent study of the agnipurANa around the age of 13. He was
surprised by her ability to expand from pratIka the various vaidika
mantra-s in the vidhAna. It abraded against the conventions of the age
and he tried to dissuade her from dabbling from any such stuff and
instead spend her energy in the bhAgavata purANa, as would be fit for a
woman. She calmly showed how she had already studied the bhAgavata and
was familiar with some intricacies that were not apparent to the regular
bhakti-oriented reader. At this point it suddenly struck him that he was
dealing with someone who might even be beyond his capabilities and
informed her family that they should pay close attention to her
eccentricity – especially certain points she had noted in the agni
purANa and the bhAgavata. Her brother intuitively suspected that a
learned vaikhAnasa paNDita from mannArguDi he knew might be able to
evaluate her. This vaikhAnasa, while a hereditary archaka, had
considerable knowledge of various tAntrika lore and also Tamil
literature. Their meeting was tense, the vaikhAnasa realized that he was
coming face-to-face with a girl who was already familiar with certain
rahasya-s of different mantra mArga-s. But he feared breaking
conventions, and suggested that she concentrate on acquiring skills to
be a good wife and that such mantra-s could back-fire without
appropriate dIkSha. Nevertheless, he taught her some Tamil lore that
considerably helped her in her secular studies. In the mean time her
achievements in secular education showed similar penetration. So her
family took the rather drastic move of letting her continue on to higher
secular studies by moving to the city of Chennai (which as some would
know were well informed by her facility in the devabhAShA and its
literature).

During her secular studies in the city of Chennai, she earned some
additional income by writing some journalistic material in Tamil. Via
these she came in contact with a shUdra mantravAdinI from the chera
country who gave her kaula dIkSha to the three-syllabled tripurashekhara
mantra and introduced her to a great sarvAdhikArI kaula practitioner of
the Madhurai school. With him she rather rapidly progressed through
realms of the mantra-shAstra that few had scaled, acquiring
pA\~ncharAtrika, saiddhAntika, vAma, various bhUta and bhairava
traditions. At the same time in Chennai she became the pupil of two
famous paNDita-s who are renowned for their work to this date. With them
she earned a high secular degree and also initiated academic studies on
the history of the tantra-s. The first person to do this in a modern
sense as far I know. She made some remarkable investigations regarding
the early pA\~ncharAtrika and saiddhAntika activities in the Tamil
country and noted for the first time the connections between them and
the developing bauddha mantra-shAstra. We also realized that she also
anticipated some observations that we made regarding the early
connections between vaikhAnasa-s and kaumAra-s in South India. She
suggested that at the ancient heart of Kanchi there was a dyad of
temples kumArakoTTam and the urakaM that were built under vaikhAnasa
tradition to kArttikeya and viShNu. This was followed historically by a
saiddhAntika shaiva temple and a nAstikAlaya shortly there after. Then
there was a pA\~ncharAtrika temple, but she astutely noted that the
preexisting vaikhAnasa archaka-s took over the worship in the
pA\~ncharAtrika devAlaya. Then finally the kaula shrine of kAmakoTI, the
pinnacle of shrIvidyA in the south, was built. While she had performed
secular studies of great merit, her kaula practice with its nocturnal
visits to the cemetery and secret offerings (indeed she made some
observations on kuNDagola that were rather prescient for the age – it
struck me that she had a scientific spirit as she showed in her secular
life) was outted. She faced a degree of ostracism from many making her
secular existence somewhat difficult.

She was sought by a turuShka who was facing abhichAra and she
successfully saved him with her pratikriya. The turuShka paid her a
handsome sum for her services on account of which she could continue her
independent existence. She also defeated some mlechCha-s in arguments
who were trying to convert Hindus to the pretamata. The chera
mantravAdinI sought her help in a difficult mantra contest with a
powerful rival. While successfully helping the cherA, she is said to
have been struck by a mysterious dhUmAvatI prayoga; others said it was
influenza and yet others blamed her poor food. Her condition defied
diagnosis and treatment of Hindu as well as western physicians and she
was incapacitated from doing any prayoga herself. She died shortly
thereafter at a young age. Her crumbling notebooks in a neat hand record
a tale of a towering all-round intellectual who was well beyond her
times and way beyond most of her own people – but nothing more aptly
illustrates that unseen undercurrent of deeply knowledgeable, scholastic
mantra tradition that exists or existed in bhArata.
