+++
title = "Why rasa? where did Arya and yavana nATakaxa0diverge?"

+++
This may be read in conjunction with an earlier note on an [overlapping
topic](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/11/23/the-spectrum-of-synesthesia-metaphors-and-samdhya-bhasha/).

Through the period of our existence we spent some time trying to
understand kAvya and nATya and reached certain conclusions we felt were
of particular importance. Not only is this understanding central to
appreciating kAvya and nATya but also in general trying to understand
Indian artistic tradition. After I had reached my conclusions I realized
that two other people had been laboring along similar tracks, albeit
from very different directions and without any intersection what so
ever. So I must mention their efforts, though I must stress that
whatever similarity between what I say here and their work is
convergent. The first of them is Bharat Gupt who expounded these ideas
in his book titled: “Dramatic Concepts – Greek and Indian” (I would
recommend an independent study of Gupt’s work because he is one of the
few Hindus with a firm grasp of the Greek language in addition to the
devabhASha). The second person is the neurobiologist VS Ramachandran who
has made considerable progress in studying synesthesia and its
relationship to aesthetic endeavors.

The Christianized West sees the Greek theater as one of the important
precursors of its modern culture and as a direct ancestor of its
theatrical traditions. What is missed as a result of this equation is
the real nature of the Greek theater because it, unlike modern Western
society, was a product of heathen sensibilities, just like its Hindu
sister culture. The key point underplayed by modern Western treatments
is that the Greek theater, like its Arya counter part, was not merely
for the enjoyment of men but also for the gods. This is what Gupt calls
hieropraxis (the sacred drama). This element is very clear in the
nATyashAstra and the fact that through the centuries the chief patrons
of nATya was the Arya orthropraxy, both in its smArta and sectarian
tAntrika manifestations. The nATyashAstra as we have it is a composite
post-Vedic text, but the discerning eye can easily make out the layers
within it, some of which were clearly coeval with the veda. This makes
it clear that the nATyashAstra and the Greek theater indeed descend from
a common Indo-Greek ancestor, which also shares several unique
innovations within the broader Indo-European world, such as similar
structure of their epic narratives. The nATyashAstra opens with a
statement that for the use and instruction of all the four varNa-s,
prajApati collected the essences of the veda to compose the nATyaveda:
the R^ik supplied the chants, the sAman the songs, the yajur the acting
(in the manner of the adhvaryu’s ritual actions) and the atharvan the
rasa (in the manner of the atharvan extracting the rasa-s of oShadhI-s).
After this explanation the nATyashAstra lists the lineage of
transmission of the theatrical lore (indeed even pANini mentions the
nATyasUtra-s in his aShTAdhyAyi) similar to the transmission of other
lore like the philosophy of the upaniShad-s or Vedic recitations. This
clearly establishes the hieropraxic nature of the Hindu theater.

A memory of the oldest layer of the Hindu theater is given thereafter in
the nATyashAstra (NS 1.64 onwards). The first play to be staged by
bharata was a depiction of the deva’s conquest of the dAnava-s during
the glorious indra-dhvaja festival. During this the dAnava-s led by
virUpAkSha decided to disrupt the drama by stirring up the vighna-s with
their mAyA powers. As a result the actors lost their speech, movements
and memory and the director was knocked down. Seeing this indra was
infuriated and lifting the indra-dhvaja or jarjari as a quarter-staff he
fell upon the daitya-s and vighna-s and smashed them with it. Thus, did
indra save the original drama, and that is why his staff is worshiped as
the protector of the drama. This play linked to the period of the
primacy of indra clearly is coeval with the veda and is an account of
ancient plays that were held in open air theaters with the worship of
the indra-dhvaja. However, some surviving dAnava-s are said to have
continued their attacks on the open-air plays. So prajApati directed
vishvakarman to build a nATyashAlA and approached indra and the other
deva-s to take station in its various parts in order to protect it: The
nATya enclosure is protected by soma, the directions by the lokapAla-s,
the inter-directions by the marut-s, the dressing rooms by mitra, the
space within the building by varuNa, the ritual altar by agni, the sides
of the stage by indra. His thunderbolt is made to guard the enclosure of
the clowns, while a daNDa of yama and a shUla on top of it are erected
in front of the nATyashAla to protect it. The jarjara is installed with
the vajra in it. In its nodes indra is installed. In its top part
prajApati is installed. In its second section rudra is installed. In its
third section viShNu is installed. In its fourth section kumAra is
installed. In the portion affixed to the ground the sarpa-s are
installed. Further deities are worshiped in other parts and indra is
invoked to protect the hero of the play and sarasvatI the heroine. The
beginning of the nATya is accompanied by the worship of musical
instruments, the pole of indra and the deva-s occupying the different
sections of the theater house.

This arrangement installation of deva-s in the nATyashAlA presents an
obvious comparison (as has been previously described by a few authors
like Ghosh, Kuiper and Lidova) to the organization of the yAga-shAlA,
with the yUpa as a cognate of the jarjari. Indeed, the nATyashAstra
makes no secret of it by repeatedly stating:  
yaj\~nena saMmitaM hy etad ra\~Nga daivata-pUjanam | (1.123ab; 3.97ab)  
i.e. the worship of the deva-s in the theater is similar to the
performance of a yaj\~na.  
Or  
yaj\~navid yaj\~na-yoge tu nartako .abhinaye smR^itaH | (27.65cd)  
Here an ritualist expert is described as being an assessor of the ritual
associated with the drama.

The connection of theatrics with the ritual of yaj\~na is not merely a
superficial one but goes right into the heart of what we had outlined
before as central to the experience of yaj\~na, i.e. the synesthetic
experience. It is this experience that the nATyashAstra terms rasa (we
have only seen Gupt recognize this in modern discourse). Indeed the
Hindus recognize rasa-s as central to all artistic experience. For
example, the chitra-sUtra-s on drawing and painting preserved in the
viShNudharmottara mention that they are supposed to produce the
experience of rasa-s in the beholder. This is reiterated by king
bhoja-deva in his samarA\~NgaNA-sUtradhAra, who also mentions that
sculpture and constructions (like a properly made house) should evoke
rasa-s. Thus, the common denominator of all experiences pf these
artistic expressions are linked to the experience of rasa that we
encounter in kAvya (which itself while differentiated in later Hindu
tradition directly descends from the vaidika mantra poetry, an epitome
of early synesthetic experience. However, note that the nATyashAstra
entirely recognizes this continuity).

The importance of this synesthetic experience of rasa for sAdhana was
well-appreciated by the early shaiva-s and vaiShNava-s and like many
other elements was borrowed from them by the tAthAgata-s. This
experience was incorporated in the pAshupata practice, as the experience
of theater became rather important for them. With the kaula
reconfiguration of the early bhairava and yogini tantra-s, the aesthetic
experience became central to their sAdhana as the devata-s of the
kula-chakra are conceptualized as being in the sense organs and as being
gratified by the experience of the senses. Here the synesthetic
experience is the equivalent of the unity of the kula deities in
kuleshvarI, as a reversal of the emanation process. Hence, the great
kaula thinker abhinavagupta gives one of the most clear exposition of
the role of rasa in sAdhana. He clarifies that the aesthetic experience
is not simply for an individual’s instruction but is actually equivalent
to the high experience of sAdhana by allowing the universal or
generalized experience beyond the limited sense of I. In his explanation
of rasa, abhinavagupta tries to bring out a subtle point. He states that
when one experiences a piece of art, like kAvya or its expression as a
nATaka then one has a transcendent experience i.e. an experience that is
not limited to that of the individual or the situation described in the
kAvya, but extending to ones own self and incorporating the priors from
ones own past experiences. This, he terms the generalized experience,
and differentiates it from a cognate real life situation because in that
case one experiences a direct emotion with respect to objects of the
situation. Indeed, the generalized experience of rasa allows the rasika
to enjoy a spectrum of emotions, many of which would be rather negative
if actually experienced in a real life situation rather than via the
actor on stage or from the reading or hearing of a text.

This last point is important because it establishes the relationship
between rasa of the Arya-s and catharsis of the yavana-s. Aristotle in
countering his teacher Plato’s understanding of poetry presents the term
in his work on the theater known as Poetics. Here he explains that, as
against Plato’s opinion, the experience of the poetry or theater has a
purifying effect by fostering the “controlled” experience of emotion.
This allows an sense of relief (since Aristotle is primarily dealing
with tragic situations with negative emotions) relative to the real
world, where one is very caught up with ones own experience of the
emotion. This suggests to us that the hieropraxic drama of the common
ancestor of Greek and Arya culture had a notable element of catharsis
and also another element that might be interpreted in light of rasa,
i.e. the Greek term ekstasis. This latter term may be viewed as a
semantic cognate of chamatkAra, i.e. astonishment, which is used by
number of Hindu literary critics. While the ancestral culture recognized
this experience as a key element of drama and poetry, it clearly did not
have an advanced theory for it. Instead, this theory was independently
developed by the Arya-s and the yavana-s. In the yavana world the
theoretical framework did not go very far and appears to have ended with
a relatively simple attempt at characterizing it as catharsis by
Aristotle. That Plato had a rather rudimentary idea of the situation
suggests that it emerged relatively late and Aristotle probably was the
first to understand it among the yavana-s. In contrast, among the Arya-s
it had a rather early and elaborate form in the rasa sUtra-s (NS chapter
6). In fact even the nATyashAstra already records a commentary on the
rasa sUtra-s. However, the proper interpretation of this theoretical
framework was not easily grasped by all Hindu intellectuals. For
example, it appears to us that bhaTTa lollaTa, the Kashmirian
predecessor of abhinavagupta, had a relatively simplistic understanding
of rasa when he describes it as being an “upachita” of sthAyibhAva-s.
Now the word upachita is difficult to precisely translate or rather
interpret. Usually it means “increase”. In this case it appear that
lollaTa means that the rasa is the accentuation of the basic emotion
(sthAyibhAva) and its consequences. This in a sense mirrors Aristotle’s
explanation of catharsis as resulting from poetry/theater magnifying a
emotion relative what one might have personally experienced. But there
were multiple Astika and nAstika theorists who understood brilliant
insights of the nATyashAstra more deeply, though they might have not
entirely agreed on the fine points. This group includes dharmakIrti,
bhaTTa nAyaka, king bhoja-deva and abhinavagupta. Of these, abhinava
alone had the deepest description of the rasa phenomenon, keeping in
line with his similar display of depth while analyzing the kaula mArga
or dhvani.

This deeper theoretical analysis and description of the synesthetic
nature of the experience of kAvya/nATya beyond its simple expression in
the framework of catharsis of Aristotle was the point where the the Arya
poetics and theater diverged and went beyond the yavana counterpart.
This view is reinforced by the answer to the question: Why rasa? An
examination of the original nATyashAstra shows that the very choice of
the word is an expression of the synesthetic nature. The rasika can hear
or see/read kAvya/nATya, but by using the word for a sensory experience
that is completely distinct from those two, i.e. rasa for taste, the
rasa-sUtra-s suggest that the experience is synesthetic. Indeed, in
explaining this abhinavagupta uses the term carvaNa (compared to
enjoying the taste of food while chewing it). That this idea stems
straight from the nATyashAstra can be seen by examining the sUtra-s and
their commentary laid out in NS 6.32. It explains that just as the
enjoyment of tasty food comes from the melding of the individual tastes
of various herbs and condiments, likewise the enjoyment of kAvya/nATya
stems from the admixture of experiences of the different emotions
portrayed by the text or actors. This is termed rasa, which
abhinavagupta commenting on the text clarifies as a cross-sensory,
generalized experience. Given this remarkable analysis of abhinavagupta
1000 years ago, and that of the rasa-sUtra-s probably 2000 years before
him, it is interesting to note that a modern insight into the neural
foundations of aesthetics comes from V.S. Ramachandran. One wonders if
his Hindu origins might have provided a prior (“sub-conscious” or overt)
for his formulating his theory.

NS 6.32:  
tatra rasAneva tAvad AdAv abhivyAkhyAsyAmaH |  
na hi rasAdR^ite kashchid arthaH pravartate |  
tatra vibhAvAnubhAva vyabhichAri saMyogAd rasa niShpattiH |  
ko dR^iShTAntaH |  
atrAha yathA hi nAnA vya\~njanauShadhi dravya saMyogAd rasa niShpattiH
tathA nAnA bhAvopagamAd rasa niShpattiH |  
yathA hi guDAdibhir dravyair vya\~njanair auShadhibhish cha ShADavAdayo
rasA nirvartyante tathA nAnA bhAvopagatA api sthAyino bhAvA rasatvam
ApnuvantIti |  
atrAha rasa iti kaH padArthaH |  
uchyate  
AsvAdyatvAt |  
kathamAsvAdyate rasaH |  
yathA hi nAnA vya\~njana saMskR^itam annaM bhu\~njAna rasAn AsvAdayanti
sumanasaH puruSha harShAdIMsh-chAdhigachChanti tathA nAnA bhAvAbhinaya
vya\~njitAn vAg a\~NgasattopetAn sthAyibhAvAnA svAdayanti sumanasaH
prekShakAH  
harShAdIMsh chAdhigachChanti |  
tasmAn nATya rasA ity abhivyAkhyAtAH |

atrAnuvaMshyau shlokau bhavataH  
yathA bahu dravya-yutair-vya\~njanair-bahubhir-yutam |  
AsvAdayanti bhu\~njAnA bhaktaM bhaktavido janAH ||
