+++
title = "The vaidika kaumAra kulaxa0vidyA"

+++
We had earlier discussed the root mantra of the kumAra shAsana as
provided in the vaikhAnasa mantra-prashna. The complete formulation,
which includes the mantra-s of kumAra and devyaH, represents an early
form of the kula vidyA. Another early vaidika kula vidyA is provided by
the bodhAyana mantra prashna (mantra-s: 181-182). Its correct form is
only known to those who understand the foundations of the
kumAra-shAsana.  
The kumAra mantra:  
OM aghorAya mahAghorAya nejameShAya namo namaH ||  
The mantra of the kula devyaH:  
AveshinI hy ashrumukhI kutuhalI hastinI jR^iMbhiNI staMbhinI mohinI cha
|  
kR^iShNA vishAkhA vimalA brahmarAtrI bhrAtR^ivya-saMgheShu patanty
amoghAs tAbhyo vai mAtR^ibhyo namo namaH ||

The textual corruptions have resulted in some confusion among the
readings of the mantra-s. The most common problem is the correct
interpretation of the number of the mAtR^i-s of the kumAra kula. One
tAntrika interpretation notes 14 mAtR^i-s as part of a 14 pointed
maNDala. However, the version given above is the form preserved in the
oral tradition of the taittirIyaka-s who follow the bodhAyana sUtra
(like my maternal clan). The published bodhAyana mantra pATha (and its
otherwise best-preserved manuscript) and the sUtra text have corrupt
readings at different points which can be recombined to create a
“critical” reading completely concordant with the oral version. In
this reading the kumAra kula consists of only 12 mAtR^i-s. These are: 1)
AveshinI (the possessor); 2) ashrumukhI (bloody faced); 3) kutuhalI (the
eager one); 4) hastinI (the elephant headed one); 5) jR^imbhiNI (the
stretching one); 6) staMbhinI (the paralyzer); 7) mohinI (the deluder);
8) kR^iShNA (the black one); 9) viShAkhA (having he form of vishAkha,
one of the 4 kaumAra mUrti-s); 10) vimalA (the unblemished one); 11)
brahmarAtrI (the epoch of universal dissolution); 12)
bhrAtR^ivya-saMgeShu-patanti (one who falls upon the enemy hordes).  
The last name has been broken up into two separate names in certain
interpretations but this is not the case in original vaidika form
because it neither supported by manuscript nor oral tradition. Some
might also interpret the amoghAH as a further name of a mAtR^ikA. This
interpretation is supported by the presence of the name amoghA as one of
the mAtR^ikA-s in the trayodasha-prAkArIya pa\~nchadashi kaumAra chakra
and the equivalent kaumAra circuit described in the mahAbhArata.
However, it being in plural, in the vaidika mantra provided above it is
likely to be a description of all the mAtr^i-s of the kula (i.e. meaning
they are infallible). The accentation (i.e. positions of the udAtta-s)
of few of the names in second hemistich of the devInAm mantra is corrupt
in the published form of the mantra prashna and needs to be known from
oral tradition.
