+++
title = "Some considerations on Indian polity"

+++
Along with the failure to restore saMskR^ita, one of the congenital
defects of modern India was its failure to reacquire its tradition of
political thought. While such visions might have existed in the world of
the Lal-Bal-Pal trio, they were certainly denuded by the coming of
mahAtmA-chAchA duo. Of the two, chAchA had the merest modicum of
knowledge of any aspect of traditional India thought, as can be seen
from his own writings of India history. On the other hand, though the
faux mahAtmA was a firm Hindu, his understanding of the dharma was
perverted by all manner of self-delusions that characterized many a
Hindu of that age. In this back drop, the only man with a natural sense
of action that characterized the true Hindu spirit was the mahAtmA’s own
saMskR^ita student vallabh-bhAI – sadly he did not remain alive long
after independence. The effects of this start were truly pernicious –
none of the prominent founding leaders paid any attention to genuine
Hindu political thought, and this neglect propagated through the whole
education system of India. For instance, in the 8th or 9th class we were
introduced to political constructs and our textbook waxed about the
Magna Carta, English democracy, the French revolution, the American
revolutionary war, Fourier, Engels, Marx and the Russian communists.
However, there was not a word about the nItishAstra in translation or
the original. Hence, it is not at all surprising that a Hindu might
mouth political platitudes such as “[vasudhaiva
kuTumbhakaM](http://bharatendu.com/2008/08/29/the-hoax-called-vasudhaiva-kutumbakam-1-hitopadesha/)”
or that a front-line Hindu geopolitical analyst is more concerned about
his peg of scotch than the nItishAstra. Even as whole new generations of
Hindus were being trained in the neglect of (or even hostility towards)
their own political tradition, a new generation of white indologists
emerged in the Euro-American academia, such as Pollock, Heesterman,
Bronkhorst, and Davidson, who took up the philological analysis of this
tradition. While philologically reasonably competent, the productions of
these indologists were ghastly and misplaced in spirit. Despite their
apparently sincere protestations of having outgrown the old colonial
paradigms, these white indologists labor under an implicit sense of
superiority of the truth claims of their own systems, such Euro-American
democracy and academic liberalism. We may see this a secularized version
of the Abrahmistic truth claim concerning God. In the system of dharma
we do not present the presence of an Ishvara as a truth claim; instead,
our darshana-s try to make a case for its presence or absence using
logic. Likewise, a Hindu thinker does not accept Euro-American democracy
or liberalism or modernism as a truth claim – we need to really compare
its *theoretical* foundations, practical expressions and history with
our own extensive corpus of the nItishAstra. There is no reason a priori
to accept the Euro-American constructs as truth.

In contrast to their extant descendents, the Arya-s of yore stressed the
importance political thought in no unclear terms. In his deathbed
lecture to the victorious pANDu monarch, the grandsire said in his
famous triShTubh-s:

majjettrayI daNDanItau hatAyAM sarve dharmA na bhaveyur viruddhAH |  
sarve dharmAsh chAshramANAM gatAH syuH kShAtre tyakte rAjadharme purANe
||  
If the politico-legal system disappears the three-fold shruti will
disappear, all dharma-s that inculcate the human duties are overturned.
Indeed, if the ancient political system upheld by the kShatriya-s are
forsaken, then all the duties in respect of all the modes of life,
become lost.

sarve tyAgA rAjadharmeShu dR^iShTAH sarvA dIkShA rAjadharmeShu choktAH
|  
sarve vidyA rAjadharmeShu choktAH sarve lokA rAjadharmAn praviShTAH ||  
In politics are realized all forms of renunciation, in politics are
united all ritual initiations (dIkSha-s); all kinds of knowledge are
linked in politics; and the \[conduct of\] all the worlds are based in
politics.

yathA jIvAH prakR^itau vadhyamAnA dharmAshritAnAm upapIDanAya |  
evaM dharmA rAjadharmair viyuktAH sarvAvasthaM nAdriyante svadharmam
||  
As the destruction of lives in natural calamities result the torment of
those abiding in dharma, even so dharma-s uncoupled from political
support causes \[people of\] all professions scatter from their ordained
paths.

The politics implied by the pitAmaha in these triShTubh-s is that which
upholds all other dharma-s – the rAjadharma – the dharma that
encompasses the administrative, the legislative, judicial and military
systems of a state. Its perversion or loss is seen as a catastrophe by
the Hindus – something that results in the breakdown of all other
dharma-s. Hence, even the dharma-s associated with knowledge,
renunciations, rituals and the very operation of society are seen to
rest upon it. The failure to heed such words is indeed evident in the
unfolding fates of the ancient nations of Greece, Rome and the Egypt.
The perversion and destruction of the rAjadharma in these nations by the
pretamata or the rAkShasa-mata first resulted in the loss of their
“veda” followed by the erosion and breakdown other foundations of
civilization. Indeed, the fate of these nations is a preview of what
awaits bhArata if its peoples were to continue acceding to the entry of
the rAkShasa, preta and rudhira mata-s into its polity.

\~oOo\~

First two of the above verses are inscribed on the frontispiece of Kashi
Prasad Jayaswal, the vaishya scholar’s monograph on Hindu polity.
Jayaswal was traditionally educated in the devavANI by a Hindu ascetic
and subsequently, inspired by the Shri Lankan scholar Wickramasinghe, he
applied his knowledge to several important studies in the rediscovery of
the lost Hindu past. He was also a nationalist who supported the cause
of liberating the Hindu nation from the fangs of the English. In process
he came to study in depth the structural and operational features of old
Hindu polity (i.e. those feature distinct from the statements of legal
code laid down in the dharmashAstra-s). This was the first major
development on the earlier studies on Hindu polity by Law and RK
Mookerji. Indeed, we may see his work as the seed that initiated a
vigorous discourse among Hindu scholars leading to the re-investigations
of the field by likes of DR Bhandarkar, BK Sarkar, NC Vandyopadhyay,
Mahalingam and Altekar. During these studies he befriended Rahula
Sankrityayana and was deeply influenced by him. Hence, we see in his
monograph on Hindu polity the following dedication:  
*“To the memory of the republican vR^iShNis, kaThas, vaishAlas and
shAkyas who announced philosophies of freedom from devas, death, cruelty
and caste.”*  
Thus, despite the erudition and analytical clarity in Jayaswal’s
research, he had already sown the seeds for the befuddlement of the
generations that would follow. Rather than building up, consolidating
and practically implementing the results of the scholarly discourse
initiated by his work, much of Indian expression in this direction
(outside the relatively narrow range of academic scholars listed above)
focused on the message of his unfortunate dedication. In a sense, his
dedication betrays a certain internalization of the occidental framework
during his study of law in England. In a strict sense one might point
out that indeed certain ideas in the upaniShad-s and the teachings of
the tathAgata tried to sideline the deva-s, but neither of them even
vaguely proposed to render them otiose, as implied by Jayaswal. As far
as varNa went, the imputations of Jayaswal are even farther from the
truth, in regard to the republics he mentions or even more generally.
Hence, indeed worthwhile to re-approach the issues of Hindu polity with
a different spirit, one which does not a priori accept the superiority
of modern or Western constructs in this regard.

\~oOo\~

One may question as to why ancient politico-legal Hindu thinking of any
value at all in this day and age, so as to spend time re-approaching it
from different angles ? First, Our interests in this regard are largely
philological, philosophical and scientific. Second, while we are not
particularly knowledgeable in geopolitical, military and strategic
issues, it is not difficult to note that many of the so called
front-line strategic thinkers in post-independence India have a very
poor understanding of their own legacy, especially in the old language
of the Hindu cosmopolis. We can easily see that this lacuna in their
understanding results in disastrous formulations of strategy – a rather
sordid situation for the successors of bhIShma, vidura or viShNugupta.
Instead,  we are provided with are strategic constructs informed by
facile ideas, such as those held by chAchAjI and the mahAtmA. Thus,
looking into classical rAja-dharma is a necessary corrective to avoid
the catastrophic course taken by Greece or Egypt. Third, modern
political constructs created in the west are based on Abrahamistic
frameworks, which has resulted in mohasUtra-s such as: Equal before God;
Equal before law; All people are equal; The state having more rights
over your genes than yourself\! These ideas are not in line with the
biological ground situation: individuals are not blank slates and not
genetically equal; Selective pressures have shaped different groups of
humans differently; not every individual is equally important for
society or even for his own family; When fitness of an individual is
considered, included fitness cannot be neglected in the equation. Hindus
of yore were unfettered thinkers being influenced by the biological
ground situation much more than post-Abrahamistic western thought. Thus,
we might find in Hindu political thought elements that might be more
consonant with ground realities than the western constructs. This is
important because a society that can come terms with, rather than clash
with, its own sociobiology is less likely to be limited by deleterious
policies.

Most importantly, rAjadharma was indeed the common denominator that
allowed us to define the nation of the Hindus. So it is not surprising
that it has been attacked by the enemies of the Hindu nation in all
manner of inane ways. One common tactic has been that of inducing
amnesia – trying to claim that the rAjadharma is a construct for the
exploitation of the vish (or in some alien narratives the shUdra-s and
avarNa-s) by the brahma-kShatra alliance. Here, the detractor causes
selective memory loss with respect to the historical evidence and tries
to obfuscate the temporal series of events by equating the spread of the
memetic package with its alleged forcible imposition by its innovators.
After the Arya-s established themselves in northern India they let loose
the meme of rAjadharma – evidently it was so attractive a meme in
heathen societies that it expansively spread over the whole jambudvIpa
and beyond, even more than the genetic material brought by the Arya-s.
In India, over a period spanning well over two millennia we observe
three modes of transmission of rAjadharma: 1) The erudite transmission,
which was largely spearheaded by the brAhma-kShatra combine. 2) Its
incorporation into itihAsa-purANa and transmission by both brAhmaNa-s
and sUta-s for general education of all varNa-s. 3) The regional
transmission in desha-bhASha-s, in many cases to people at the
Indo-Aryan fringe, which was largely the work local authors, not
necessarily belonging to the brahma-kShatra elite. In regard to the
latter, we may point out the relatively early work in Tamil of
tiruvaLLuvar belonging to the traditional drAviDa ritualist jAti. The
tirukkuraL represents a classical example of a concise yet complete
transmission of dharma literature in a desha-bhASha, wherein the
teachings of manu and chANakya along with other dharma teachings are
summarized. This phenomenon continued over the ages. As pointed out by
Jayaswal one might consider the writings of rAmadAs in mahArATTI or
those of guru gobind in hindi as such transmissions of rAjadharma that
happened within the context of regional religious movements. In this
regard, we are led to a noteworthy point by way of Jayaswal’s work: He
draws our attention to the political work nItivAkyAmR^ita by the naked
jaina AchArya somadeva sUri who was a protege of the chAlukya
mahAsAmanta of the rAShTrakUTa kR^iShNa III. The jaina, not
surprisingly, expresses considerable rivalry towards brAhmaNa and kaula
tAntrika-s (as in his apologetic novel yashastilaka), but at the same
entirely internalizes the rAjadharma issuing forth from great brAhmaNa
authorities like bR^ihaspati and ushanA kAvya. He, following old Hindu
tradition, admits that rAjadharma was founded by these ancient
brAhmaNa-s, and lays out what is enjoined by such authorities as the
norm in political wisdom. Likewise, the tathAgata has incorporated
verses from the mAnava dharmashAstra into his dhamma pAda (e.g. 8.9 and
19.5) by rendering them word for word into vulgar pAli. In Tibet we find
the tsa na ka rgyal po’i lugs kyi bstan bcos, which is a work on
rAjadharma based on chANakya’s maxims written by king bhojadeva paramAra
that considerably influenced the kings of Tibet. Similarly, we find
multiple nItishAstra-s derived from saMskR^ita originals in the old
Indonesian language that were in vogue in the Hindu kingdoms of
Indonesia. This shows that the meme of rAjadharma always traveled
together with the Indian religious traditions, be it the classical
shruti-based tradition or the heterodox shruti-virodhaka traditions or
the more regional flavors that did not use the devabhASha. Hence, the
rAjadharma meme is a major common thread rooted in the original
Arya-dharma that runs across divergent traditions of the subcontinent,
even encompassing groups with little Sanskritic learning or those with
anti-Vedic tendencies. It is for this reason that secularism is
detrimental to the Hindus – it breaks the organic connection that exists
between politico-legal thinking and religion in the Hindu world. As a
result it criminalizes Hindu participation in politics on one side and
on the other it estranges the different divergent dharma traditions by
removing their common thread i.e., the rAjadharma. It was for this
reason the policies of the English-approved Indian leaders in the last
days of the the British rAj have had long-lasting destructive effects on
Indian polity. Hence, every conscious Hindu must oppose secularism in a
Hindu state.

\~oOo\~

## Vedic election of the rAjan and the samiti  
In the last part of this epistle we shall examine the validity of ideas
first presented by Jayaswal on one of the oldest political institutions
of the Arya-s – the Vedic samiti. Jayaswal saw the samiti as an assembly
of the whole people for the election of the rAjan. Thus, he believed
that the Vedic samiti was the origin of Hindu democracy. As for the
election of the rAjan, Jayaswal appears to be on relatively firm ground
as, indeed, the kaushika sUtra of the atharvaveda lays out an ancient
ritual in which the rAjan elected by the vish (people) is inaugurated.
This is made clear in the mantra-s recited by the purohita on this
occasion:  
tvAM visho vR^iNatAM rAjyAya tvAm imAH pradishaH pa\~ncha devIH |  
varShman rAShTrasya kakudi shrayasva tato na ugro vi bhajA vasUni ||
(AV-vulgate 3.4.2)

The people have elected you to kingship, you have \[been established
among\] the five divine directions; at the summit of the state, situated
at the pinnacle, from there endowed with mighty power distribute the
wealth among us.

Now this is corroborated by another mantra deployed by the brahmA for a
similar purpose:  
A tvAhArSham antar abhUr dhruvas tiShThAvichAchalat |  
vishas tvA sarvA vA\~nChantu mA tvad rAShTram adhi bhrashat ||
(AV-vulgate 6.87.1; cf. RV 10.173.1)

I \[the brahmA\] have brought you forth, you have entered, stand firm
not unsteady; let all people choose you, let the the state not fall away
from you.

This suggests that in the Vedic system the people might elect or choose
a rAjan, but what is the relationship of this to the samiti? Here we
need to take a much closer look at the Vedic texts to afford a better
picture. We are informed of two distinct assemblies of the Arya-s in
mantra-s deployed in the AV ritual for the two assemblies to reach a
consensus with the yajamAna:

sabhA cha mA samitish chAvatAM prajApater duhitarau saMvidAne |  
yenA saMgaChA upa mA sa shikShAch chAru vadAni pitaraH saMgateShu ||
(AV-vulgate 7.12.1; cf. shatapatha brAhmaNa 4.1.4.1 for the equivalent
shukla yajurvedIya ritual)

Let both the sabhA and the samiti, the two daughters of prajApati
reaching a consensus favor me. May he train me in \[the means\] by which
I achieve consensus \[in these assemblies\], O ancestors may I speak
well in these assemblies.

The two distinct assemblies, the sabhA and the samiti, are considered
daughters of prajApati (an embodiment of the state), and we learn that
speeches are made in these assemblies with the aim of trying to convince
them to reach a consensus with the individual applying to them. The same
two, sabhA and samiti, are mentioned in the same order in the AV royal
ritual to aditi as virAj. Here the sabhA and samiti are described as
becoming fit with the invocation of aditi into them (AV-vul 8.10.4-5).
We further learn that the king is regulated by samiti, i.e. his
decisions need arise from the concordance of the samiti. This is
supported by a mantra to this effect in the first royal ritual mentioned
above.

dhruvo.achyutaH pra mR^iNIhi shatrUn ChatrUyato.adharAn pAdayasva |  
sarvA dishaH saMmanasaH sadhrIchIr dhruvAya te samitiH kalpatAm iha
||(AV-vulgate 6.88.3)

Firm, unmoving, may you \[i.e. the newly chosen rAjan\] exterminate your
enemies, make your enemies fall under your feet; may from all directions
a consensus and concordance in action be reached with you; may the
samiti reach a consensus for fixing \[your decisions\].  
A similar mantra is seen in the rohita-rAShTra-bhR^ita ritual:

rohito yaj\~nasya janitA mukhaM cha rohitAya vAchA shrotreNa manasA
juhomi |  
rohitaM devA yanti sumanasyamAnAH sa mA rohaiH sAmityai rohayatu ||
(AV-vulgate 13.1.13)

The ruddy one is the generator and the mouth of the sacrifice; with
speech, hearing and mind I make an oblation to the ruddy one, in the
ruddy one the deva-s go with a beneficent mind, may he make me ascend,
when the samiti rises.

These mantra-s are deployed, among other things, so that the samiti
reaches a consensus to uphold or fix the rAjan’s decisions (See also RV
10.166.4, a mantra among other things for the samiti to hand one the
mandate). This conclusion is also supported by the evidence provided by
a mantra for the converse to happen. This mantra is from recitations
used in the abhichArika ritual of the bhR^igu-s against the inimical
vaitahavya rulers who had harmed them. Here a spell is laid to prevent
the samiti from supporting them.

na varShaM maitrAvaruNaM brahmajyam abhi varShati |  
nAsmai samitiH kalpate na mitraM nayate vasham ||(AV-vulgate 5.19.15)

The rain of mitra and varuNa does not rain upon the brAhmaNa-harmer, the
samiti does not accord him a consensus, no friend comes under his
influence.

There are several Vedic references of the king going to the samiti:  
yatrauShadhIH samagmata rAjAnaH samitAviva |(RV 10.97.6ab)

A \[physician\] has an assembly of medicinal plants even as a king has a
samiti.

Further:  
pari sadmeva pashumAnti hotA rAjA na satyaH samitIr iyAnaH | (RV
9.92.6ab)  
The hotar seeks the pen rich in cattle, even as a true king attends the
samiti.

Thus, we see that a true rajan is one who attends the assembly of the
samiti. This is confirmed by references such as those in the chAndogya
brAhmaNa of the sAmaveda where the pa\~nchAla monarchs (e.g. pravAhana
jaivali) are described as attending the samiti-s of the pa\~nchAla-s. It
is from the description in the latter text and the sum-total of the
Vedic evidence that we conclude that the samiti was not an assembly to
elect the rAjan, as suggested by Jayaswal. Rather, it was an assembly
that regulated the rAjan’s decisions by way of reaching a consensus or
majority agreement. It was also a place for intellectual discussions.
Thus, the samiti was a body that was critical to the government of the
Arya-s in the highest level legislation rather than as a electoral
assembly.

With respect to the sabhA, Jayaswal is largely correct in noting that it
was different from the samiti and that it had a primarily judicial
function. This is indeed supported, as he points out, by the pAraskAra
gR^ihyasUtra 3.13. This suggestion is further supported by the mantra RV
10.71.10:  
sarve nandanti yashasAgatena sabhAsAhena sakhyA sakhAyaH |  
kilbiShaspR^it pituShaNir hy eShAm araM hito bhavati vAjinAya ||

The friends are delighted in the friendship of him who returns in
triumph, having been declared the winner in the sabhA; he is the remover
of the accusation, the nourisher, he inclined and fit to bring victory.

The remover of the accusation phrase supports the idea that the sabhA
was the place where legal matters were settled by a majority. This is
further clarified by sAyaNa in his commentary on the atharvavedIya
mantra (also seen in the shatapatha brAhmaNa) on the sabhA:

vidma te sabhe nAma nariShTA nAma vA asi |  
ye te ke cha sabhAsadas te me santu savAchasaH ||(AV-vulgate 7.12.2)

We know your name, O sabhA, the inviolable majority decision is your
name; who ever sits in the sabhA may they speak in my favor.

In explaining this sAyaNa states that the name nariShTA derives from it
being the inviolable majority opinion being reached in the assembly:
bahavaH saMbhUya yady ekaM vAkyaM vadeyus…na parair ati-la\~NghyaM ataH
anatila\~Nghya-vAkyatvAt nariShTeti | This indeed suggests that the
sabhA was place where binding judicial decisions were reached. However,
we do not hear of the rAjan being mentioned in connection with the
sabhA, unlike the samiti. This suggests that the sabhA probably had a
local role unlike the royal samiti. Alternatively, it might point to the
separation of the judicial wing of the government from the sphere of the
rAjan. In any case, the beginning of the rAja-dharma Arya-s can be seen
as having several distinct departments which are clearly distinguished
in the vaidika statements on these matters: 1) the rAjan – the head of
the state; 2) the samiti which worked with the rAjan; 3) the sabhA which
administered justice; 4) the senA – the army.Thus, we have been endowed
with a long tradition of rAjadharma that goes back to the shruti itself
– to neglect and pervert it is truly reflective of our failure in
re-acquiring our traditions.
