+++
title = "The conversion"

+++
It was many many moons ago. We were seated upon the wall near the
viShTa-parvata when the kR^iShNa-shUdra materialized in front of us. He
was looking agitated. Just a few days before the English teacher had
asked the class to write an essay on which political party would be best
for the republic of India. KS had told us as to how he had filled a
whole page with his rudimentary English in support of the Kangress
party. Even before the essay exercise, he had told us how he was excited
by the full-page advertisements that had been sponsored by the Kangress
party in the local news paper. In particular, he was impressed by one
ad, which he showed me with some animation: It depicted scorpions and
may be snakes and a broken figure of a doll and had words like
communalism, separatism and disorder printed above them. Behind all of
this was the hand symbol (the hastA\~Nka) subliminally signaling an
image of protective assurance. KS told us that, in particular, he has
discussed the significance of this advertisement in his essay. He stated
how, from the civics textbook we had long left behind us, he added the
lines regarding the sovereign, secular republic of India and how the
Kangress party was the best option for maintaining it. We had then asked
kR^iShNa-shUdra what he felt was communalism? He promptly described it
as being rioting by the Meccan ruffians. Just then the proud brAhmaNa,
dvipakSha-kesha chimed in regarding an experience he had during the
recent vinAyaka festival when the beards had fallen upon their
procession and he was struck by a large stick. KS quipped that he should
be happy that it was just a stick and not a sword which had struck him.
We were a little puzzled by KS’s vision of things. The arrogant
dvipakSha-kesha left, but before parting he advised Blackie to see a
certain documentary that was being aired for a nominal price in the
college auditorium by the BJP youth wing.

It was after seeing this that KS had emerged in an agitated state before
us. We queried him regarding his great agitation and he proceeded to
narrate what he had seen. He had seen graphic images of Hindus being
slain and dispossed by the marUnmatta-s in Kashmir. In the same
documentary he had also seen some material regarding stealth ghazis from
TSB. It had struck him like blow from hanumat’s fist that the Kangress
party which he had much admired was at the center of these happenings,
and not exactly in the way he thought it to be. KS asked: “Could it be
true that the party which had brought us to freedom from the the English
has been neglecting the nation, aiding and abetting our millennial foes?
If true everybody needs to know this. At least they need to discuss
whether this is true.” We told KS that we completely stood by him but
wondered if the others might. Indeed, KS had his doubts if what he had
seen was true. The documentary was claiming that BDs had been imported
to give votes for the Kangress, but then could the “party that led us to
freedom” really commit such a crime. Then there were sphichChiras,
aja-dADhika and lambashiras who were telling KS to get away from all
this politics, which could only ruinous to his “abhyAsa”. They asked him
if it really mattered him if something was happening in kashmIra,
prAgjyotiSha or ayodhyA, especially when he was an year away from what
they thought was the biggest event in life. “arre\! paDo yAr, ye sab bAt
choDo, nahi to DakTar yA injinyar kaisa banega?”.

Indeed, KS applied himself aggressively to the curriculum, all the while
reinforcing himself with the quip: “kuch bhI hone do; AkAsh bhi sar par
paDne do; jarUr DAkTrI karnA chAhi.e”. In this quest of his life’s goal
he was taking special tuitions from the crack of dawn. He had made it
his habit to swing by our place after his morning lessons to discuss his
latest conquests in the curriculum. One evening in the year of vibhava,
in the second turning of the hexadecal cycle in our lives, we had gone
out of our compound to the end of the street to meet Mis-creant.
Shortly, there after palitA\~Nga materialized from nowhere, perhaps
because Mis-creant attracted guys like flies to a syrupy spill (OK I did
not say that:-)) creating a moment of silence. Two streets beyond was a
small rAkShasAlaya topped with the shashidhvaja. The still evening air
was pierced by the wail of the marUnmatta crier proclaiming
ekarAkShasatvaM and the primacy of the Adyunmatta. It was much louder
than usual. From our vantage point we faintly heard a response of AoA’s
and suddenly the crier suddenly took off delivering a fiery sermon in
the turuShka-vAk. palitA\~Nga who was familiar with the turuShka-vAk
caught a few words which he translated for us – including: “the
marUnmAda is in danger from the infidels”. Mis-creant added that she had
passed that rAkShasAlaya as a kid was terrified by the sight of an aja
being slaughtered and added that she felt a sense of terror. “Is this
not open incitement” she asked? To that palitA\~Nga replied how many
people in this locality other than the marUnmatta-s understand the
chaste turuShka-vAk (perhaps in those days apparently Bollywood was not
yet so drastically turuShikized)? Confidently, palitA\~Nga dismissed
Mis-creant’s concerns saying that the marUnmatta-s were all talk and
could really do nothing. On that somber note we retired to our
respective abodes.

The next morning KS appeared extraordinarily agitated – words were
difficult to come by. He said that one his way back from his tuition he
had witnessed an outrageous sight and there was definitely potential for
great trouble. There was a vinAyaka devAlaya, not far from our regions,
which we used to occasionally visit. KS told us that a freshly severed
bleeding bovine head had been deposited in the maNDapa of the said
devAlaya and that the SS party activists had gathered there shouting
that they would retaliate. Just then ajagarAsya, hrasvaroman,
sphichChiras, AmrAnana and braindeya appeared. They all looked worried.
sphichChiras broke the silence by stating that he was worried that this
political “chaos” might prevent him from attending his afternoon physics
tuition, thereby setting him back by a precious day or more in his
conquest of the curriculum. Thereafter, ajagarAsya said that this SS
party was only out to cause trouble – why could they not just remove the
bovine head, clean up the temple, and move on with life rather than
threatening to bring the sky down? Most of the rest seemed to murmur in
assent. But KS and braindeya remained silent with conflicted miens.
After a moment of silence braindeya spoke as though some deep feeling
within him had just erupted: “It is not the SS party which is the issue
here, and nor is it the issue of our classes being disrupted, but the
marumoha spitting at our faces”. “Indeed\! This is marumoha and its
rascally founder have nothing but evil to offer” said KS in apparent
agreement. Just then AmrAnana stepped forth and blasted them: “How could
you blame an entire community or religion. My own parents while born
Hindu greatly respect dargahs and prayed for my birth at a Saracenic
structure. You are the ones encouraging communalism”. The rest of the
crowd was sort of sporting a glazed look on their eyes and were
murmuring in discomfort. This catalyzed the break up of the group and
everyone went their own way. The expected riots did not pan out and the
still was restored the next day. But AmrAnana came up to KS and us with
a newspaper article – it stated that the temple desecration was possibly
a “political act” by “activists” in order to bias the results in nearing
elections against an incumbent Kangress politician. He then stated: “Did
I not tell you so. It is all a political game and probably the cow-head
incident was done by the SS activists themselves to gain in the
elections against the Kangress. You have to always seek a political
explanation before a communal one.” While KS and AmrAnana argued for a
while, we merely smiled and remained quiet. After AmrAnana had departed
we told KS that fellow was beyond repair and probably might get the
message only when he is being slashed by a ghazi. But KS was livid, he
said: “this fellow does not know anything and he accuses us of
communalism. Today, I have obtained reliable intelligence that the
Kangress was distributing free gifts in the marUnmatta locality and they
had organized a slogan-shout-out in return for the politician from that
party. Today, I know that this Kangress is not the party that lead us to
freedom but one that might take us back to the times before the
Chatrapati\! Could it after all be that even Gandhi and Nehru were like
this? After all my mother had said that the old Nathuram was a patriot
too.”
