+++
title = "A narrative on the kAlAmukha-s: implications for thexa0bhairava-srotas"

+++
We had earlier briefly considered the kAlAmukha-s on these pages. While
once prominent in both the north and south of the country, their last
occurrences are recorded only in the south (though they clearly
acknowledge their connections to the northern branches). While the
kAlAmukha institutions received a devastating blow from the army of
Islam’s rampage through south India under genocidal Ghazis, such as
Khalji and Tughlaq, we know from inscriptional evidence that few
Acharya-s of the system survived into the early years of the
vijayanagara empire. Unfortunately, some time after this period they
became extinct and with them vanished their major ritual manual the
kAlAmukha-mahAtantra. A few fragments of this tradition have
nevertheless survived in the Alur town of the karNATa country, where the
kAlAmukha-s were once at pinnacle of their glory. These fragments
include a text from the vijayanagaran capital that narrates an unusual
version of the old tale of the competition between kumAra and vinAyaka
in the context of the origin of the kAlAmukha tradition. Typically, this
tale is used as device to downgrade the more ancient deity kumAra and
prop up the emerging deity gaNesha within the shaiva hierarchy. But here
it is resolved amicably. This, to us, suggests a link to the dominance
of the old kaumAra tapovana-s of dakShiNaugha which appear to have been
a major force in the Bellary region before the Mohammedan terror
intruded upon these regions. The tale goes thus:

“In the long past rudra had narrated to his son kumAra the kAlAmukha
lore. When rudra was holding court on his mountain abode, a devI known
as sevitA, who was the mistress of the forest of nandana trees, appeared
and offered a fruit of the kalpavR^ikSha tree to him, after having
saluted him and his wife. rudra gave it to aMbikA and in turn kumAra and
vinAyaka wished to have the same. To have some fun, umA smilingly asked
kumAra and gaNapati to go round the world and said that she would give
it to the one who returned first. kumAra mounted his peacock and went
racing around the world. But vinAyaka was off to a slow start and
instead went around umA and rudra. They were surprised at his action and
he explained that they were the origin of the world as the puruSha and
prakR^iti and thereby comprise the whole world; by going around them he
said he has completed his task. Just them kumAra completed his circuit
of the world and arrived there. Pleased with the energy of kumAra and
the cunning of gaNesha, umA cut the fruit and gave each of them a half.
Two muhUrta-s later, mahAkAla, a gaNa of kumAra appeared there. He too
had gone around the universe as he was keen to provide service for his
lord, kumAra. But since kumAra was flying at a blistering pace and he
was going unaided it took him a longer to complete the journey. rudra
noticed this and was struck by his loyalty to his leader. So rudra asked
kumAra to give him mahAkAla and appointed him as one of his
bhUtagaNeshvara-s beside nandin and vIrabhadra. Then one day kumAra
revealed to him the kAlAmukha-mAhAtantraM. Thereafter, mahAkAla taught
it to the deva-s and they imparted it to the muni-s. The students of
these muni-s transmitted it to the earthlings as the aghorasAra, and
thus kAlAmukha tradition was promulgated.”

In bharadvAja’s narration of it it began with the mantra:  
namaH shivAya devAya harAya paramAtmane rudraya kAlakAlAya kAlakaNThAya
shambhave ||

Continued …
