+++
title = "The base ofxa0Artiodactyla"

+++
Notable aspect of our divergence from our cousins, the chimpanzees, has
been our “mutualistic” or “parasitic” association with artiodactyla.
Several human populations have repeatedly acquired the ability to
domesticate artiodactyls – a process which began with pigs (suids), but
came to include: camelids in Eurasia (at least 2 times independently,
Camelus bacterianus and Camelus dromedarius) and the Americas (Lama), to
a degree certain dolphins, caprinae, like sheep and goats, giraffids
like Sivatherium, cervids (e.g. Rangifer tarandus) and various bovids of
the Bos and Bubalus clades. In the making of whole human cultures were a
consequence of intimate associations with various artiodactyls. Our own
culture and life is one which has not yet lost its links to the bovids.
Today, artiodactyls present much varied morphologies keeping with their
colonization of various niches – the camels, pigs, the semi-aquatic
hippos, wholly aquatic whales, the distinctive giraffe, deer, goats,
cattle and other antelopes. But when exactly did these morphologies come
into being and of these morphologies are any close to the primitive
artiodactyls is not very clear. Anatomically one of the most distinctive
features of the artiodactyls is their “double pulley” astralagus, which
they all seem to share and was clearly present in the common ancestor.

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2012/07/double_pulley_astralagus.jpg?w=640
"double_pulley_astralagus")](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2012/07/double_pulley_astralagus.jpg)  
*The double pulley astralagus*

However, on the whole morphology by itself has proven to be rather
unsuccessful in uncovering the evolutionary history of the artiodactyls.
Molecular phylogenies have revealed a rather interesting picture of
artiodactyl relationships. They unequivocally support the following
clades: 1) camelids; 2) suiformes uniting the Old world pigs and the New
world peccaries; 3) Whippomorpha uniting the hippos and whales; 4)
ruminantia uniting the ruminant clades of the tragulidae (mouse deer),
antilocapridae (gazelles, oryxes, muskoxen, goats, sheep), giraffidae
(giraffes and okapi), cervidae (deer), moschidae (musk deer) and bovidae
(chausingha, nilgai, kudus, buffaloes and cattle). The molecular studies
also strongly support the monophyly of whippomorpha and ruminantia (the
cetruminantia clade). The camels and pigs consistently emerge as the
basal-most clades of the extant artiodactyls. Most studies place the
camels as the basal-most lineage, though it has been proposed that a
basal pig-camel clade cannot be statistically ruled out. The placing of
the fossil artiodactyls in this framework has proved to be even harder
and raises some interesting issues. The most extensive studies, to our
knowledge, in this direction are those of J. Theodor, O’Leary and
coworkers, and we shall use those as a starting point for the ensuing
discussion.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-EE1B8l5hv64/UBjQY_pMbFI/AAAAAAAACaw/KIsABXD1i2s/s400/artiodactyla.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/K46ZMMJeLWeZwTswDKPcJNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*The diversity of artiodactyls*

Continued …
