+++
title = "Some more ramblings on the mlechCha-marUnmatta abhisaMdhAnaM"

+++
The mlechCha-s outwardly appear to have been at war with the
shashidhvaja-s since the first days of the khilI-moha propagated by the
adi-marUnmatta. But throughout history several actions of mlechCha-s
have ended up strengthening the marUnmatta-s rather than weakening them.
This has been more so in the last 150 years than ever before. We first
realized this and pointed it out when we were in school. The
kIlitashava-sAdhaka-s attacked us with much vigor and only ekanetra
stood by us in that great strife. We wondered why the pretAchArin-s of
the desh needed to be so affected by this observation – after all many
of them were from the so-called “depressed” jAti-s (technically avarNa
jAti-s or jAti-s not belonging to the 4 varNa-s) who had historically
nothing to do with the mlechCha-s. Then by interviewing these
pretAchArin-s we learned that they had connections with good old chAchA
shAM – after all they had become shUlashava-sAdhaka-s in return for the
rice (or was it chappAti-s?) and pelf given to them by mlechCha agents.
When we reached the shores of the mlechCha-desha, we brought this up
again on certain internet fora, which evoked a comparable response,
again spearheaded by concealed pretAchArin-s, who were herding clueless
Hindus as a bulwark against us. Thus, again we found that pretAcharin-s
and their deluded followers were batting for the marUnmatta-s – a true
harmony between the religions of peace and love. One may list many
historical instances of this:  
\* The legitmization of sundry Arabic bandits as the royalty of the
hellhole of Saudi Arabia by the Anglospheric combine. This was
accompanied by legitimization of petty Moslem warlords or robber barons
as grand Amirs all the way from West Asia to Brunei.  
\* The empowerment of TSP against Hindus as part of the historical
extension of Anglospheric colonial ventures in the subcontinent, with an
ultimately pan-Asian objective from the mlechCha viewpoint (part of the
subcontinent as a foothold to reach China policy).  
\* The military and material support for Ghazis against the neo-Russian
Soviet empire during the cold war.  
\* The support of eastern European Mohammedans against Serbia by the
Anglosphere.  
\* Support for the Chechen terrorists against the Rus.  
\* Facilitation of the de-Hinduization of East Bengal by supporting the
genocide of Hindus by the Mohammedans of TSB.  
\* Covert dealings with or support for Mohammedan groups who destroyed
the visible signs of Indic heritage in Afghanistan, Maldives, Malaysia,
Indonesia and other places.  
\* Support for or facilitation of various Mohammedan movements to
replace secular Arab and Shia regimes with sharia compliant ones (Iran,
Iraq, Tunisia, Egypt, etc).  
\* Cover up and lobbying to make the marUnmAda look like a respectable
religion (including offering additional cover for the Sufi
subversionists).

An important aspect of this has been the effort to prevent any study of
the interesting psychological dimensions of marUnmAda by using the
cudgel of academic liberalism to enforce self-censorship. The marUnmAda
is interesting in that it is a meme complex that originally arose as a
moha in brain of an unmatta, i.e. a person with defective neural
hardware. However, it successfully propagated in the brains of millions
upon millions of people with normal hardware. Herein lies the key to
understanding the mlechCha-marUnmatta abhisaMdhAnaM. Even before the
marUnmAda reached pandemic proportions, that path was taken by another
unmAda arising from the defective neural hardware of the kIlita-preta.
The heathen ancestors of the mlechCha-s were among first victims of the
pretonmAda. A clear diagnosis of this unmAda was made by the brilliant
yavana vidvAn Celsus, who exposed it for what it was. Yet, this unmAda
spread rapidly and overwhelmed the western world. Any fundamental
description of the marUnmAda can also be generalized to the pretonmAda.
This, would lead to a widespread appreciation of Celsus’ brilliant
analysis, leading to the realization that for all these centuries the
mlechCha-s have been carrying a “mind-bending” unmAda and basing their
whole culture and society on it. This, their leaders well realize, could
result in a very damaging effect on their carefully built self-image.
Thus, investigations on the remarkable phenomenon of how an unmAda from
a defective brain can memetically affect millions of normal brains has
been sidelined. Thus, the attacks of the conservative mlechCha-s on the
marUnmAda are, at best, structurally weak because any further
development of this will come to destroy their own under-girding of the
pretonmAda. The demographic advantage held by the devout followers of
the pretamata relative to the lapsed ones, can lead to a strengthening
of the basic delusions of pretonmAda, at least in parts of
krau\~nchadvIpa. Thus, we are not going to see any improvement in the
fundamental characterization of the unmAda-s in the west, which in turn
implies that they are unlikely to fundamentally challenge the marUnmAda.

The only real challenge to the mata-s based on unmAda has, for a long
time, been that of the bhArata-s. Hence, we are not surprised that they
have a particular fear of the dharma and work hard to exterminate it. In
this regard ekanetra had asked if historically the unmAda-s understood
their shared doctrinal weakness when confronted with the robustness of
the dharma. This question was particularly pertinent because the general
opinion has been that until the late 1800s (e.g. Vakimchandra
Chattopadhyay) the Hindus had no proper understanding of the unmAda-s.
At least the sister group of the bhArata-s, the yavana-s had a Celsus or
a Julian who had produced devastating critiques of the unmAda. But
Hindus were not known to have any such. If this were the case, then how
could the unmatta-s feel threatened by the dharma. This prompted us to
narrate to ekanetra the case of the relatively obscure internal
critiques that arose in the West Asian and European realms, long after
the tragic demise of the brave Julian, wherein rare philosophers saw
through the madness gripping their people. We had earlier alluded to the
[Georgios Plethon
Gemistos](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/fragments-of-west-asian-heathen-thought-late-surviving-hermetica/)
in the Byzantine world of pretonmAda-s. Not only did he see the delusion
gripping the Greeks but he also realized that it was not different from
the marUnmAda gripping his neighbors. But several centuries before him
there was an internal critique right in the maru from Abu al-Husayn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Ishak al-Rawandi, which is of interest for multiple
reasons, one of which is how the transmission of an Indic critique
touched a raw nerve simultaneously across all the mata-s based on
unmAda.

What ever little is known of al-Rawandi makes a fairly interesting tale,
which while commonly known in educated circles, is still worth retelling
(One may profitably consult the works of Sarah Stroumsa to glean useful
information regarding him). His father was a Judaist and Talmudic
scholar, who as a Dhimmi during the Arab conquest of Iran, was obliged
to convert to Islam. Moving from one Abrahamism to another with much
ease, with a new convert’s zeal, he started a program of refuting Judaic
texts and favoring Mohammedanism. His son Abu al-Husayn was well
schooled by his father in Koran and Hadiths and was on his way to being
a good Mohammedan. However, he drifted away, first moving to the
mu’tazilI system of semi-rational Mohammedanism, followed by a stint
as a Shia, and then becoming a Manichaean. Finally, he gave up all
prophetic Abrahamisms and compiled a piercing critiques of these cults,
and thoroughly exposed their shallowness. The Mohammedans termed him
al-zindIq and al-mulHid, which are supposed to mean a materialist or
atheist who rejects the religions of the book. Indeed an Islamic
apologist says about him: *“We have never heard anyone defame the
creator (i.e. the Abrahamistic mono-deity) and make fun about him as
much as this cursed one (i.e. al Rawandi) did.”*

Not surprisingly, his refutation of the Abrahamism, titled the Kitab
al-Zumurrud (or the emerald) does not survive in totality. However, we
have fragment of it preserved within an Islamic apology written by a
Shia hAshIshin (Assassin) missionary to counter it. The point of
interest to us here is his presentation of the critique of prophetic
religions that was developed by the barAhima or brAhmaNa-s. Now some
western arabologists have tried to deny that barAhima meant brAhmaNa-s
or have tried to claim that al Rawandi put words into brAhmaNa-s’ mouths
because he was afraid to claim them as his own. These attempts suggest
that there is still an underlying fear among the followers of
unmAda-mata-s to accept that these critique came from the brAhmaNa-s.
After all, unlike some imaginary group, they are still very much alive
and can still undermine the philosophical foundations of the
unmAda-mata-s. Indeed, this denial is a part of the continuum of trying
to deny the Hindu traditions when confronted with their superior
robustness (it should be noted that a tangled skein connects some of
these arabologists to the indologists like the mahAbhagabhakShakI from
Chicago and her relatives). However, a closer look clearly re-affirms
the fact that the barAhima were indeed brAhmaNa-s and not anything else,
and the critique was not put into their mouths but came from them.
First, in the 900s al-Qasim ibn Ibrahim clearly states that the barAhima
are from al-Hind. This establishes that the Arabic writer were talking
about Indians not any one else as some western arabologists have tried
to claim. Second, as Stroumsa indicates, the Persian mullah Taj al-Din
ash-Shahrastani furnishes the term “barAhima sumaniyya aShhAb al-budUd”;
thus, clarifying that the brAhmaNa-s and shramaNa-s (bauddha-s) were the
categories of idol worshipers. Other Islamic authors place the al-budUd,
i.e. the idol-worshipers in al-Hind (the term bud-shikhan or
buddha-buster is a general term used by Mohammedans for their
iconoclastic ghAzI-s). So it is quite clear that the Moslems were indeed
referring to the brAhmaNa-s and bauddha shramaNa-s, whose lands they
were intruding into and thus coming in direct contact with them. Third,
independently of al-Rawandi, we find the mention of the barAhima as
refuting the prophetic religions in both Islamic and non-Islamic
Abrahamistic sources, such as the work of the Judaic apologist Dawud ibn
Marwan al Muqammash. Among the Judaic and Islamic sources we also have
Sa’adya and al-Qasim ibn Ibrahim, which appear to be independent of that
of al-Rawandi. All these sources are distinct but consistent with the
statement that the barAhima reject the truth claims of all Abrahamistic
prophets and refute the idea the word of a prophet can have
soteriological value. These observations, taken together, make it clear
that indeed the refutation of the prophetic religions was composed by
the brAhmaNa-s: it was lapped up by al-Rawandi and extensively utilized
in his own refutation of the Abrahamism, even as the barAhima refutation
was attacked by apologists of all three Abrahamistic cults.

Now looking at what survives of the barAhima refutation of prophetism,
it is clear that the Arabic writers are talking about sAmkhya-yoga and
vedAnta based ideas which were philosophies of the Hindus. It is notable
that al-Rawandi, who was well familiar with the related Greek
Neoplatonic thought, especially via its late survival in the [city of
Harran](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/fragments-of-west-asian-heathen-thought-late-surviving-hermetica/),
refers to the brAhmaNa-s. This, strengthens the idea that he was
specifically referring to the philosophy taught by brAhmaNa-s and not a
general transmission of this type acquired via the Neoplatonists. The
fundamental barAhimA critique of prophetism presented by the Arabic
writers is rather destructive (effectively showing their mata-s to be
delusions): “*If prophets are sent to preach adherence to things that
can be established by the use of intellect then the prophets are just
like ordinary people. If, of the other hand, they come to preach what
contradicts those things – god has made those things to be perceived as
proofs; they will not suit anything else except through the
altering/perversion of the intellect itself.*” The Abrahamistic writers
also mention that the brAhmaNa-s denied a role for prophetic
declarations (as seen in the pretonmAda and marUnmAda) in determining
reward and punishment (i.e. puNya and pApa of Hindus being independent
of the prophetic assignment of someone to either to hellfire or 72 girls
and 28 boys).The primary thesis of the barAhima presented in the Islamic
world by multiple Islamic apologists (Sunni and Shia) is entirely
consonant with the idea of j\~nAnayoga which widely encountered in
Indian advaita vedAnta and bauddha circles. They view it with much fear
because, as noted above, the barAhima view of j\~nAna alone being the
instrument for soteriology fundamentally overturned the principle of a
prophet’s direct line to the Abrahamistic mono-deity: From the
Stroumsa’s work one can glean at least 12 Mohammedan authors writing
polemics against the barAhima-inspired refutation of Islam introduced
into their world by al-Rawandi. This continued long after the death of
al-Rawandi and well after the army of Islam had erased the Hindus from
the Western expanses of Greater India. Importantly, this fear was not
restricted to the Mohammedan – interestingly we find similar reactions
from the paleo-Abrahamism to the barAhima, with at least 5 polemical
Judaic authors taking up their refutation of prophetism, along similar
lines to that of the Sunni and the Shia. Much of this mirrors the
earlier attack by the pretAcharin-s on the yavana pagans (e.g. Origen
apology for the shavamata and his attack on Celsus). This strongly
supports the contention that the fear of the dharma among the prophetic
monotheists is a dangerous one. These attacks might also be leveled in a
slightly modified form against the secular neo-Abrahamism which emanates
from the prophets Marx and Engels (whom DD Kosambi venerated in a very
Abrahamistic fashion as the “nUtana-mAnava-samAja-nirmANakAra-s). That
is why we see the liberal Marxists studiously avoid any presentation of
the true import of al-Rawandi’s attack on Abrahamism.

Finally, we might ask a question as to how did the knowledge of the
brAhmaNa-s reach al-Rawandi. Much after his time, when the accursed
Mahmud Ghaznavi was leading the army of Islam against the Hindus,
Al-Biruni remarks that the Hindus had “scattered like atoms” their
scholars had retreated from the western domains of Greater India. But
before the cataclysm of Mahmud, we know that the Hindu presence was
still strong in the western domains of bhArata even as the rAjpUt-s
stanched the Arabic jihad. However, the jihadic pustules were already
scarring lands of the sindhu and bAhlika giving opportunity for
transmissions of Indic knowledge to the Mohammedans. The preservation of
transmissions to multiple Islamic and Judaic sources around al-Rawandi’s
and his Manichaean teacher al Warraq’s times suggest the transmission
itself happened before their times. It was probably via a Manichaean or
Judaic informant (given that al-Rawandi’s own family had been Judaic
before conversion to Mohammedanism). From the location of the early
sources in Iran and their association with what is now northwestern
Afghanistan, we suspect that brAhmaNa-s were from gandhAra or bAhlika
rather than the sindhu. In this context we might look into the case of
two other men who gained freedom from Islam. The first of these, the
mathematician Abu’ al Abbas al-Iranshahri from Persia, is mentioned by
al-Biruni as being influenced by Hindu thought and he subsequently gave
up Islam. He then went on to propose his own religion that was based on
a Indic model of sAmkhya with several Iranian elements incorporated into
that framework. He in turn inspired the physician and chemist Abu Bakr
al Razi (from Ragha near Tehran), who too gave up Islam and took to the
study of Neoplatonism preserved by the Harran school and Hindu thought.
From that point on he started describing himself as a Neoplatonist or a
Pythagorean, but he also incorporated the saMkhya theory in his view of
the origin of the world. He states: “*The world originated with
consciousness uniting with matter. Through higher knowledge the
consciousness recognizes is its identity as itself and not as matter.
This he declared is the ultimate wisdom that releases consciousness from
the bonds of matter.*” He also declared that the divine inspiration is
innate in all organisms, including non-human ones and does not require
additional revelation of divine directives from prophets. Thus, he too
declared the prophet Abrahmisms as invalid truth claims. Here too, not
just the Islamic authors but also the Judaist theologian Maimonides
declare al Razi as a dangerous heretic, again illustrating the alignment
of basic Abrahamistic thought. What we observe from this is that not
just al Rawandi and but also al Iranshahri and al Razi lapsed from Islam
under the influence of Hindu thought. Given their links with the
North-Western Afghanistan, it again points to Hindu thought being
transmitted via that route. The case of these early refuters of
Abrahamism parallels the much later rejection of Islam by the Mogol
tyrant Akbar under the influence of Hindu scholars and his Hindu friend
bIrbal. Thus,we see two related phenomena play repeatedly over several
centuries: 1)The re-acquisition of heathen thought, Hindu and Greek,
cured several Abrahamists. This process involved a lapse from Islam
towards more robust heathen constructs. 2) Specifically in the zones
were Hindus came in close proximity with Moslems there were brAhmaNa
refutations of Islam that today are only preserved in Arabic sources but
had a strong effect on not just Islam but even Abrahamisms with whom the
Hindus were not directly in proximity. This reinforces our view that the
West will be unable to critique the religion of peace seriously as long
as it does not give up the religion of love at all levels. As a
corollary the otherwise disunited Abrahamisms could align against the
dharma because they all recognize it as a fundamental problem from their
stand point. This lies at the heart of issue which has been diagnosed by
Malhotra somewhat imprecisely in his “desert” versus “forest” dichotomy.
Finally, we might point out that some of Arun Shourie’s eminent
historians claimed that Islam influenced the Hindus during the
consolidation of shaMkarAdvaita. As we can see here there is influence
no doubt, but the direction was opposite, and it clearly confronted
rather than conformed to Abrahamisms.
