+++
title = "On feathers, fleas and big stem birds"

+++
Should the Mesozoic dinosaurs have been depicted with feathers or not?
This question seems to have been asked by very few people until the last
15 years. Of course we had Robert Bakker and Gregory Paul presciently do
this, but other than them, few people ventured to break the mold of the
scaly depictions that characterized the very first dinosaurian
reconstructions made in England in the modern era (Of course we might
add that the ancients were far more direct in their feathered
reconstructions of griffins and sharabha-s). In part this might be
because of the early realization of the relationship between birds and
dinosaurs due to Thomas Huxley’s work being largely voided by the one
fatal mistake of Heilmann. Indeed, this resulted in many a misconception
that still remain in lay discourse: The dinosaurs were called extinct,
when they are even today one of the most speciose groups of jawed
vertebrates. The Mesozoic dinosaurs were called reptiles from the
legendary Age of the Reptiles, while the modern dinosaurs went under a
different name that everyone knew – birds. In contrast, when we look at
the stem synapsids, some were at least called “mammal-like reptiles” and
yet others were called mammals. Several artists routinely depicted forms
going as far back in the synapsid tree as the gorgonopsians with fur and
even whiskers, even though there was absolutely no fossil evidence for
any of these. In fact, the only early non-mammalian synapsid with known
integumentary structures is the varanopid Heleosaurus/Elliotsmithia from
South Africa which has rows of dorsal osteoderms reminiscent of those
seen in crocodile-line archosaurs. Yet, even until recently
deinonychosaurs were routinely depicted by most artists with a scaly
lizard-like integument (e.g. in the series of popular Hollywood movies
starring dinosaurs), even though their relationship with birds was known
since the work of Ostrom. This bias showed in other ways too –
Archaeopteryx was for long called a bird because it was preserved with
feathers, whereas Velociraptor or Oviraptor were called dinosaurs and
depicted as scaly lizards. Indeed, in a memorable piece of artwork from
the popular Discover magazine in the 1990s a rich array of theropods
were depicted all scaly, but Archaeopteryx alone was shown with a rich
plumage. However, we must keep in mind that just earlier in the 20th
century a fossil of Archaeopteryx was called a dinosaur (actually
Compsognathus) because it did not preserve feathers unlike the other
specimens.

In a purely scientific sense, in the absence of direct evidence, the
question of the presence of feathers on Mesozoic dinosaurs other than
Archaeopteryx could be answered only by: 1) the principle of
phylogenetic bracketing and 2) presence of osteological correlates for
soft tissue. For much of the 20th century there was no direct evidence
at all. The Mesozoic dinosaurs were bracketed between the birds with
both feathers and scales and purely scaly crocodiles; so one could not
be sure when exactly in the dinosaur-line did feathers emerge, just as
we cannot be sure when exactly in the mammal-line fur emerged. Direct
osteological hints were absent until recently, although the artist Paul
through his careful anatomical analysis was able to show that some
dinosaurs were probably neo-flightless relative to Archaeopteryx and
were likely to bear feathers. But since the Chinese fossils came to
light there has been an abundance of direct evidence for feathers in
most major coelurosaurian lineages. There is also evidence for feathers
in some ornithischians and fur in pterosaurs. So it is likely that the
ancestral dinosaur had at least simple feathers and these were
homologous to the even more primitive structures seen in the pterosaurs.
So the ancestral ornithodiran likely had primitive feather-like
structures. We have also had more evidence in the form of osteological
correlates for feathers in the past 15 years – the presence of quill
knobs on the ulna are seen in deinonychosaurs like *Velociraptor*. More
recently quill knobs have been reported on the ulna of the
carcharodontosaurian *Concavenator* providing indirect evidence for
feathers in yet another dinosaurian lineage. Beyond the presence of
feathers, the remarkable melanosome analysis techniques developed by
Vinther have even thrown light on the colors of these feathers. Yet, it
seems to us that acceptance of feathered Mesozoic dinosaurs in
scientific and public circles has not been as smooth as it should have
been. For example, there was the *Juravenator* paper in the prominent
British tabloid, which claimed that the dinosaur was scaly not feathery.
But then the authors later performed a more detailed analysis and
eventually found that the feathers were very much there. Then there has
been this strange proposal that the *Tyrannosaurus* chicks were
feathered but they lost them when they grew older – all based on few
small patches of preserved scaly Tyrannosaurus skin in rocks that have
never been known to allow preservation of feathers. This appears to
arise from a myopic view based on mammalian models – giant mammals like
elephants and rhinos are to a great extent naked so the large dinosaurs
should have also been naked. Of course this ignores the fact that there
are large mammals like moose, bison, camels or giraffes that are not
naked. Again there have been proposals that just as the Ice age rhinos
and elephants radiating out of Tibet were woolly, the large dinosaurs
living at northern latitude might have been feathered, but were naked or
scaly elsewhere. These are based on an erroneous equivalence of
dinosaurian and mammalian thermal physiology. Though both are
endothermic they show some differences in thermoregulation – for
instance birds have higher body temperatures and some what higher
metabolic rates than equivalent sized mammals; they also do not sweat
unlike mammals.

The recently reported Yutyrannus prompts a more detailed look at these
issues. Yutyrannus, the latest of the feathered dinosaurs reported from
the Yixian formation (121-125 Mya; Barremian-Early Aptian) is remarkable
in being a large theropod (\~8 m in length) that displays feathers. This
settles the issue once and and for all regarding the presence of
feathers in large dinosaurs – they were certainly capable of having
feathers no different from those seen in their smaller counterparts. So
there is now absolutely no reason not to reconstruct an adult
*Tyrannosaurus* or a *Gigantoraptor* with a full pelage of feathers.
Nevertheless Yutyrannus raises several interesting questions that we
consider below in light of several other recent finds.

\* ***What are the large theropods we should reconstruct with feathers?
Just coelurosaurs or even the megalosaurs, allosaurs and other basal
tetanurans? Are abelisaurs not entirely scaly?***

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-4gPFtVmCXQI/T4HyvxiF6SI/AAAAAAAACWo/x5RWZ-5IIHQ/s640/Yutyrannus_Concavenator.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/anjPyXPsENYPKc7l9Fx2HNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Since feathers or feather-like structures have been reported in both
ornithischians and saurishchians there is no reason to suppose, barring
direct evidence to the contrary, that all theropods were not feathered.
However, direct evidence has only come from coelurosaurs. Yutyrannus
itself was reported as being a basal tyrannosaur. If this phylogenetic
position were correct then there is nothing special about it displaying
feathers as it is a coelurosaur. The only thing it does is to dispel the
unfounded notion that large dinosaurs should not have feathers. However,
in our opinion it phylogenetic position is not cut and dry. It does
resemble Sinotyrannus, a possible tyrannosaur from the same formation in
certain features, but is differentiated from it by the authors. In
particular the elongated external naris and nasal crest is reminiscent
of the basal tyrannosauroids such as Sinotyrannus, Guanlong, Kileskus
and Proceratosaurus. On the other hand, the blunt maxilla without a
prominent anterior process, the multiple pneumatic recesses above the
antorbital fenestra, the general shape of the skull and the form of the
fore limb are also strongly reminiscent of the recently described
carcharodontosaur, Concavenator. The authors’ phylogenetic analysis is
also based on a potentially problematic matrix. Hence, there is some
possibility that the position of Yutyrannus might change and it groups
with the carcharodontosaurs. This is not the first time some convergence
of features between the carcharodontosaur clade and coelurosaurs has
been observed – indeed such features have been noted in Orkoraptor,
Aerosteon, and Megaraptor before. If this were the case then in would
more significant because it would be the first published direct evidence
for feathers among carcharodontosaurs. It should be noted that
Yutyrannus has prominent feathers on its forelimb (\~16 cm), which will
be compatible with the presence of large display feathers in
Concavenator inferred from the quill knobs on its ulna. Even if
Yutyrannus turns out to be a tyrannosaur as the authors propose, there
are other unpublished lines of evidence in support of feathers in more
basal tetanurans like megalosaurs. Recently, a second exquisite German
specimen of Juravenator (nicknamed Otto) was reported. An unpublished
report by the noted theropod expert Rauhut suggests that it is a not a
compsognathid as originally proposed but a megalosaur chick. This
specimen shows clear feathers – thus, it might represent the first
direct evidence for feathers in megalosaurs.

The abelisaur *Carnotaurus*, which lies in the ceratosaur clade outside
tetanurae, was reported to have extensive scalation throughout it body.
The published reports mention a large patch of skin from the base of the
tail, smaller patches from the flank, scapula, neck and head. All
patches are characterized by the presence of scales. The large patch on
the tail shows a small type of scale about 5 mm in diameter that
surrounds large stud-like scales about 4-5 cm in diameter, which are
arranged in irregular rows about 8-10 cm apart. This pattern of studs
with smaller surrounding scales have been reported in sauropods,
hadrosaurs, stegosaurs and ceratopsians. This suggests that such a
scaling pattern might have also been ancestral to the dinosaurs. In this
context it may also be noted that *Ceratosaurus* is the only theropod
reported to bear osteoderms, suggesting that its integument might have
been rugose like what has been preserved in *Carnotaurus*. But does this
mean abelisaurs and other ceratosaurs had no feathers at all? We suspect
this is not the case and that simply they had more regions of the
integument with scalation and the feathers were simply not preserved –
after all outside of the Chinese and German beds, and rare amber
inclusions, there are very few regions were feather are preserved in the
fossil record. It should be kept in mind that even in several modern
birds (excluding ratites, penguins and Anhimids in the anseriform clade)
feathers are not present in all parts of the integument but only in
specific tracks or pterylae. It is likely that such partial pterylosis
was also the rule in non-avian theropods and the apterylae were probably
occupied by different types of scales in at least certain groups. This
fits the patterns of scalation observed in Concaventor or Carnotaurus.

***\* Were feathers lost in most ornithischians and sauropodomorphs?***

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-_6Dw9KSpW6Y/T4H0kv6iKrI/AAAAAAAACXA/PrkCH9RP4PU/s640/dinosaur_integument_scales.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/ylEjJN0ARqMvkKt-siLY9tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

After Archaeopteryx, the first dinosaurs for which integuments became
known were the Cretaceous hadrosaurs unearthed in North America by the
Sternberg clan. Since then several specimens of hadrosaur skin have
turned up in North American and also Asia. We now have some account of
the skin from *Edmontosaurus annectens*, *Corythosaurus casuarius,
Brachylophosaurus canadensis, Gryposaurus notabilis, Parasaurolophus
walkeri, Lambeosaurus magnicristatus* and *Lambeosaurus lambei* in
addition to several unidentified hadrosaur skin fragments. Several
published descriptions of hadrosaur skin show no hint of feathers but a
rather diverse array of scale patterns. Some of these integumentary
differences even allow taxonomic differentiation as was recently
demonstrated in the case of *Saurolophus angustirostris* and *S.
osborni*. Importanly, the specimens of *S. angustirostris, Edmontosaurus
annectens* and *Brachylophosaurus* suggests that practically the whole
body of hadrosaurs was encased in scales. Shortly after the discovery of
the hadrosaur integument, comparable patches of scaly integument were
recovered from the ceratopsian *Chasmosaurus belli*. Over the years,
integument has also been recovered from the stegosaurs (e.g.
*Gigantspinosaurus* and *Hesperosaurus*) and ankylosaurs (see recent
report on *Tarchia gigantea* by Arbour et al). Interestingly, in each of
these cases the presence of larger studs, with smaller scales forming a
rosette around them are visible just as in the theropod *Carnotaurus*.
Scalation of the sauropodomorphs, which are a sister group of the
theropods has primarily become apparent from the rare specimens of
titanosaurs. The pattern observed in both unhatched chicks of a
Saltasaurus-like species and the adult Tehuelchesaurus benitezii point
to the presence of the rosette motif formed by large studs and
surrounding smaller scales as seen in the theropods and ornithischians.
So the direct evidence for a rather conservative form of scalation is so
pervasive in dinosauria that one might turn around and state that in the
absence of Tianyulong and Psittacosaurus feathers are a purely  theropod
innovation. Does this imply that there was an apparent loss of feathers
in most derived sauropod and ornithischian lineages? This seems to be
the case in the case of the derived hadrosaurs where we have
representation of skin from most of the body, the ankylosaurs, perhaps
stegosaurs and the titanosaurs. The latter cases the skin also shows
heavy presence of osteoderms (see above figure), which accounts for much
of the body not covered by scales (e.g. see recent work of Arbour et al
on ankylosaur skin). Indeed, osteoderms appear to be primarily
associated with scaly skin (they are rare in mammals) but far more
common in reptiles.

***\* Do the polar dinosaurs present a conundrum?***

A number works, specially those of Godefroit et al and Chinsamy et al
have indicated that several dinosaurs were perennial residents of
ecosystems within the polar circle. In particular Godefroit et al’s
study shows that in polar Russian and Canadian sites there was a
considerable dinosaur diversity in the late Cretaceous, which in
addition to the deinonychosaurs and tyrannosaurs, which were certainly
feathered, included the ornithischians, namely hadrosaurs, ankylosaurs,
neoceratopsians and certain more primitive lineages (resembling
Hypsilophodon or Jeholosaurus) too. While the temperatures then were
much higher than today, they were still cold enough (mean average
temperature of no greater than 10°C) with at least some snow and ice in
the cold months. The polar sites from the coldest period in the latest
Cretaceous show few if any squamates, turtles, crocodiles and
amphibians. This indeed supports the fact that the temperatures were too
cold ectothermic reptiles to survive. The work of Chinsamy et al uses
the bone growth of the large hadrosaur Edmontosaurus from Alaskan sites
as a marker to investigate over-wintering in the polar regions. Their
results, in the form of a decreased growth signal in the bone
microstructure, shows that the large hadrosaur indeed lived throughout
the year in the polar regions and did not migrate to warmer latitudes.
This decreased growth signal is notably absent in the Edmontosaurus that
lived in warmer latitudes. This, taken together by Godefroit et al’s
recovery of eggs from polar sites, indicates that the polar dinosaurs
including the large hadrosaurs, neoceratopsians and ankylosaurs lived ad
bred right there throughout the year. This raises an apparent puzzle –
how did some of these forms, which apparently lacked feathers, manage to
pull through the winter with just a scaly rather feather pelage? One
could point to fat, which is used by penguins for insulation. But
feathers apparently provide an order of magnitude greater insulation
than the equivalent fat layer. Further, fat insulation is primarily a
feature of aquatic endotherms, that need to streamline their bodies. So
how were the hadrosaurs and ankylosaurs managing the polar winters? In
the case of mammals the ice age counterparts of the lower latitude naked
forms like the elephant and the rhino are known to have sported wool as
they are supposed to have radiated from the Tibetan highlands into
Eurasia. Is something like this possible with respect to feathers and
polar dinosaurs?

***\* The biology of avian feathers and scutate scales: what might it
mean?***

A section of neo-dinosaurological literature generally under-appreciated
by the paleo-dinosaurologists is that pertaining to feathering in fowl.
Over the centuries in India and East Asia certain mutants have been bred
such as the Silkie and Cochin fowl, which sport an excessive plumage on
their legs at the expense of the scutate feathers. The fowl geneticist
Abbott and her successors have studied these and also developed some
other mutant lines like the low-line and high-line scaleless (Sc)
mutants. The low-line Sc mutants are striking in lacking most of their
feathers and all their scutate scales. The high-line Sc mutants totally
lack scutate scales but have abundant, abnormal feathers with a juvenile
morphology. Importantly, instead of scutate scales on their feet they
have feathers. The low-line Sc mutant indicated that feathers and
scutate scales are developmentally closely related because a single
mutation can eliminate both of them. Likewise, the high-line Sc
indicated that a single mutation can redirect development from scutate
scales to feathers. Further, the morphology of the feathers in
the juvenile high-line Sc mutants is also reminiscent of the simpler
feathers found in compsognathids like *Sinosauropteryx* and
*Sinocalliopteryx* . Additionally, both *Sinocalliopteryx* and several
dromaeosaurs have feathers on their feet just as seen in the high-line
Sc animals, suggesting that this mutation might recapitulate some of the
features of early feather evolution. The high-line mutants indicate that
the choice between between scutate scales and feathers is a simple
switch, and suggest that indeed this has happened on one or more
occasions in coelurosaurian evolution. The presence of feathers on the
feet of compsognathids and dromaeosaurs as opposed to the scutate scales
seen in most extant birds suggest that there was a transformation from
feathers to scutate scales in the feet in course of the emergence of the
derived birds. In contrast, the more basal theropod Concavenator shows
scutate scales both on the feet and the ventral surface of the tail.
This indicates that the there was an earlier opposite transformation
from scutate scales to feather during the emergence of the more derived
coelurosaurian theropods. Thus, the choice between specification of
scutate scales and feathers appears to have gone back and forth in
theropod evolution, and there is absolutely no reason to exclude this
phenomenon as happening again in both sauropodomorph and ornithischian
evolution. Indeed analysis of the development of the feathers in the
high-line Sc mutant gives specific clues regarding the emergence of the
ornithischian and sauropodomorph integumentary structures.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-T6XaDy0k6Ig/T45kp7chHuI/AAAAAAAACXQ/B_LdM3b-kb0/s800/feather_scale.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/zrgPOv5H8YWmZsF86DZrVtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite) Embryonic
feather and scutate scale development. The homologous layers are colored
equivalent. Note that layers above the dashed line are lost after
hatching in the scale

To understand this better one needs to look into archosaurian scale and
feather development in greater detail. In extant representatives of both
archosaur lines the embryonic scutate scales are characterized by the
presence of primary and secondary periderms and a subperiderm, of which
the primary periderm and the subperiderm express members of the
characteristic archosaurian beta keratin gene family. In birds both the
scutate scales and feathers develop from clearly defined ectodermal
structures, the placodes, but such ectodermal placodes have not been
hitherto reported in the development of scales in the crocodile-line.
This, further strengthens the inference from the scaleless mutants that
the feathers and scutate scales of the dinosaur-line have a specific
common origin from a common dinosaur-like scale precursor, rather than
the scales alone being cognates of the eponymous structures in the
crocodile-line and feathers being neomorphic. This is also bolstered by
observations regarding embryonic development of scutate scales and
feathers: Both embryonic feathers and scutate scales show an outermost
layer of cells expressing feather-type beta keratins. This layer is
followed by a beta keratin non-expressing layer. Finally, there is a
more basal layer, which in scutate scales expresses a scale
beta-keratin, whereas in feathers again expresses the feather-type
beta-keratins. In both the scutate scales and feathers it is separated
from the outer layers by the presence of a layer of alpha-keratin
expression. Thus, the layered expression of beta-keratin sandwiching an
alpha-keratin layer is common to both scutate scales and feathers. This
suggests that despite the ultimate morphological differences the scutate
scales and feathers have fairly comparable initial development which was
probably inherited from the common developmental mode of the ancestral
integumentary structure of the dinosaur-line. Now returning to the
high-line Sc mutant it is interesting to note that many of the
feather-type ectodermal placodes that develop on the feet are large
domes of epidermis with comparably sized underlying condensations of
dermis. These structures are reminiscent the large “feature-scales” or
scutes described in the integuments of the ornithischians like
*Saurolophus angustirostris* (see Bell) and *Edmontosaurus* and certain
sauropodomorphs. The domes are characterized epidermal invaginations
into the dermis that subdivide the dome into a series of ridges. This
invagination into dermis is typical of feather development but an
offshoot of this developmental process might have had a role in
sculpting structures like the feature-scales to produce the
characteristic ridges seen in them.Thus, one might even conclude that
the derived ornithischians and sauropods did not really lose feathers,
they simply underwent a morphological shift towards a more scutate
scale-like morphology from the ancestral feather-like morphology. In
particular, the so called “feature scales (refer to Bell on
*Saurolophus* species)” might be simply seen as “feathers” with a more
scale-like morphology.

This leads us to one final point regarding the embryonic development of
scales and feathers – the morphology observed in the silkie mutants. In
normal birds one never observes the intermediate morphology between
feathers and scales – there are either scales or feathers which are
mutually exclusive alternatives. However, in the developing silkie
mutants in the medial region of the tarsus and toes the scutate scale
precursor ridges give rise to feather buds as contiguous extensions.
Thus, they appear to be chimeric structures with both scale and
feather-like regions. Sawyer’s morphological work showed that these
structures have a base as a scutate scale, which developed from its
placode and interplacode regions, but their feather ﬁlament is
continuous with the scutate scale ridge and does not arise from a
separate feather placode. This along with the observed morphology of the
scale-like structures in silkie mutants points to possibility that
during the earlier evolution of the dinosaur-line there could have been
a greater diversity of intermediates in the scale-feather continuum. One
extreme possibility that might be considered is that the sauropod and
ornithischian scutate scales were the bases of structures that on their
ridges bore structures that were feather-like, but failed to be
preserved. Could this account for the missing ornithischian feathers?

***\* The giant Mesozoic mecopterans/siphonopterans***

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-cb9Sb6ceutg/T5LwP8RrPvI/AAAAAAAACXc/-HAuio7UMkY/s800/dinoflea.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/BtE3p5SIBFdWiaeYM6DA8NMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
A Middle Jurassic stem siphonopteran with its long needle-like mouth
parts and mesotibial ctenidium in inset

Both molecular and morphological studies suggest that dipterans,
mecopterans and siphonopterans form a higher order monophyletic clade
among the derived insects. Further, a sister group relationship between
mecoptera and siphonoptera is also largely supported. However, the fine
points of this relationship remain unclear, as some studies indicate the
siphonoptera lies within mecoptera and others to contrary. Given this
background, the origin of the siphonopterans has remained controversial.
A while back a supposed Mesozoic flea, *Tarwinia*, was reported from
Australia. Most entomologists did not accept it as a flea and its mouth
parts were not visible to confirm its relationships. Nevertheless,
Grimaldi and Engel in their insect monograph concluded that *Tarwinia*
was a a basal siphonopteran. At 7 mm it was already twice the length of
the largest extant fleas (utmost about 3.3 mm). This gave the first hint
that the fleas of the Mesozoic probably “pursued” larger quarry than the
extant fleas. However, the belief among entomologists was that fleas
emerged in hairy mammals and secondarily adapted to suck off feathery
birds. This view is articulated by Grimaldi and Engel in their monograph
and consequently there was no consideration of possible non-mammalian
hosts for *Tarwinia*. However, given its size we wondered if after all
this was an indication that it fundamentally implied somewhat bigger
hosts. After all most fleas today are only found on small mammals
(rodents and bats) and small birds; big mammals like elephants have no
fleas. So at least theoretically on much larger hosts there could much
larger fleas as hinted by *Tarwinia*, and we wondered if they were the
larger feathered dinosaurs. Further evidence in this regard has come
recently from two reports from China regarding apparently the very same
*Tarwinia*-like insects from the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous (named
*Pseudopulex* by one of the groups). While these flea-like insects share
some features with modern fleas like the piercing mouth parts, ctenidia,
lack of wings, and reduced abdominal sclerites for filling up with
blood, they are distinct in lacking jumping legs and having a
dorso-ventrally flattened body. They are notable for their claws for
navigating among fibrous integument and long piercing mouth parts. But
most remarkably they are giants relative to the extant fleas, being
14-20 mm in length. This indeed supports the idea that they might have
been parasites of particularly large animals. As we have no mammals of
such size from the Mesozoic, their hosts were certainly large feathered
dinosaurs, again providing indirect evidence that several of the the
large Mesozoic dinosaurs, like *Eutyrannus*, were certainly feathered.
In this regard one might also consider an insect from the Late Jurassic
of Russia, *Saurophthirus*, with potential blood-sucking siphonate
mouthparts and large claws, about 12mm in size. It is believed that it
might be a mecopteran and might have been yet another ectoparasite of
feathered dinosaurs. Similarly, another potential basal mecopteran
*Strashila incredibilis* at 6 mm, has also been proposed to be a
dinosaur ectoparasite. The consistently larger size of these insects
relative to modern siphonopterans can be taken as evidence for the niche
offered by the feathers on large dinosaurs. Of course the implications
for mecopteran and siphonopteran evolution is something beyond the scope
of the current discussion.

[Earlier notes on related
issues](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/03/20/how-far-back-do-feathers-go/)
