+++
title = "Account of a mantra practice and discussionxa0thereon"

+++
The below account is mainly for mantra-theorists and practitioners in
the circle but certain points might interest others who are in the know.
Certain things will left unstated, which can be understood “between the
lines” by such sAdhaka-s. While the practice under discussion is a
nAstika one its deeper links will not be lost to Astika mantravAdin-s.

The worship of AkAshagarbha is specified in the [charyA
layer](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/16/nastika-notes-2/)
of the tAthAgata tantra-s. Its practice belongs to the texts of the
mahAvairochanAbhisaMbodhi tantraM family. [This class of texts was
transmitted to the chIna-s by the tAntrika-s (vajrabodhi of
kA\~NchIpuraM and amoghavajra) who journeyed to the Tang court to
perform rituals for the
emperors](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/01/15/a-note-on-the-tantric-state-among-the-china-s-and-recovery-of-a-lost-vainayaka-ritual/).
From there it was transmitted to Japan. In 717 CE, the illustrious
kShatriya mantravAdin shubhakara-siMha revealed to the chIna-s a new
mantra-vidhi for AkAshagarbha that was supposed to confer the siddhi of
extraordinary hearing, memory and vision on to the sAdhaka. In 718 CE a
Japanese mantra-sAdhaka, Doji, obtained dIkSha in this vidhi directly
from shubhakara-siMha (whose portrait is preserved in Japan) and
transmitted it to the island. In around 796 CE the Japanese genius kUkai
learned the vidhi from a mantravAdin and became an ubasoku (Skt:
upAsaka) of this mantra practice. He assiduously practiced this in
isolation on the Pacific coast by scaling the cliff of Mount tairyU in
awa and the cape of muroto in tosa. As result he is supposed to have
attained the remarkable vision of AkAshagarbha that eventually led him
to found the shingon tradition in Japan and eventually compose an
enormous tAntrika work titled “himitisu mandara jUjUshinron” (Ten
abiding stages of the mind according to the secret maNDala-s). Those
familiar with Japanese mantra tradition inform us that this a very
well-developed paddhati for mantra practice. Not surprisingly, this
vidhi of AkAshagarbha, known to the Japanese as the “kokUzO bosatu nOman
shogan saishOshin dhAraNI gumonji hO”, which is a close translation of
the Chinese translation produced by shubharakara-siMha in 717, has an
important place in their tAntrika practice.

It is an arduous practice like several other related nAstika and Astika
mantra practices aimed at obtaining siddhi-s and cannot be easily
performed by aspirants. An account of its performance in 1955 CE is
given by the great Japanese mantravAdin, professor taikO yamasaki.
Before going into his account we shall consider the mantra of
AkAshagarbha used in this practice:

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-QGC_1oNZK9g/UNvyT07SyaI/AAAAAAAAChQ/u68-EQ6xBKY/s400/AkAshagarbha.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/EOaPhKA8J-_SBScyYOvZadMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The Japanese record it as:  
nObO akyashakyarabaya OM Ary kyamAri bori sowaka ||

Which is a distortion of the original saMskR^ita form:  
namo AkAshagarbhAya OM Arya kAmAri maulI svAhA ||

This mantra is from the paddhati of shubhakara-siMha \[Footnote 1\] and
is not found in the complex yantra recorded in the mahAvairochana sUtra
as preserved by chIna-s (lost in bhArata). There it is:  
\[namaH samantabuddhAnAM\] AkAsha-samatAnugata vicitrAmbaradhara svAhA
||

An interesting point to note is that the Japanese have changed some of
the original instructions to shubhakara-siMha’s vidhi in order suit
their practice. This illustrates how rituals change as they are adapted
by new practitioners in different settings. In shubhakara-siMha’s
instruction the sAdhaka used a sealed vial of milk symbolizing the
“amR^ita” of mantra-siddhi. After performance of the
akAshagarbha-vidhi the milk vial was opened and the way in which the
milk had fermented was used to indicate the degree of success of the
sAdhana. In Japan as milk was not commonly known due the
lactose-intolerance of the Easterners this process was omitted. The
original vidhi also specified the use of a sphaTika mAlA, but the
Japanese found that to heavy to use and replaced it with a mAlA made
from the wood of the beautiful Torreya nucifera pine. The original
Indian version of the rite was performed at a more relaxed pace with
10800 repetitions of the mantra every day for 100 days, with daily japa
sessions of about 5 hours, reaching a count of 1080000 at the end. The
Japanese practice is half that with 21600 repetitions per day in two
sessions totaling to 10 hours. This practice is typically initiated by
the sAdhaka at the brahma muhUrta (\~3.00 AM) while he has withdrawn
into isolation.The practitioner also limits his salt intake before the
performance and during the performance does not eat after noon. Thus,
this kind of sAdhana cannot be undertaken by any one except those in
best physical condition. The ritual hall itself is open so that the
sAdhaka can glimpse the stars. On the eastern side there is a wall with
an opening in the middle to see the the stars and the eastern horizon
(this is the reason we hear of kUkai performing it high in the
mountains). On the wall a picture of AkAshagarbha is hung which is
covered by a white cloth except at the time of the sAdhana. Immediately
below the painting, a maNDala of AkAshagarbha, along with the rest of
the pantheon of the mahAvairochanAbhisaMbodhi texts, carved in wood,
specified in the paddhati of shubhakara siMha is kept on an wooden
four-legged stool. An oil lamp is placed in front of it which is keep
burning through the rite. In Japan such meditation halls exist in a few
places, including at a temple at the original place where kUkai had
performed his sAdhana.

The core of the sAdhana involves the meditation of AkAshagarbha in the
disc of the planet Venus even as it seen above the eastern horizon. The
right is done such that the last day corresponds to a solar or lunar
eclipse with the number of days of sAdhana counted backwards. The
practice itself begins with a pUja of AkAshagarbha in Venus just before
it rises in the East. Then he draws two pails of water for ritual use.
With water from one of the buckets he performs Achamana with the
purificatory visualization. Then he prepares the offerings and enters
the ritual arena wearing a white mask over his nose and mouth. In the
hall he bows to the image of AkAshagarbha and lifts the white screen
with a special stick while seated in the svastikAsana. Thereafter, he
performs pa\~nchA\~Nga nyAsa while visualize being absorbed by
AkAshagarbha followed by the other deities of the maNDala. Then he
utters a mantra on the water and sprinkles it over the maNDala and the
floor. Then he displays dhUpa and invokes a kavacha of the maNDala
deities. Thereafter, he meditates on his unity with AkAshagarbha as
depicted in the image and invokes the deity into the maNDala. Then he
uses the ritual water specified for the deity to wash his feet, rings
the bell and makes the five-fold offerings. He worships the tathAgata-s
thereafter and performs a sarvA\~Nga nyAsa and digbandha. This done he
gets into the core ritual visualizing AkAshagarbha in the rising Venus,
while doing japa with his akShamAla. He conceives a white disc on the
chest of the deity in which the arNa-s of the mantra appear. He
meditates on the mantra thus flowing from the deity emitting a golden
hue and entering himself through the crown of his head, exiting via his
mouth and reentering the deity via his feet. This cycle is kept
throughout the ritual. However, in the last round the he performs the
dharmadhAtu pravesha meditation in which he conceives the white disk
with the mantrArNa-s expanding to occupy the entire universe and then
contracting back to the original size. After this he concludes the
ritual with the with the initial maNDala vidhi and the japa of the
mantra of mahAvairochana and the other primary deities of the maNDala.
Then after stuti-s and stotra-s he performs the digvimochana and
upasthAna of the deity.

taikO yamasaki’s first person account of the ritual gives some important
points: He mentions that early in his sAdhana he suffered from physical
pain in the legs and back that eventually gave way to a tranquil
clarity. He also experienced non-dual consciousness, and described this
experience in no different terms than the various sAdhaka-s who have
been there before. He also mentions intense hallucinatory experiences
that he states could have shaken anyone with a weaker physique or mental
constitution. He mentions a vivid vision in which a mantravAdin appeared
and offered him a secret mudra, but he did not get distracted as that
could have completely ruined his sAdhana. Interestingly, he notes that
shubhakarasiMha had a similar experience while performing this sAdhana
in which he was tempted with a mantra for invisibility. This is what is
implied in certain tAntrika texts which talk of siddhi-s which can
distract as also in the classical yoga tradition. At the end yamasaki
attained siddhi from his sAdhana as mentioned in the texts of his
tradition.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: This mantra while for bauddha devatA has elements of a
shaiva mantra – kAmArI and maulin being epithets of shiva. A bauddha
informed me that the correct bauddha saMskR^ita form was actually:  
namo AkAshagarbhAya OM Arya kamala-maulI svAhA ||  
or  
namo AkAshagarbhAya OM Arya kamalI maulI svAhA ||

Where he is perceived as having a lotus garden or lotus diadem. This is
consistent with taikO yamasaki’s interpretation of the mantra. It is
possible that the conversion of Astika-s to the nAstika fold in bhArata
led to reinterpretation of it using more familiar shaiva epithets or
that originally shaiva epithets were reinterpreted in a nAstika form. A
mantra-theorist might ponder upon how a grossly mispronounced mantra
might still confer siddhi upon a prAchya sAdhaka.
