+++
title = "iShmin and the raudra devatA-s"

+++
\[disclaimer: I tend to use Indicized spellings in most cases, which do
not necessarily capture the Iranian pronunciation exactly. For my own
Iranian studies I use the text of the avesta printed in an extended
devanAgarI script which tends to capture the Iranian sound values well
and also gives a sense of “script familiarity” while comparing it to the
shruti\].

For background: [Iranian
miscellany-1](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/12/26/iranian-miscellany/)

pra ye me bandhveShe gAM vochanta sUrayaH pR^ishniM vochanta mAtaram |  
adhA pitaram iShmiNaM rudraM vochanta shikvasaH || RV 5.52.16

I asked of their relations, the rich ones named the cow, they declared
pR^ishni as their mother;  
then the skilled ones declared the impetuous rudra as their father.

In the zarathushtrian reconfiguration of the old dharma of the Arya-s we
can discern several distinct events:  
1\) In the amesha spenta-s we find an invention of new devatA-s, in part
to conceal the old ones. Thus, the abstractions of vohu-manaH, asha
vahishta, and khshathra-vairiya are raised to devatA-s. The abstractions
haurvatAt and amaratAt are used to conceal the old demonized twin
devatA-s (i.e. the ashvinau).

2\) The old devatA-s mithra (=mitra), baga (=bhaga),
airiyaman(=aryaman), vAyu (same), aredvI surA anAhitA (=sarasvatI),
haoma (=soma), thworashtar (=tvaShTar), thrita (=trita), apAm-napAt
(same), spentA Armaiti (=aramati), yima vivanghat (=yama vaivasvata),
and nairyosangha (=narAshaMsa) were, in large part, maintained as is but
reconfigured as partisans of the ahuric force directed against the
daeva-s.

3\) Some devatA-s were retained as is, but they were given a new
preferred named, and in some cases their old preferred name might being
demonized as a daeva. Thus, the old varuNA received a new preferred
appellation of ahura mazdA; viShNu received a new name raShnu,
suggesting that the old ‘vi-‘ prefix was interpreted as a negative ‘vi-‘
prefix and replaced by a “right” “ra-” prefix; indra received the
preferred name verethraghna, even as the name indra (andra) was
demonized as indra-daeva; agni also received a new preferred name in the
form of Atar.

4\) Of greatest interest to the current note is the most drastic change,
i.e. the attenuation of the “raudra” class of deities \[Footnote 1\].
They are represented in the shruti by rudra, his wife pR^ishni, the
marut-s, and their wife rodasI at the core. vAyu also belongs to this
class although he is rarely combined with rudra or the marut-s; so in a
sense he is an alternate member of the class rather than a linked
representative. In his capacity to exhibit heDas, varuNa also partly
overlaps with this class. In the avesta only vAyu is retained and the
rest of this class is apparently nullified or transmogrified. This is
rather dramatic relative to what happened in the Indo-Aryan sister
group. Here, the old raudra class underwent major changes but was never
attenuated as in the avestan world. In the post-Vedic period we see the
diminution and near loss of the marut-s and the complete loss of rodasI.
On the other hand, late in the Vedic period the para-marut deity skanda
emerged to displace them. Later on, this class was expanded by the
addition of vinAyaka and the proliferation of the ectypes of rudra and
his wife. Even viShNu, who does not ancestrally belong to this class,
developed an overlap with it via his ectype nR^isiMha. The situation of
the raudra devatA-s in the avesta is also strange with respect to the
condition at the earlier branch points of the tree of Indo-European
tradition. Among the Hellenes we have a well-represented devatA of the
raudra class in the form Apollo. Even further away, among the Germanic
peoples we have Wodan (Odinn) as an exemplar of this class suggesting
that raudra class existed in the ancestral Indo-European tradition (of
course we cannot be sure of the situation at the stem of the
Indo-Hittite clade). Thus, it is clear that the avestan tradition has
undergone loss in this ancestral devatA category.

In the Iranian world, along with indra under his preferred name, rudra
has also been demonized under the name saurva daeva – corresponding to
his name sharva, which is widely used in the veda. What about the
marut-s, who seem to have vanished entirely in the avesta while being
major deities in the veda? To better understand the situation we need to
look at the structure of demonization in zarathuShtra’s reconfiguration.
As is typical of him he innovates to create a new “head daeva” for his
pandemonium:Angra manyu who is described as: daevAnAm daevotamA. Angra
manyu is followed by the following series: indra daeva; saurva daeva;
nAnghaithya daeva; taurvi; zairi; aeshma. Of this series the first three
are transparent demonizations of indra, sharva and the nAsatyA. While
indra and the nAsatyAu are reintroduced as verethraghna and the
haurvatAt and amaratAt pair, superficially it appears that sharva has
not be reintroduced in any form (See below for the more complex
situation). Of the remaining demons of zarathuShtra’s system, taurvi has
no counterpart in the veda, though its cognate tUrvi used in a positive
sense to described deva-s. It means something like victorious or
superior, while tUrvan is related to speed. The word zairi is a cognate
of hari in the veda and is a common descriptor for the horses of the
gods or a name of soma. In later Hindu tradition it is exclusively used
as a name of viShNu. While this is from a later layer of Hindu
tradition, we cannot rule out the possibility that a demonized viShNu
equivalent underlies the zairi of the Iranians. In the Iranian tradition
recorded during the Sassanian rule we have one more demon coming after
nAnghaithya daeva named tarOmaiti (tarOmat in Pahlavi) who is battled by
the goddess spentA Armaiti (or just Armaiti). We posit that tarOmaiti
corresponds to an inversion of Armaiti who is the daughter of ahura
mazdA in the Iranian world. Armaiti’s counterpart is the old Vedic
goddess aramati, who is invoked several times in the vaishvadeva
recitations. In particular, she is invoked multiply by the vasiShTha-s
who appear to be more recent immigrants from the Iranian zone. Finally,
we come to aeshma – this word appears to be related to a peculiar
descriptor found the RV, iShmin, which reveals an important clue
regarding the attenuation of the raudra deities in the avesta. aeshma is
one of the most feared entities of the avestan tradition. The Iranians
have a special incantation known as the daeva-smiting manthra in which
aeshma is prominently mentioned:

snathâi angrahe manyêush drvatô snathâi aêshmahe xrvîm-draosh snathâi
mâzainyanãm daêvanãm snathâi vîspanãm daêvanãm |  
This to smite the evil angra manyu, and to smite aeshma of the bloody
spear, and the mazainya daevas, and to smite vispa-daevas \[Footnote
2\].

aeshma is described as rallying the daeva-s to harm humans (yasna 30.6)
and he is also repeatedly described as bringing harm and violence to
cattle in zarathuShtra’s famous gAtha known as the geush urvan or the
cry of the slaughtered cow (yasna 29.1-2). He is described as bearing a
bloody (xrvIm) staff or spear (draosh ; related to Skt dru, wooden
staff). This fear of aeshma is indeed seen throughout the avestan texts,
where he is described as bringing violence and destruction on the
Iranians. In particular mithra is invoked to bring protection against
the charge of aeshma at the head of various daeva-s and other demons
(yaSht 10.93):

adha vaêibya ahubya vaêibya nô ahubya nipayå  
âi mithra vouru-gaoyaoite aheca anghêush ýô astvatô  
ýasca asti manahyô pairi drvatat mahrkât pairi drvatat aêshmât  
pairi drvataêibyô haênêbyô ýå us xrûrem drafshem gerewnãn  
aêshmahe parô draomêbyô ýå aêshmô duzhdå drâvayât  
mat vîdhâtaot daêvô-dâtât ||

May you in both worlds, may you keep us, in both worlds, O mithra, lord
of wide pastures, both in this real world and in the other one of the
mind, away from mahrka \[equivalent of the vaidika demon marka, who is
blocked by the manthin graha in the soma ritual\], away from aeshma,
from the rushing armies, which lift up the cruel spear, and from the
rush of aeshma, wherein the evil-doing aeshma rushes along with vIdhAtu,
made by the daevas. To block aeshma, the old Iranian ritualists deployed
these manthra-s in a special yearly festival known as xvEtUdas. From the
recitations it is clear that aeshma is seen as rushing in with armed
hordes and a spear is mentioned as his special weapon. In the final
showdown between the party of ahura mAzda with his yazatas and the
daeva-s, the yazata sraosha whose body is made of manthra-s (tanu
manthra) is supposed to quell aeshma with his own mighty spear.

Now this popularity of aeshma was such that it was laterally transferred
to the Judaists in course of the prolonged association with the Iranians
in West Asia. When exactly this transfer happened is hard to say. While
some people try to trace the emergence of Abrahamistic eka-rAkShasatvaM
to the exclusivist worship of Aten by Akhenaton, we have argued that its
iconoclastic streak is more consistent with a transfer from the
zarathuStrians. Thus, the interactions between the zarathuStrians and
the Semites have been at the very base of the emergence of
eka-rAkShasatvaM in the latter. The evidence for the transfer of
aeshma-daeva comes from the story narrated in the Judaistic book of
Tobiah: In the Iranian province of mAda (Media) lived a Jewish woman
Sarah. She was seized by ashmedai (Judaist version of aeshma-daeva).
Hence, each time she would try to have sex with her newly married
husband he would be killed by ashmedai. A Jewish moneylender Tobiah was
going to mAda to recover some money his father has placed there. The
Semitic deity Rafael befriended Tobiah and taught him a ritual with a
burnt offering of fish meat to subjugate ashmedai. As result he was able
to successfully drive away ashmedai and marry Sarah. Subsequently,
ashmedai was captured and bound by Rafael in Egypt. The setting of the
story in an old Iranian province, the idea of a specific deity (Rafael)
to counter ashmedai, and a specific ritual for this purpose supports the
whole-scale transfer of the meme from a zarathuShtrian source.
Importantly, in the narrative of Sarah, ashmedai kills seven of her
husbands before Tobiah marries her. In the bundahishn (28.15) of the
Iranians, aeshma daeva is described as having 7 powers to utterly
destroy creatures who he seizes. This numerical correspondence clinches
the above hypothesis. This may be seen as yet another piece of evidence
supporting the development of Semitic eka-rAkShasatvaM under Iranian
influence.

What is the meaning of aeshma? The explanation given by the great dastur
nairyOsangha (who was the first to “discover” the Indo-Iranian
monophyly) is that the word means krodha in saMskR^ita. Now the only
obvious cognate of the word in the IE world is seen in the saMskR^ita
iShmin. We see this as being derived from the base iShm (same as the
avestan aeshm) by an ‘-in’ suffix type formation. Thus, we compare it
with formations like ashvin, vajrin, shikhaNdin, hastin or balin. The
existence of the Iranian cognate directs us against seeing it as one of
those rare ‘-min’ suffix type formations, such as those seen in:
r^igmin, vAgmin, kakudmin, gomin and svAmin. This word is a rare one –
it only occurs in the R^igveda and in the recitations of the adhvaryu
that deploy R^iks from the RV. Moreover in the RV it is an epithet that
only used to describe the marut-s or their father rudra. Its use only in
the oldest layer of Hindu suggests that its meaning might not have been
clearly understood in later times. I have not been able to locate an
explanation for it in the commentary of the early RV commentator
skandasvAmin. The learned sAyaNa sees it based on the context as meaning
fast-moving (gatiman) or rushing. While this captures a bit of the
meaning, it might still be prudent to subject it to closer examination.

The primary occurrences go thus:  
te vAshImanta iShmiNo abhIravo vidre priyasya mArutasya dhAmnaH || RV
1.87.6cd

They armed with axes, impetuous \[iShmin\] and fearless, have perceived
the dear realm of the marut-s.

adhA pitaram iShmiNaM rudraM vochanta shikvasaH || RV5.52.16cd

See opening

yenA sahanta R^i\~njata svarochiSha sthArashmAno hiraNyayAH svAyudhAsa
iShmiNaH || RV 5.87.05cd

Wherewith you charge, victorious, self-luminous, with firm reins, with
gold ornaments, impetuous \[iShmin\] and with good weapons.

svAyudhAsa iShmiNaH suniShkA uta svayaM tanvaH shumbhamAnAH || RV
7.56.11ab

With good weapons, impetuous \[iShmin\], they verily decorate their own
bodies with good necklaces.

From these occurrences it can be observed the word iShmin occurs in very
similar contexts in describe the marut-s or rudra – in most occurrences
it comes with a string of epithets that are specifically applied to the
marut-s and rudra. The most prominent of these is the mention of weapons
(svAyudha or vAshI) and golden ornaments thereafter. These are very
typical epithets of marut-s and rudra, but is also reminiscent of the
frequent mention of a weapon in connection with the aeshma deva of the
Iranians. The Iranian explanation of krodha is also not out of place for
marut-s and rudra who are among the most wrathful of the RV deities and
are much feared for the destruction they can bring in the form death to
cattle, “bolts from the blue” or disease. Thus, even though though the
raudra deities are exalted deities of the RV, a certain overlap in
properties with the Iranian aeshma cannot be missed (where it is given a
purely negative presentation). Thus, we suspect the original meaning of
iShmin was some kind of hybrid of the semantic values of wrathful and
fast-moving – hence, the rendering impetuous is not far from the mark.
On the other hand it shows that lurking behind aeshma is actually an
abstraction of the raudra class of deities in a demonized form, with the
positive epithet of these deities iShmin being given a negative
evaluation by zarathuShtra and his followers. This might also explain
the “loss of the maruts” in the Iranian line – with the whole-scale
demonization of the raudra class, their leader saurva-daeva was retained
as a demon, but the symbolism of the multiplicity of the marut-s was now
without value to the Iranian. However, the mention of the seven powers
of aeshma-daeva in the bundahishn is probably not a coincidence and a
reminiscence derived from the seven-fold marudgaNa-s \[Footnote 3\].
Thus, only the essence of the marut-s was abstracted in the form of
their unique epithet aeshma and retained as yet another daeva. This
parallels the positive “essentialization” with contraction of the
marut-s to give rise to the deity skanda.

Now the presence of marut-like deities in the raudra class is a fairly
ancient trait of the Indo-European system. Some have recognized that the
original berserks \[not the human warriors who emulated them\] who
accompanied Odinn, the cognate of rudra among the Germanic peoples, were
a potentially cognates of the maruts. Even as Germanic paganism was
being extinguished by the evil of the pretamata, Snorri Sturluson
recorded in the Ynglinga saga that the berserks, strong as bears or wild
bulls, slaughtered men, but neither fire nor steel harmed them
\[Footnote 4\]. This simultaneous comparison to bears and wild bulls
(hence Germanic bär= bear; serk=shirt) is interesting because it is also
used specifically for the marut-s in RV \[Footnote 5\]. Indeed, some
like Dumezil, have proposed that the old Germanic verb eiskra used to
describe the fury of the berserks is related to aeshma and iShmin.
However, we must caution that this etymological connection is dubious,
especially in the context of Dumezil’s weak attempt to further relate it
with Greek/Latin ira. The Sanskrit iShira and its cognate ijero in
Mycenaean Greek might be related to the latter rather than iShmin.
Further, marut-like deities were apparently also present in the Roman
world as suggested by deities, the Lares and Semones, in the ritual
incantation, the [Carmen
Arvale](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/10/04/the-wives-of-mars/).

So, it was zarathuShtra who was deviating from the old IE pattern in
attenuating the marut-s. Why could this be? The old IE system, like many
heathen systems, has deities who as actions relative to humans or their
domesticated animals is ambivalent. The raudra class of deities are
epitomes of this ambivalence of action. Why the Hindu system revels in
the various shades of grey, zarathuShtra was driven by black and white
binary thought. Thus, his was a world with deities and demons arrayed
against each other like particles and their antiparticles. In this world
view the raudra deities stuck out inconveniently. So as part of his over
all program of demonizing the daeva-s, he assigned them almost entirely
to the the demon class. However, in our opinion, there was a residual
survival of this class in the form of sraosha, who acquired a bit of the
mantle of rudra – something, recognized by the Hindus during their
historical absorption of the Iranian saura-s. In West Asia
zarathuShtra-s binary thinking found a resonance with eka-rAkShasa-vAda.
Ironically, one of the flavors of eka-rAkShasa-vAda snuffed out the
Iranians in Iran and the rest of West Asia.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Footnote 1:  
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-MACINXCETHc/T_E48PlFV4I/AAAAAAAACag/Tr9_htkSNco/s640/devatA_classes.jpg)](https://photos.app.goo.gl/EDLeeyYohcM6hnWu6)

The deities of the Indo-European world can be collected into certain
functional classes. These classes have been depicted for the old Vedic
tradition of the Hindus. Note that these classes do not necessarily
corresponding to densely connected subgraphs of the deity graph. In fact
in many cases the tight connections are between deities in distinct
classes. The dotted lines are weak connections, while the thick lines
are strong connections. The connections are quantified based on devatA
dvandva-s in the veda-s and co-occurrence in mythemes.

Footnote 2: We hold that the Iranian ‘snath-‘ for smite is the
equivalent of shnath in saMskR^ita which is frequently used in the same
sense in the veda. E.g.:

indrAviShNU dR^iMhitAH shambarasya nava puro navatiM cha shnathiShTam |
RV 7.99.05a  
O indra and viShNu, you have smashed (shnathiShTam) the ninety nine
fortified strongholds of shambhara.

In the the above Iranian manthra the vispa-daeva is the demonized
equivalent of the Vedic vishvedevAH. The mAzainya-daeva would be
mAhanya-devAH.

Footnote 3: This parallel is well illustrated by the following mantra to
the marut-s attributed to the patriarch of the kShatriya-s, manu
vaivasvata:  
saptAnAM sapta R^iShTayaH sapta dyumnAny eShAm | sapto adhi shriyo dhire
|| RV 8.28.5

Belonging to the seven fold \[marut-s\] are the seven spears and the
seven radiances; seven-fold fold powers they take on.

Footnote 4: Ynglinga saga 6 describes the coming of the god Odinn to the
northern Germanics thus:  
When Odinn of Aesir \[one of the two types of Germanic gods\] came to
the north, and the Diar \[the Germanic pagan ritualist-poets\] with him,
they introduced and taught to others the arts which the people long
afterwards have practiced. Odinn was the cleverest of all, and from him
all the others learned their arts and accomplishments; and he knew them
first, and knew many more than other people. But now, to tell why he is
held in such high respect, we must mention various causes that
contributed to it. When sitting among his friends his countenance was so
beautiful and dignified, that the spirits of all were exhilarated by it,
but when he was in war he appeared dreadful to his foes. This arose from
his being able to change his appearance and shape in any way he liked.
Another cause was, that he conversed so eloquently and smoothly, that
all who heard believed him. He spoke everything in rhyme, such as now
composed, which we call poetry. He and his ritualist-poets were called
song-smiths, for from them came that art of poetry to the northern
countries. Odinn could make his enemies in battle blind, or deaf, or
terror-struck, and their weapons so blunt that they could be no better
than a willow twig; on the other hand, his men rushed forwards without
armor, were as mad as dogs or wolves, bit their shields, ***and were
strong as bears or wild bulls***, and slaughtered men at a blow, but
neither fire nor iron told upon themselves. These were called Berserker.

Footnote 5: In a mantra of the atri-s deployed in the great offerings to
the marut-s in the soma ritual they are thus invoked:  
R^ikSho na vo marutaH shimIvAM amo dudhro gaur iva bhImayuH || RV
5.56.3cd

Strong as a bear, O marut-s, is your violent charge, terrible as a wild
gaur.
