+++
title = "A note regarding the multilingual poetry of jayarAma kavI"

+++
We had a discussion with an acquaintance regarding the local linguistic
pride and chauvinism among those who identify with desha bhAShA-s in
bhArata. We had encountered the effect most forcefully in two modern
states of the secular Indian republic, namely mAhArAShTra and tamiL
nADu. In both the above states it was easy to encounter people, usually
in towns, who were extremely proud of their desha bhAShA-s, and had
their identities strongly intertwined with them. Such people in
mahArATTa country they would insist that the people use their
desha-bhAShA and on occasions refuse to speak in any other language even
if they knew it. We have heard from others of related phenomena existing
to a degree in some other linguistic states of the republic, such as the
chera (where it is a certain anxiety to be different from dramiDa; hence
anti-dramiDa) and karNATa countries. In our days, some
pretAchArin-backed English medium schools in the mahArATTa state
attempted to suppress the use of their desha-bhAShA by insisting that
the students only use English on the school premises, even when not in
the classroom. This evoked considerable anger and resentment among the
mahArATTa-s, as though reminding them of the fact that the empire of
India had been seized from their hands by the English. Not surprisingly,
it sparked the unsuccessful reaction on their part to ban English as the
primary medium of education.

This discussion on the modern linguistic landscape of bhArata reminded
us of a notable literary figure who was an extensive polyglot in days of
the origin of the mahArATTa empire – jayarAma kavI (aka jayarAm piNDye).
To students of Hindu history he better known for his kAvya, the
parNAla-parvata-grahaNa, which describes the reconquest of Panhalgad
from Moslem control by koNDAjI ravLekar. But among students of late
medieval literature he is also known for a peculiar poem known as the
rAdhA-mAdhava-vilAsa-champu. On its face the champu has a rather common
place theme, i.e. the erotic sports of kR^iShNa and rAdhA and is laid
out in 11 chapters. The first 10 chapters are primarily in AryavAk,
while the 11th chapter is a very long one in a gamut of deshabhAShA-s,
and comprises a good fraction of this book. Indeed, jayarAma boasts that
he capable of composing poetry in 12 different languages. This work has
several interesting historical implications. First, jayarAma is said
composed this work in the court of shAhjI rAje the father of shivAjI at
Bengaluru \[Though he probably completed it under shIvajI in mahArAShTra
because he has a poem in the last chapter on how shivAjI defeated four
Mohammedan tyrants\]. He opens it by praising the literary legacy of old
saMskR^ita kavI-s ending with that of rAjA bhoja-deva paramAra. The
context of its composition is presented as a vidvat-sabha presided by
shAhjI, where samasyA-s are presented, and he lavishes praise on the
mahArATTa warrior as an independent rAjA in chapter 6. This shows that
shAhjI, despite being officially under the Adilshahi Sultanate, was
clearly being seen as a reviver of Hindu traditions – a patron of kAvya.
This image of a proper Hindu rAjA was centered on bhoja-deva, the last
great king etched in the Hindu imagination prior to the vivisection of
Hindu tradition by the marUnmatta-s \[Let us not forget that even
kR^iShNadeva rAya of vijayanagara saw himself as an abhinava-bhoja\].
Thus, shAhjI and his court are presented in the RMVC as connoisseurs of
saMskR^ita kAvya-s in accordance with classical Hindu tradition.

A second point which emerges from the RMVC is the literary activity in
the vernaculars in the medieval period. It is not that vernaculars were
not used as a vehicle of literature prior to this point. Rather, by the
time of jayarAma they had a long literary history of about 2000 years,
both in Indo-Aryan and Dravidian tongues. This began with the works of
the nAstika-s in the vulgar pAlI and ardhamAgadhi tongues, and is
followed by the saMgam poetry in the dramiDa bhAShA (e.g. the heroic
poems of the puranAnUru and the erotic poetry of the akanAnUru). Closer
in time to jayarAma, we already see the pan-subcontinental spread of the
vulgar apabhraShTa tongues and prAkR^it-s as literary languages, as
suggested by the mAnasollAsa of someshvara-deva and their formalization
in the grammars of the jaina scholar hemachandra-sUri (i.e. the
siddha-haima). What we learn from jayarAma’s work is their revival
concomitant with the Hindu revival under the mahArATTa-s. The 12
languages that jayarAma uses in his work are:  
1\) saMskR^ita: Of course this is the dominant language used for more
than half the work and he shows his ability in producing elegant prose
and verse in same (as daNDin had defined champu-s as being
gadya-padya-mayI).  
2\) panjAbI: The language of the panjAb and the vehicle of the literary
productions of the sikh guru-s.  
3\) hindusthAnI: From the poems it appears that he meant kharIboli and
rekhtA.  
4\) gopAchalIya: This is the original braj bhAShA (i.e. language of
gopAchala), which became important in northern India in the zone
centered on mathurA as a major vehicle of north Indian classical
music.  
5\) vaktara: As this language is congruent to that used by the bundelI
bards. It might be inferred that it is the form of bundelI used in the
1500-1600s.  
6\) DhUnDhAD: Since this name refers to the province around Jaipur, it
is clear that this language was one used by rAjasthAnI bards of the
region. It was used extensively in late medieval bardic poetry on rAjpUt
heroes.  
7\) gurjara: The pre-modern form of gujarAtI.  
8\) bAggul: The language of the rAjpUt kingdom of rAThoDs of baglAnA.
The kingdom was destroyed by Awrangzeb and the rAjA was forcibly
converted to Islam. It bears features of mahArATTi, hindI and
gujarAtI.  
9\) prAkR^ita: By this jayarAma appears to have usually referred to
mahArATTI. At one point he has a mahArATTI poet durga ThAkur tell
jayarAma: “kavI, thor Ahe yAs bhAShA aplA |”  
10\) karNATa: kannaDa, the sister of tamiL, had a long history of its
own. Interestingly, an early attestation of it comes from a vulgar
bilingual Greek play in the Oyxrynchus papri regarding the woman
Charition. It was widely spoken over mahAraShTra at some point before
the rise of the seuna yAdava-s. This is the only Dravidian language used
by jayarAma.  
11\) yAvanI: In the lay Hindu’s mind the Moslem invader was already
conflated with the ancient Macedonian barbarians of Alexander and their
successors. Hence, the yavana was indiscriminately transferred to the
Mohammedan, and Persian was termed yAvanI.  
12\) dakShiNAtya yAvanI: As the Mohammedan Sultanates entrenched
themselves in the old dakShiNapatha, a southern dialect emerged with an
Indo-Aryan grammatical scaffold and Perso-Arabic vocabulary, known as
dakkhanI. This is what jayarAma terms the yavana language of
dakShiNApatha. It was widely known to the people of mahArAShTra and was
used as medium by Sufi subversionists to target Hindus for conversion.

This illustrates a certain level of cosmopolitanism in the revived Hindu
court of age, with a knowledge of a wide range of languages from
different parts of the country. The preference of languages found in
jayarAma’s work is generally reflected in terms of certain connections
that developed even further with the expansion of the mahArATTa empire.
For example, the vaktara language echoes the later links between
ChatrasAl who inspired by his meeting with shivAjI liberated Bundelkhand
from the Mohammedans. Likewise the panjAbI connection is echoed in the
incorporation of mahArATTa bhakti saints works into the sikh compendium.
The mahArATTa-s were also conscious of the rAjpUt-s as fellow Hindu
kShatriya-s (whether they were honorary or original is a secondary
point) and had a certain knowledge their bardic literature. This is
evidenced by the conscious identification (genuine or otherwise) of the
bhosle, ghorpaDe, pavAr and other clans with rAjput clans like the
shishoDiyA-s \[e.g. the jayarAma himself terms the bhosle as such\] and
paramAra-s along with emulation of their vernacular bardic productions.
There also appears to have been a retro-influence of rAjpUt bardic
traditions in bundelI and DhunDhaD languages on saMskR^ita productions
in the deep south, as seen in saMskR^ita epics on various mahArATTa
rAjA-s \[Footnote 1\]. The languages of the Kannada, Gujarat and
Bagalana provinces were of course geographically closely linked to that
of mahArATTa country and there had been a long custom of interactions
between them. On the whole, such multilingual compositions in the
incipient Hindu revival of shAhjI rAje can be compared favorably with
the multilingualism seen in the mature vijayanagaran court of
kR^iShNadeva. There we encounter a famous polyglot in the form of rAma
of tenAlI, who used saMskR^ita and prAkR^ita along with the desha
bhAShA-s of andhra, dramiDa, karNATa, mahArAShTra and gopAchalIya (or
perhaps more correctly an older apabraShTa language related to the later
hindI-s). We see the dominance of the geographic effect with jayarAma
having a greater northern range and tenAlIya rAma having a greater
southern range in their respective multilingualism. Thus, while the
Hindu regimes accorded the natural position of primacy to the
devabhAShA, they also appear to have supported the local linguistic
diversity enabling considerable multilingualism. In contrast, the
Mohammedan tyrannies tended to enforce Persian, with the lower ranks of
the army and the Sufi subversionists fostering the emergence of the
hybrid dakkhani and urdu zabAn-s \[Footnote 2\].

Finally, the RMVC also throws hints regarding how desha-bhAShA-s like
mahArATTI were viewed in the resurgent Hindu regime of shAhjI. The
statement attributed to durga Thakur in the text suggests that there was
a certain special respect towards it as their particular vernacular.
However, at the same time it appears that the exclusivism observed in
modern mahArATTa linguistic politics was not present then – to the
contrary, there appears to have been a much wider appreciation of
regional languages from other parts of the subcontinent. The preeminence
accorded to saMskR^ita in the text is also mirrored in actions of
shivAjI in course of the establishment of svarAjya. It restored the
natural position of saMskR^ita as the language of the Hindu cosmopolis,
as would befit a true Hindu empire. This is seen in many actions of him
and also those of his son shaMbhAjI: his seal was in Sanskrit rather
than Marathi, specifically to reverse centuries of Islamic
indoctrination he set up the royal thesaurus project to establish the
Sanskrit forms for all administrative terms and his coronation was
performed as per the ancient Vedic model of the indrAbhisheka. The
officiant priest of the rite, paNDita vishveshvara (gAgabhATTa) wrote a
prayoga manual in saMskR^ita termed the shrI-shivarAjAbhisheka-prayogaH
to record these rites. At the same time he also revived the tAntrika
jayAbhisheka by having a second coronation done as per tAntrika
traditions.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: A shrauta ritualist and paNdita, shaMkara dIkShita, from
svAmImalaya, whose ancestors were from the mahArATTa country, became a
student of our clansman in kaumAra shAsana and tAntrika topics. He
reputed as being an expert on heroic poetry on mahArATTa and shishodiyA
kings in a rAjpUt bardic languages. One of the poems he had was an
account of the great war under rAjArAm during the 26 year jihad of
Awrangzeb.

Footnote 2: Of course an Indian secularist, a “liberal”, or a white
indologist and his imitators might claim that the Mogol courts of Dilli
encouraged the native languages. But what is lost here is that the Mogol
court was shaped by several distinct events: 1) The apostasy of the
Padishaw Akbar gave the first break for Hindus in dilli after they lost
ruler-ship of the city. Note that Akbar tried to model himself after a
Hindu monarch in many ways after his apostasy \[an introduction to the
same might be found in [shrI sharvesha tivarI’s
work](http://bharatendu.com/2009/07/06/akbar-transition-5/)\]. 2) Though
after akbar the despots Jahangir and Shah Jahan were far more
antagonistic to Hindus they did not bother reverse some of his pro-Hindu
actions. Shah Jahan was also open to heeding to non-violent petitions by
Hindus regarding Jaziya and the like being imposed on Kaffrs. 3)
Further, Akbar had given a break for rAjpUt-s in the Mogol court and
their role did not diminish after him. So much of the Mogol patronage
was actually due to influential rAjpUt-s at the court much to the
disdain of the Mohammedan ulema. 4) It should also be noted that during
a part of Shah Jahan’s reign, his son Dara Shikoh and general Shaista
Khan (who studied hindI and saMskR^ita with chaturbhuja mishra) were
generally well-disposed towards Hindu scholars, and this only increased
until Dara’s military defeat and execution for apostasy from
Mohammedanism (After all in his Sirr-e-Akbar he stated that he learned
more from the Vedic texts than from Sufis). Thus, the Hindu literary
activities in the Mogol are a consequence of the weakening of the
Mohammedan grip due to Akbar and Dara preferences, Shah Jahan’s weakness
and the rise of rAjpUt-s. They do not imply any conscious liberality on
part of the upholders of Mohammedanism or any general rapprochement
between Hindus and Mohammedans. After all in describing this phase of
the Mogol power the jihad theorist Waliullah and the mentally diseased
proto-Taliban Ahmed Barelvi repeatedly emphasized that practices of the
Kaffr were taking precedence over pure Mohammedanism and that jihads had
to be waged to clear the Hindu influence on Mohammedan power in India.
