+++
title = "prabhAvatI in puruShapura and nAstikaxa0myth-making"

+++
The nAstika teacher paramArtha who operated in midst of the chIna-s
\~525-569 CE, wrote a hagiography of the famous dharmAcharya vasubandhu
of puruShapura (modern Peshawar in the Islamic terrorist state). In this
hagiography he gives a sthalapaurANika account for puruShapura which is
not found in any Astika source. We do not see this as an old
“para-paurANika” myth but a neo-myth created by the nAstika-s by using
preexisting sthala-paurANika material along with mutation and
recombination. As we have noted before, this tendency possibly goes back
to the tathAgata himself.

The tale goes thus:  
*The deva viShNu the lord of svarga, was the younger brother of the deva
indra the supreme lord. The latter sent viShNu to be born in jambudvIpa
as a prince, son of the king vasudeva, in order to subdue an asura named
indradamana who was for ever locked in combat with indra with the aim of
subduing him. The vyAkaraNa shAstra explains that the word asura means
one without pleasure in virtue. While all deva-s regard virtue as their
enjoyment, all asura-s take evil acts as their enjoyment. Hence, they
are named so. The asura had a younger sister named prabhAvatI. The word
prabhA means luster while vatI means lady. The asurI was possessed of
great beauty. The asura seeking to kill the deva viShNu sought his
sister’s help to seduce him. Through his mAyA the asura brought darkness
over a part of jambudvIpa (i.e. the eastern part opposite to where
puruShapura is located) so that nobody could see him. He asked his
sister to remain in the part that was still lit. He further instructed
her that if someone wished to marry her, she should state that her elder
brother would object. And he told her that she should tell her
prospective mate that she would assent to marrying him only if he could
fight her brother. The deva viShNu saw the lady in the lit part of
jambudvIpa and was exceedingly taken in by her charms. He asked
regarding her background. She said: “I am a maiden asurI.” viShNu said:
“asurI-s frequently marry deva-s. I myself have no wife and you have
no husband. I wish to be with you and so seek to marry you. Will you
agree?” She responded exactly as her brother had instructed her. viShNu
said: “You think well of me so you are interested, and it is clear you
love me, so I will not leave you alone. Since I have great strength I
will fight your brother.” The asura went into the lit part and asked
viShNu how he had dared to take his sister as his wife. To that the deva
responded that he could object if viShNu had not been a hero. Since he
was a hero and the two were unmarried there was no reason why they could
marry. The asura responded: “On what basis you claim to be a hero. If
you can win against me in battle then I would give my sister to you in
marriage.” viShNu answered: “If you do not believe it, let us put it to
test.” Then they seized their weapons and attacked each other. This one
is an incarnation of nArAyaNa and no weapon can wound his body. The deva
cut off the head of the asura but it joined back to his body. Similarly
when viShNu cut off his hands, legs and other parts of the body they
kept joining back. Thus, the battle raged from morning to evening. With
his efforts viShNu was becoming tired while with the growing night the
asura’s strength was increasing. Fearing that viShNu might not be able
to succeed, prabhAvatI took a blue lotus flower and tore into two piece.
Then she cast the pieces in opposite directions and walked in between
them and came back again. The deva understood what she meant and seizing
the asura tore him into two pieces and threw them in opposite
directions. Then he walked in between the pieces and came back again.
The asura died there after. Formerly, a R^iShi had given the asura a
boon that he would be immune to being sliced. But the R^iShi himself
desirous that he should be killed by the deva-s did not grant him
immunity from being torn into two halfs and thrown in opposite
directions. Hence, he died. A viShNu had showed his manliness
(puruShatva) in this place came to be known as puruShapura.*

It is likely that indeed the city of puruShapura was associated with an
old sthalapurANa related to the above. However, the bauddha retelling
presented above from vasubandhu’s hagiography appears to have been
purposefully distorted by the narrator. There is evidence that this
narrative was part of a “mobile” sthalapurANa system that also
asssociated itself with other places in jambudvIpa. The cognate myth
from an Astika source is obtained in the pradyumna-vijaya-khaNDa of the
vAgvatI mAhAtmya, which is a sthalapurANa attached to the Bagmati river
in Nepal from the Northeast of jambudvIpa on the opposite side of
puruShapura. This mAhAtmya is supposed to be part of a much larger
pashupati-purANa, which to our knowledge is only extant as fragments.
The same narrative appears to have been transferred in this local milieu
to other related texts, the nepAla mAhAtyma, which has its own
pradyumna-vijaya, and the pradyumnottara of the himavat-khaNDa.
Colloquial versions of the narrative found in these texts also exist in
Hindi nATak-s which were enacted all over Northeastern jambudvIpa. A
comparable Sanskrit nATaka name the prabhAvatI-haraNa was composed in
Mithila by bhAnunAtha. In the Astika form of the narrative found in
these texts we have an account of how the asurI prabhAvatI, the sister
of indradamana, is married to pradyumna the son of kR^iShNa, along with
the killing of indradamana. In the account of vAgvatI, the Nepali river
is also described as being imprisoned by the asura and being allowed to
flow upon his killing by pradyumna. These narratives, in turn, derive
from the older version seen in the harivaMsha, where prabhAvatI is the
daughter of the asura vajranAbha, and there is no indradamana.In south
Indian popular literature the narrative of prabhAvatI follows the
harivaMsha version in specifying vajranAbha as the asura. An Andhran
scholar from the iShTaka-kShetra felt that an Telugu kAvya known as
prabhAvatI-pradyumnamu composed by pi\~NgaLi sUrana was inspired by the
Hindi prabhAvatI nATak-s seen by his brother during his visit to Gaya.
While he may have had his learned reasons for this proposal, we suspect
this is unlikely for the poem of sUrana is structurally comparable to a
play by the noted chera king saMgrAma-dhIra ravivarman (1200s of CE).
This king is eulogized in the Sanskrit verse of the poet from the chera
country, samudrabandha, and in Tamil/maNipravAla verse in inscriptions
from Kanchi, Thiruvadi and Shrirangam. These two, along with the version
of the same story rendered in poetry by the south Indian jaina
samayasundara, all have vajranAbha as the name of the asura suggesting
that they are unlikely to have derived from the northern versions
mentioning indradamana as his name.

What paramArtha’s Chinese version suggests is that a version of the
narrative with indradamana was already extant in the Northern
sthalapurANa literature by the 500s of CE. He appears to have merged it
with the jarAsandha mytheme in which jarAsandha had to torn asunder
sagittally and his two half thrown in opposite directions. He
incorporates it in order to slightly downgrade the Astika deity viShNu
by needing help of prabhAvatI, the asurI to win the battle against the
asura. He also tries to simplify the the avatAra side of the story by
removing pradyumna and only vaguely alluding to kR^iShNa and retaining
viShNu for most of the narrative.

In conclusion, these prabhavatI narratives should be seen as a mirror
image of the mAyAvatI narratives. In those pradyumna marries the asura
shambara’s wife mAyAvatI after killing him. There mAyAvatI helps
pradyumna by providing him with mAyA tactics with which he could counter
those of shaMbara. It is quite possible that this mytheme also inspired
the nAstika paramArtha to incorporate a corresponding element of help
from prabhAvatI into his narrative. The role of mAyAvatI and prabhAvatI,
identified with ratI, and the appropriation of shaMbara’s killing (from
indra) for pradyumna are aspects of early sAttvata pA\~ncharAtra
mythology that need more careful consideration.
