+++
title = "Vignettes from the kumAra saMbhava"

+++
*The mAtR^i-s and gaNa-s of rudra:*  
The image of rudra being accompanied by female deities is an ancient one
which goes back to the shruti. In the shatarudrIya of the yajurveda the
following mantra-s are seen:  
nama AvyadhinIbhyo vividhyantIbhyash cha vo namaH | nama ugaNAbhyas
tR^igMhatIbhyash cha vo namaH |

Similarly in the atharvaveda the following mantra-s are seen:  
namas te ghoShiNIbhyo | namas te keshinIbhyaH |namas saMbhu\~njatIbhyo |
namo namaskR^itAbhyaH | namas te jAyamAnAyai | jAtAyA uta te namaH |
AV-P 16.106.11

These mantra-s describe rudra’s agents, female deities who assume
various forms, who are organized as female hordes, who strike with
tridents (tR^iMhatI) and devour their targets (saMbhu\~njatI). In the
KS, kAlIdAsa furnishes a great poetic description of the march of the
mAtR^I-s and kAlI in rudra’s retinue. Though, here rudra is portrayed as
being as yet unmarried, he is never separated from his kula of shakti-s,
who accompany his marriage procession along with his gaNa-s. This
association is the root of the yoginI tradition, which in turn lies at
the root of the tAntrika kaula tradition. The intermediates between the
ugaNA-s and vividhyantI-s of the shruti and the mAtR^ikA-s of the later
tradition are seen in the form of the mAtR^ikA-s associated with kumAra
in the mahAbhArata and early kaumAra texts. The ritual system of
manthAna rudra preserves early elements of the yoginI-rudra association
similar to what is alluded to in the shruti. Now on to kAlIdAsa’s
verses:

taM mAtaro devam anuvrajantyaH sva-vAhana-kShobha-chalA-vataMsAH |  
mukhaiH prabhA-maNDala-reNu-gauraiH padmAkaraM chakrur ivAntarIkSham ||
7.38 ||

The mAtR^i-s who followed the god, with their earrings swaying to
movements of their respective mounts, seemed to make the welkin like a
field of lotuses, with their faces hallowed by the radiant orbs of fair
pollen.

tAsAM cha pashchAt kanaka-prabhANAM kAlI kapAlAbharaNA chakAse |  
balAkinI nIlapayodarAjI dUraM puraH kShipta shatahradeva || 7.39 ||

Behind those \[mAtR^i-s\] shining like gold, was kAlI dressed in
gleaming white \[implied by the metaphor of the egrets\] skulls, like a
flock of egrets against dark blue clouds \[also a metaphor for the
breasts of kAlI\] that cast hundred flashes of lighting far ahead of
them.

tato gaNaiH shUlabhR^itaH purogair udIrito ma\~Ngala-tUrya-ghoShaH |  
vimAna-shR^i\~NgANy avagAhamAnaH shashaMsa sevAvasaraM surebhyaH || 7.40
||

Those gaNa-s \[of rudra\], holding tridents, flew in the sky in front
\[of him\], with the auspicious sounds of pipes resonating with the
crests of their airplanes declared that the time for the service \[of
rudra\] by the deva-s had come.

*The kavI as a naturalist:*  
The great Kashmirian savant kShemendra had pointed out that a [kavI
should be a naturalist among other
things](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/13/thinking-of-kshemendra/).
Indeed, this tradition is well-borne at least among the kavI-s before
the assault on Hindu traditions by the marUnmatta-s. On these pages we
have illustrated this in the form of the sketches of
[bhavabhUti](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/02/bhavabhutis-avifauna-and-flora/)
and
[vAkpatirAja](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/30/the-kingfisher/)
from the neo-mauryan court of yashovarman and alluded to it in the works
of the great
[bhoja-deva](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/04/21/the-mechanical-the-magical-and-the-fantastic-2/).
In kAlidAsa we see some relative early examples of the same tradition:

vanecharANAM vanitAsakhAnAM darI-gR^ihotsa\~Nga-niShakta-bhAsaH |  
bhavanti yatrauShadhayo rajanyAm atailapUrAH surata-pradIpAH || 1.10 ||

Junglemen with girlfriends residing in caves with glowing walls can
pursue their sexual pleasures without needing to fill oil lamps as the
glowing “herbs” light up darkness.

This in our opinion is one of the earliest records of a bioluminescent
fungi. In Hindu tradition we encounter the mention of glowing “herbs” as
special toxins or remedies held by the ashvin-s:  
oShadhIr dIpyamAnAsh cha jagR^ihAte .ashvinAv api | Mbh 1.218.032a

This suggests that kAlidAsa was not the first in Hindu tradition to
record these bioluminescent fungi. Interestingly, bioluminescent fungi
can be encountered in the wet hilly regions in several parts of India.
For example we have seen them in the remarkable forest surrounding the
bhImashaMkara jyotirli\~Nga. However, despite the Hindu knowing of them
for ages they remain poorly characterized to date. They probably are
from the mycenoid lineage

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-miO4mctw2tM/UNgHtVk7krI/AAAAAAAACgc/xZyZGR4anqE/s800/bioluminiscent_fungi.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/0XkA4BlWTlpx4rMTAX4_P9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

kapola-kaNDUH karibhir vinetuM vighaTTitAnAM sarala-drumANAm |  
yatra srutakShIratayA prasUtaH sAnUni gandhaH surabhI-karoti || 1.9 ||

Where elephants trying to rub off the itch \[due to the ichor oozing
from their\] temporal glands on pine trees give rise to flows of resin
and make the mountain ridges sweet-scented.

Here kAlidasa makes the observation regarding tree-rubbing by elephants
in musth. With a long history of elephant domestication going back to
the Indus civilization, the Hindus were well familiar with the
behavioral patterns of the elephant. kalidAsa’s observation regarding
tree-rubbing by the Indian elephant in musth may be compared with the
description of of the same by modern naturalists studying its African
counterpart:

*“This Musth-Temporal gland secretion may be distinguished from Temporin
by its congealed appearance and strong odor… Musth males rub their
temporal glands against trees…Marking may be so vigorous that the male
departs with bark and debris on the side of his face. Dissected temporal
glands have been found to have pieces of bark embedded deep inside them.
Non-musth elephants also mark, but the behavior is more ritualized among
musth males.”* – Poole and Granli in The Amboseli Elephants: A Long-Term
Perspective on a Long-Lived Mammal

One may take this verse to imply that the mountain flanks (of the
himAlAya which he is describing here) are made fragrant by virtue of
both the resin oozing from the conifers abraded by the elephant and also
by the musk-like odor of the temporal gland secretion with odoriferous
compounds. As with the luminescent fungi, whose biology is unclear, the
biology of musth is also mysterious. It clearly corresponds to a huge
(up to 60 fold) spike in the testosterone levels in the male elephant
with corresponding behavioral and physiological changes. The temporal
gland itself is a modified sweat gland, and its secretions are believed
to elicit an avoidance response in calves and females. The odoriferous
compounds in it include dimethyl disulfide (foul odor), cyclohexanone
(has a peculiar sweet odor), 2-Nonanol (a cucumber-like odor),
2-Nonanone (a cheesy odor), and (E)-farnesol (a compound found in many
scents). Thus, marking its presence based on odoriferous compounds
appears to be an important aspect of musth.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-_PcLqjP620E/UNn1rjEyP6I/AAAAAAAACg4/yWVHvNuE2_c/s800/elephant_tree_rubbing.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/TK4EKi7QbqHhNkBqhGnvx9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Continuing with elephants, we may also consider:  
nyastAkSharA dhAtu-rasena yatra bhUrja-tvachaH ku\~njara-bindu-shoNAH
|  
vrajanti vidyAdhara-sundarINAm ana\~Nga-lekha-kriyayopayogam ||  1.7 ||

Where \[i.e. the himAlAya-s\] the vidyAdhara beauties go for birch bark
to use in writing their love letters with mineral extracts, which are
like the pink spots on the elephant skin.

Here kAlidAsa compares the writing of the vidyAdhAra females on birch
bark to the depigmented spots appearing on elephants skin with age. Such
depigmentation is largely seen only in Indian elephants and develops
mainly around the head, trunk and ears. This depigmentation on the
frontal surface of the trunk in particular is indeed reminiscent of the
lenticular bark of the Himalayan white-barked birch with the writing on
it. This birch can grow high in the himAlAya along with the conifers
that are also mention in 1.9.

He has more allusions on conifers, for example:  
bhAgIrathI-nirjhara shIkarANAM voDhA muhuH kampita devadAruH |  
yad vAyur anviShTa mR^igaiH kirAtair Asevyate bhinna-shikhaNDi-barhaH ||
1.15 ||

Whose \[i.e. the himAlaya’s\] breeze carrying the mists from cascade of
bhAgIrathI (i.e. ga\~NgA), which repeatedly causes the Himalayan cedars
to tremble and the spreads apart the crests and plumage of the peacocks
is enjoyed by the tribesmen in the quest for animals.

*shR^i\~NgAra:*

The whole of the kumAra-saMbhava is a shR^i\~NgAra kAvya – so what more
needs to be said one might ask? In the earliest days of kAvya, as seen
in its beginnings in the veda, and then in the itihAsa-s, the kavI-s
were most eloquent in the vIrya rasa – be it in the sUkta-s of the
R^igveda praising the heroic acts of the great indra or in the itihAsa-s
praising the many heroes at founding of the Hindu nation. Indeed, this
might even be considered the heritage of the warlike Indo-Europeans,
from whom the Hindus trace a part of their genetic and most of their
cultural ancestry. This rasa was also not lost on the drAviDa-s, as can
be seen in their earliest expressions upon contact with the Indo-Aryans
– the purAnanuru as a whole is a paean to the heroic society of the
Tamil regions. But as Hindu civilization matured, the one rasa Hindu
poets consistently excelled at was shR^i\~NgAra. The roots of this in
the saMskR^ita world, while seen an nascent form in the rAmAyaNa and the
purANa-s, really came of its own only in the classical kAvya realm. This
was mirrored in the earliest Tamil expressions in the form of the
akanAnuru. Hence, we shall give a few sketches, for after all in
kAlidAsa we see not just relatively early examples of this rAsa that was
to dominate later kAvya, but some of its most splendid examples.

yatrAMshukAkShepa-vilajjitAnAM yadR^ichChayA kiMpuruShA\~NganAnAm |  
darI-gR^iha-dvAra-vilambi-bimbAs tiraskariNyo jaladA bhavanti || 1.14 ||

Where \[i.e. himAlaya\], fortuitously, if the kinnara ladies were to
turn shy when their clothes are taken off, the hanging masses of clouds
become curtains for the doors of their cave dwellings.

This is a classic example of how a kavI works into his description of
natural beauty, i.e. the cloud-girt slopes of the himAlaya, the trope of
the shR^i\~NgAra rasa.

Of course 8th sarga, describing the dalliance of rudra and umA that
resulted in kumAra’s birth, is one of the best pieces of this rasa in
saMskR^ita literature and has to be enjoyed as a whole for its unmatched
beauty, which is not easily rendered in any other language. Here we just
reproduce a pentad:

lohitArka-maNibhAjanArpitaM kalpa-vR^ikSha madhu bibhratI svayam |  
tvAm iyaM sthiti-matIm upasthitA gandhamAdana-vanAdhidevatA || 8.75 ||

\[rudra tells umA\]: “The prime goddess of the gandhamAdana forest is
arriving, she herself bringing for you in a chalice made of sun-red ruby
wine made from the kalpa trees.”

Ardra-kesara-sugandhi te mukhaM matta-rakta-nayanaM svabhAvataH |  
atra labdha-vasatir guNAntaraM kiM vilAsini madaH kariShyati || 8.76 ||

“By your own nature your mouth is naturally fragrant as the fresh
saffron flower, and your eye lids have a red shade, sensuous one, what
further sensual merits can wine give you?”

mAnya bhaktir athavA sakhIjanaH sevyatAm idam ana\~Nga dIpanam |  
ity udAram abhidhAya sha\~Nkaras tAm apAyayata pAnam ambikAm || 8.77 ||

“However, honor the devotion of your friend by accepting this
\[beverage\] which will light up love”, saying so, with his generosity
shaMkara gave aMbikA the liquor.

pArvatI tad upayoga sambhavAM vikriyAm api satAM manoharAm |  
apratarkya-vidhi-yoga-nirmitAm Amrateva sahakAratAM yayau || 8.78 ||

When pArvatI had drunk that wine, she was transformed, yet she
captivated the mind as though by some inconceivable procedure an
ordinary mango were to become a sahakAra mango (the most flavored of the
Indian mangoes).

tat-kShaNaM viparivartita-hriyor neShyatoH shayanam iddha-rAgayoH |  
sA babhUva vashavartinI dvayoH shUlinaH suvadanA madasya cha || 8.79 ||

At that moment, her pretty face was in the control of both
trident-bearer and the liquor, both took away her coyness, and both led
her to the bed and both became kindled passion.

*brahmA:*  
The late Vedic period saw the spectacular rise of the deity prajApati.
Diversifying as a god of many functions, including the deity of the
year, the progenitor of the deva-s and asura-s, the source of the
universe in the form of the hiraNyagarbha, the supreme deity and the
embodiment of the Vedic ritual, he began encroaching in a big way on the
primacy of the old great gods of proto-Indo-European vintage in the
Vedic pantheon. It was his role as the embodiment of the Vedic ritual
that appears to have greatly fueled his evolution and dominance in the
circles of the ritualists who were reorganizing the older rites into the
classical shrauta form represented by the later layers of the brAhmaNa
literature. As consequence he appears to have been a major deity in
system of the early post-Vedic mImAmsaka-s. This emerging preeminence of
prajApati in the Vedic circles also started coloring the developing
mythosphere of the Hindus. In the rAmAyaNa, while, indra the foremost
deity of the old IE system is still the dominant figure of poetic
metaphor and the model for the epic, we find that his position is
seriously challenged by prajApati under his preferred post-Vedic
apellation, brahmA, who is presented as the preeminent member of the
pantheon. This trend is retained in the first concrete layer of the
purANa-s as they survive. It was this preeminent brahmA who came in
competition with the expanding sectarian cults of the powerful deities
of the old IE system, rudra and viShNu, as also the other new ascendent
deity kumAra. It was this brahmA, as the foremost symbol of the
post-Vedic mImAmsaka-s, whose paramountcy was targeted by the anti-Vedic
attacks of the tathAgata. Eventually, the dominance of the cults of
rudra and viShNu within the Astika realm, along with the attacks from
without, resulted in the decline of brahmA. Nevertheless, as late as
abhinavagupta’s works we still encounter holdouts of the system of
brahmA worship, which appears to have survived among the remaining
prAjApatya mImAMsaka-s. In sarga-2 of the KS we encounter a great stuti
of brahmA, suggesting that he had not yet lost his place to ascendent
gods in the Astika realm. Indeed, many descriptions of him in this sarga
still evocative of the grandeur from his heydays.

His role is primarily presented as different flavors of the saMkhyan
universal progenitor:

namas trimUrtaye tubhyaM prAk sR^iShTeH kevalAtmane |  
guNatrayavibhAgAya pashchAd bhedam upeyuShe || 2.4 ||

\[The deva-s said:\] “Obeisance to you for three fold form, who prior to
the emission \[of the universe\] you existed as the sole consciousness,
you who divided yourself into the [three primary facets of
matter](manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/01/25/the-guna-s-of-samkhya-as-physical-concepts/)
and thereafter became the diversity of matter.”

yad amogham apAm antar uptaM bIjam aja tvayA |  
atash charAcharaM vishvaM prabhavas tasya gIyase || 2.5 ||

“Because all mobile and sessile organisms are from the infallible germ
you, the unborn one, sowed in water, you are sung as being their
origin.”

sva-kAla-parimANena vyasta-rAtriM divasya te |  
yau tu svapnAvabodhau tau bhUtAnAM pralayodayau || 2.8 ||

You divide night and day by your measure of time and your sleep and
awakening are the end and the begin of beings.

dravaH saMghAta kaThinaH sthUlaH sUkShmo laghur guruH |  
vyakto vyaktetarash chAsi prAkAmyaM te vibhUtiShu || 2.11 ||

“You are fluid, and also solid when compacted, you are both bulk matter
and the minute particles, light and heavy, manifest and unmanifest, you
appear as you wish in all your manifestations.”

tvAm Amananti prakR^itiM puruShArtha-pravartinIm |  
tad darshinam udAsInaM tvAm eva puruShaM viduH || 2.13 ||

They opine that you are the the prakR^iti \[matter\] that is evolving,
for the sake of the puruSha \[consciousness\], are also known as the
puruSha that is the unaffected witness of the evolution of prakR^iti.
