+++
title = "niShAda-s and shabara-s of jambudvIpa: What you see is what itxa0is"

+++
The vast land of jambudvIpa is home to many different types of tribal
people. They were noted right from the times of the ancient Hindu texts.
The R^igveda hardly mentions any of them, but one that is mentioned is
kIkaTa. In the later Vedic layers, epics, purAna-s and dharma
literature, the mentions of them increase and include niShAda, kirAta,
pulinda, shabara, mataMga, bhilla and kola among others. This suggests
that as the Arya-s expanded over the subcontinent they became acquainted
with more of these tribal populations. The recent autosomal data allows
us to understand the tribal peoples of India at an unprecedented level
in terms of their affinities and origins. By means of k-cluster analysis
of the Old World data derived from the studies of Chaubey et al, Behar
et al, Metspalu et al, Yunusbayev et al, the Gujarati genetics project,
and the 1000 genomes project at k=7 one can discern three major sources
of ancestry for most people of the Indian subcontinent. One can simply
model the ethnogenesis of India based on three components and their
sub-components based on the above k7 results. The first is a native
Indian component which is present in all Indians. It corresponds to what
was modeled as the “Ancestral South Indian” component by Reich et al. We
prefer calling it either simply Indian or proto-Indian. The negritos of
Andaman are primarily related to this component. The second component is
the Inner Eurasian component. This component splits up at k7 as what may
be considered Western Eurasian proper/Caucasian and Northern European.
The third component is the East Eurasian component, which splits up at
k7 into East Asian proper and North East Asian. Thus, at k=7 of the
above data collections we have the following components:  
1@k7= proto-Indian; 2@k7= Western Eurasian; 3@k7= Northern European;
4@k7= East Asia; 5@k7= Northeast Asia; 6@k7= West Asian/Mediterranean;
7@k7= African.

The Indian tribes come in two major flavors: Those who have a
predominant proto-Indian component and those who have a predominant East
Asian component. The latter are found mainly in the extreme Eastern
fringes of the subcontinent, whereas the latter are distributed
throughout the rest of the subcontinent. But no currently sampled tribe
from the mainland jambudvIpa lacks either of these two components. No
tribe with a predominant proto-Indian component has less than 65% of
that component. The people who have been classified in the modern
reservation system as Scheduled Castes, both in north and south India,
as also the tanner community from north India (chAmar), the Tamil kallar
community of guards and rural strongmen, and the comparable North Indian
Dusadh community, fall with this range of the proto-Indian component.
Among these tribal populations with a predominant proto-Indian component
there are several which have only 0-7% of any Inner Eurasian component.
Of these the Bondas, the Gadabas, the Shabaras, the Bhunjias, the
Kharias, the Dhurwas, the Hos, and the Juangs have negligible amounts of
Inner Eurasian contribution to their genomes, whereas the Santhals and
the Mawasis have less than 1.6 % of Inner Eurasian contribution. The
rest of their genomes are largely of East Asian origin. Also related to
these tribes are the Asur and Nihali with slightly more (4-7.5%) Inner
Eurasian contribution to the genomes. Thus, they can be in most part,
simply modeled as being hybrids of 82-65% proto-Indian with 35-18%
East-Asian. This is captured very well in their facial appearance. Thus,
they more or less represent the appearance of the generic native tribal
population of upper India at the time of the arrival of the Arya-s. They
are mainly located in Eastern and central India in the states of
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Bihar,
Bengal and Assam and speak Austro-Asiatic languages of the Munda group.
Nihali alone is believed to preserve elements of an isolate language.
Hunter-gathers are common among them and it is likely that they led such
a life-style, perhaps supplemented with limited agriculture, at the time
of the coming of the Arya-s. This presence of the isolate Nihali and the
dominant Munda suggests that the speakers of the latter language family
probably expanded widely from the Eastern side displacing or absorbing
older tribal languages, thus creating a level of linguistic unity in
tribal India that is very different from the tribal situation in Papua
or Australia.The Dravidian-speaking Gond is also generally similar in
the model for his genomic affinities to the above tribes – he shows a
proto-Indian fraction of about 75% combined with 12% East Asian and 13%
inner Eurasian fractions. Thus, he primarily differs in having a much
greater inner Eurasian fraction than any of the other above-discussed
tribal groups. To understand this situation with respect to the other
Dravidian-speaking tribes we need to look to South India.

Among the relatively isolated tribes of South India, such as Malayans
and Pulayars (From the tip of the peninsula, the greater Tamil country),
we find the highest fractions of the proto-Indian component recorded to
date (\~80-85%). However, they differ from the above described tribal
groups and the Gonds in having small East-Asian components (\<10%) and
similar fractions of the Inner Eurasian component (6-8%). In the former
respect they are also mirrored by several other South Indian tribes like
the the Hakkipikki (from the karNATa country), Chenchus (from the Andhra
country) and Kurumbas (the chera country), which also have low
East-Asian components. But these display much higher inner Eurasian
components in the range from 18-25%. These tribes tend to speak
Dravidian languages as opposed to the Munda languages of the
above-described group. In their general genomic constitution is similar
to that of the Scheduled Castes and communities such as Kallars, Dusadh
and Chamars. The Malayans and Pulayars are closest among the sampled
populations to the unmixed proto-Indians, and probably still bear an
appearance similar to the proto-Indians – dark in color, with wavy hair
and medium build.

The general scenario that might be posited for explaining these India
tribal groups is thus. The 2nd eastward moving branch spreading out of
Africa that dispersed over Asia colonized India on a large scale
somewhere after 50000 years and before 35,000 years. This branch also
contributed to the Papuans, Australian aborigines and certain Eastern
Asian island populations. In India they probably encountered
representatives of archaic Homo surviving from the Paleolithic and
underwent some admixture with them. This gave rise to the proto-Indians.
Sometime after 20,000 years ago the East-Asian populations started
moving into India via the East and mixed with the proto-Indians – in
most part this mixture was much greater in eastern and central India but
much lower in the deep peninsular India (strongly supported by Chaubey
et al's data). This admixture transmitted the Austro-Asiatic languages
to India and gradually overran the native tribal languages in East and
central India. In terms of the mitochondrial genome a strong signature
of the proto-Indian is seen in the form of the M haplogroup.

The third major component in the making of the Indians came in the forms
of the inner Eurasian contribution. We suspect that small early influxes
of this component might have happened from inner Eurasia into
northwestern India as early as 12,000-14000 years ago. This is suggested
by certain old variants and also paralleled in the Y-chromosome in the
form of the divergent lineages in the R1a1 clade of the R1a haplogroup.
But most evidence points to a major influx of an inner Eurasian
component, primarily represented by the Western Eurasian component
proper (2@k7) happening approximately around 5000-4000 years ago. This
event in all likelihood was the arrival of the Arya-s to the
subcontinent. Comparisons with other populations give some important
clues about their path of arrival. First the presence of the Western
Eurasian component in Indians is positively correlated with the presence
of a smaller Northern European component (3@k7). This correlation
generally holds in Iranian-speakings population and also Uighurs. This
suggests that the Western Eurasian component probably originated fairly
north of the subcontinent in a boundary zone with the Northern
Europeans. This would place them in the general zone of the
Indo-European homeland between modern Eastern Ukraine and Central
Kazakhstan in a latitude to the north of the Black and Caspian seas.
There is hardly any Mediterranean contribution in the Hindu populations
but is only present in the Islamized Indians. But even among them, it is
relatively low in Pathans. This suggests that the Mittani of West Asia
were not on the path taken by Indo-Aryans into India. Rather the
Indo-Aryans probably followed a eastern path (could be even to the of
the Caspian sea) into the regions of gAndhAra. As they approached
gAndhara they encountered people with a predominantly proto-Indian
genetic heritage probably living in an early form of settled
civilization – the early Indus people. They extensively mixed with them
forming a hybrid people that had anywhere between a 40-50% Inner
Eurasian fraction combined with approximately 40-50% proto-Indian
fraction. These people, became the bearers of Indo-Aryan culture and
expanded over jambudvIpa in the next 1000 years. In this period their
genetic contributions entered several tribal population of northern and
central India resulting in low to medium levels (5-25%) of Western
Eurasian (2@k7) fractions in them. Some of these mixed population were
incorporated into the fringes of evolving Indo-Aryan society as
specialized service communities, while the rest retained their tribal
existence with a symbiotic relationship with the Arya-s. The encounter
and the with the tribal groups is seen in many different forms in the
post-R^igveda texts of the Indo-Aryans. The symbiotic relationship is
attested in the form of the procurement of oShadhi-s from the kirAta
medicine women in the atharvaveda \[Footnote 1\] and the granting of
Indo-Aryan vaidika ritual rites to the niShada-sthapati or the tribal
chieftain in the shrauta manuals. This relationship is also preserved in
the even later texts like the rAmAyaNa where we hear of the assistance
rendered by the niShAda guha to the Arya rAmachandra and his family
while entering into forested regions of north-central India. The
admixture between niShAda-s and Arya-s is attested in the tale of garuDa
devouring the niShada-s, during which he encounters a brAhmaNa married
to a niShAda and settled in their midst. There were also episodes of
antagonism between the Arya-s and niShada-s as illustrated by the
account of the maiming and eventual killing of the niShAda sthapati,
ekalavya, by arjuna and kR^iShNa in the mahAbhArata \[Footnote 2\]. It
also appears that some tribal polities, imitating the political
organization of the Arya-s started emerging, as indicated by the account
of the niShada rAjan, nala, who commanded a retinue like the Arya rAjan.

Probably by around 3500-3000 years ago the mixed inner
Eurasian-proto-Indian hybrid, culturally Indo-Aryans started penetration
deep into the subcontinent reaching the regions within modern
Maharashtra. Here, and perhaps, earlier in Gujarat, they came in close
contact with predominantly, proto-India tribal groups speaking Dravidian
languages. In addition to admixture with these Dravidian-speakers they
also culturally influenced them, such that a dominant elite among the
Dravidian tribes came to adopt Indo-Aryan customs but retained their
language. A single or multiple populations of Dravidian-speakers with
perhaps up to 25% Western Eurasian genetic contributions were formed.
These expanded into peninsular India replacing most local tribal
languages with Dravidian languages. The interaction of the Dravidians
with local tribes of the peninsula has been a long one, and is supported
by the mention of such (e.g. the veriATTaM of the tribes in the kaumAra
context) in the oldest Tamil texts like the puranAnuru and the
akanAnuru. The Gonds were probably a product of this phenomenon in a
more northern and Eastern direction. The data strongly suggests that the
Dravidian expansion happened only after they came in contact with the
Arya-s and underwent admixture with them. There is little evidence from
the genetic data to suggest an independent pre-Aryan expansion of
Dravidian speakers. Thus, unlike the idea favored by Dravidianist
politicians and their mlechCha assistants, the Arya-s did not destroy a
mythical Dravidian paradise to drive them to the south, but actually
fostered their expansion allowing them linguistically dominate the
peninsular part of India. As a result most of the old tribal languages
of India came to be replaced by just three – Indo-Aryan in the North,
Northwest, Austroasiatic in the northeast and central regions and
Dravidian predominantly in the south and to some degree central regions.
However, the linguistic echoes of a major lost language is preserved in
the form of the “ka, ki, ku” substrate shared by Indo-Aryan and
Dravidian. The Dravidianization of the southern tribal people and the
Gonds suggests that the Indian tribes are not really as isolated as they
have been proclaimed by some, and have had a long history of linguistic
and biological interaction with their non-tribal neighbors.

Influenced, by eka-rAkShasa-mata-s of different types, the western
thinkers, ideologues and rakShasa-vAdin-s have tried to portray the
expansion of the Indo-European as a negative event that destroyed and
annihilated the native populations. The Indians, at the biding of their
Western masters internalized this model in many different ways: 1) Some
utilized this as political tool to justify Dravidian politics. 2)
Others, like the otherwise reputed nationalistic historian R.C.
Majumdar, used to create a dramatized narrative of early Indian history
in which they envisioned long-drawn, heroic battles between Dravidian-s
and the incoming Arya-s. 3) A slew of anti-national Marxist historians
and their Naxalite followers used it justify their attacks on Indo-Aryan
tradition, their lionization of religions of love and peace, and the
incitement of tribesmen to disrupt their symbiosis with the non-tribal
populations. 4) Finally, in more recent times, arose denialist movements
among Hindu nationalists: These implicitly accepted the western view of
the Indo-European expansions as a negative event and also in an
interesting way internalized the Indo-Aryan-Dravidian divide as being an
uncomfortable issue. But being nationalists they had to deal with the
discomfort arising from image of the Arya-s this view created. Hence,
they resorted to either calling for the “Out of India hypothesis” or
madly denying linguistics itself. What they do not realize is that the
eka-rAkShasa-mata-s want to create a negative image of Indo-European
tradition and want to downsize its achievements and no amount of denial
is going to change what you are – since Hindus as heathens remain the
last major surviving Indo-European tradition even if they deny it. The
genomic evidence combined with cultural evidence suggests that
Indo-European expansion was hardly a negative event. Rather, it was a
pivotal event and a new technological regime that provided a sought
after cultural ideal under which people of all kinds of genetic
backgrounds in India and the rest of Eurasia were incorporated (as the
kashyapa would say: “kR^iNvanto vishvam AryaM”). This refined heathen
cultural ideal (still preserved in India in the term saMskR^ita) was to
spawn thought processes that led to most great intellectual achievements
of the human world as we know it. The destructive and genocidal forces
were not the Indo-Europeans as the eka-rAkShasa-vAdin-s want everyone to
believe, but certain ideologies emanating from West Asia.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Such a relationship survives to this date in the chera
country where traditional medical practitioners obtain some of their
oShadhi-s from kurumbha women.

Footnote 2: One could interpret ekalavya's installation of an image of
droNa as his guru as an early example of the “cargo cult”, comparable to
the hilarious cricket of the Papuans, replete with wooden binoculars.
