+++
title = "Reading the downward turn of the yuga-chakra"

+++
A conversation, tinged with sorrow and pleasure at the same time,
reminded us of a pickle of chillies that was so artfully crafted by ST
in her flourish of sUpakalA. But one thing was clear that the
yuga-chakra was turning downwards. We have spoken of this rather clearly
before from other angles
([here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/27/our-intellectual-tradition-non-existent-decadent-or-congenitally-dilute/)
and
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/06/19/more-on-the-tragic-failure-of-the-brahma/)),
but we shall now revisit it from a different angle. Sometime back,
passing through the holy land of kurukShetra we went to indraprastha
where we visited an institution bearing the name of the late chAchA of
the nation. On the way back from there among the many sarai-s which
still remind us of the brutal yoke of the turuShka-s we caught sight of
a grotesque stall going by the name “Secular House” or something like
that with the word secular in it. This was followed by a conversation
with a person from the city, who declared that the republic of India
would have not been a modern scientific and technological nation had it
not been for the chAchA’s vision with its sweeping pa\~ncha-saMvatsara
yojana-s – indeed in the shruti the brahmavAdin-s state that a yuga is
made of 5 saMvatsara-s – so yuga by yuga we had advanced under the
paternal guidance of the chAchAjI. He waxed on that we had a brilliant
combination of a “spiritual” vision from the mahAtmA with the
intellectual vision of the chAchA resulted in a modern nation that
looked towards the future while not losing its identity coming from its
rich history. He went on to say that the efforts to preserve the
Sanskritic past of India was something well recognized by the chAchA;
after all he had said:  
*“One of our major misfortunes is that we have lost so much of the
world’s ancient literature – in Greece, in India and elsewhere…
Probably an organized search for old manuscripts in the libraries of
religious institutions, monasteries and private persons would yield rich
results. That, and the critical examination of these manuscripts and,
where considered desirable, their publication and translation, are among
the many things we have to do in India when we succeed in breaking
through our shackles and can function for ourselves. Such a study is
bound to throw light on many phases of Indian history and especially on
the social background behind historic events and changing ideas.”*

The younger generation of politicians, he said, lacks such a deep vision
as that of the chAchA and consequently are not paying attention to
education and science. Instead, inspired by the Hindutva BJP government
they have engaged in regressive practices. Sometime later I met a local
BJP politician from the mahArATTa country (disclaimer: I neither belong
to the BJP, the Kangress or any other Indian political party nor do I
endorse all politicians of any particular party). The politician was
there to attend a talk by a mlechCha intellectual and colleague because
he was an autodidact in science. An acquaintance introduced him to me.
He said that he was trying to meet as many scientists from videsh as
possible as he wanted to inculcate a scientific spirit among the people
of this constituency. In course of the conversation he went on to state
that he wanted to clear the plebeians of the ignorance coming from their
traditions, with regressive ideas like caste and superstition. So I
thought to myself after all the BJP politician and the chAchA of the
nation’s visions do not seem to diverge much.

We were puzzled by these visions and narratives.The said mlechCha
gentleman and me were being led out to a cab by a local who worked as a
researcher at the institute that we were visiting, when a sudden noise
of a street band caught our ears. The mlechCha unused to such noises and
displays asked as to what it was. The local who was accompanying us
promptly answered that it was the Hindu extremists who were celebrating
the birthday of a 17th century criminal chief whom they proclaim as a
Hindu hero. Now who was this criminal chief? He was referring to none
other than the founder of the mahArATTa nation, one of the the greatest
Hindu warriors who ever was. We had to intervene and clarify that if
shivAjI was a criminal chief, then by the same yardstick George
Washington was as much a criminal chief. Then as a Parthian shot, even
as we boarded the cab, we added that the dADhIvAlA Karl Marx was,
however, the biggest of the criminals of all – we knew the mark had been
hit. A later investigation showed us that the said individual had a
history of opposing the Indian nuclear weapons program and supporting
Naxalite-affiliated characters. This was not an isolated case; indeed
equivalent institutes in other parts of bhAratavarSha house some of the
worst public Hindu-haters.

One common trend we observed among all of them was the close
relationship between their Marxist-Maoist streak and their lionization
of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. They consistently presented a view that the
concept of nation in the geographic bhAratavarSha was a new one that
primarily owes its existence to the chAchA and the concept of
secularism. Indeed, this found in the chAchA’s own words: “*In a country
like India, which has many faiths and religions, no real nationalism can
be built up except on the basis of secularity.*” They presented
themselves as the true Indian nationalists and indicated that
nationalism comprised in essence the eradication of religion; For after
all as per the chAchA was no real nationalism except under “secularity”.
Despite the protestations of the chAchA that he did not wish to erase
religion, he had stated: “*The spectacle of what is called religion, or
at any rate organised religion, in India and elsewhere has filled me
with horror, and I have frequently condemned it and wished to make a
clean sweep of it. Almost always it seems to stand for blind belief and
reaction, dogma and bigotry, superstition and exploitation, and the
preservation of vested interests.*” Further, they all believed that
somehow the yojana-s of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty was central to the
emergence of India as a “modern, technologically capable nation”. After
all one of these individuals stated that without the chAchA’s vision we
would have been a nation, which believed that it was all about bovine
urine – everything from fueling airplanes to curing the incurable
disease could be done with it (Politically aware Hindu-s certainly know
of the professional filth-hurleress I am talking about here and can take
a guess :-) ).

Recently, R Vaidyanathan had pointed out that the term Hindu growth rate
which characterized the period of Nehruvian rule and its aftermath
should be correctly named the Nehruvian growth rate. Somehow our great
secular scientists ignore the elephant in the room: the period that they
self-righteously term as the one characterized by Hindu growth rate was
after all temporally overlapping with the glorious reign of
silsilA-i-chAchAiya. Beyond the economic fantasy that these individuals
live in, they are also believers in the fabrication that somehow the
“secularity” of chAchA’s vision resulted in the emergence of Indic
scientific achievement.

This particularly puzzled us because we had felt that our scientific
traditions were remarkably decadent especially in the post-freedom era.
It is particularly ironic and telling that this bunch were not even able
build on the start given to them by the greatest figures of their own
parampara: Kosambi, who was himself a even more rabid Marxist than the
chAchA ever was. The decadence in science was entirely consistent with
the general decline in other areas of human endeavor, but some how it
escaped them. Indeed, they live a world of their own making, like the
chAchA himself, in which due to the “secularity” of chAchA’s visions: 1)
India came into being as a nation in the first place; 2) India is a
developing country or an emergent economy (reminding us of our Brazilian
colleague pointing how they are characterized as a country of the
future); 3) India is learning to do real science. 4) India is moving
from primitiveness and superstition to an age of technology and
rationality; ityAdi. R. Vaidyanathan had pointed out in an economic
context that this narrative misses the basic fact that bhArata is simply
attempting to return to its original economic place in the world (which
was eroded by the realities of its struggle against the marUnmatta-s and
the kIlita-pretamata).

We see that this indeed is general across all elements of the narrative:
In reality we were always a nation and that is the raison d’être for the
war of independence from the English. We always had a scientific
tradition and technology, both of which were damaged by the same forces.
So if anything we can only continue these traditions after the hiatus
they suffered. Instead the narrative based on the secular fabrication
seeks to deny the very foundations of our civilization, hence; their
nationalism is no nationalism and we do not need it all. It is for this
reason why the masses need to be aroused about the need to reject this
memetic complex, false as a nAstika doctrine, camouflaging as the real
thing and rendering our ecosystem ripe for assault by our traditional
enemies.
