+++
title = "A saiddhAntika adaptation of the vAstupuruSha narrative"

+++
We had earlier pointed out that the [vAstupuruSha
narrative](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/08/the-urban-mandala/)
in the smArta vAstu texts ( e.g. as provided by varAhamihira in his
bR^ihatsaMhitA) might be derived from an old brAhmaNa-like narrative
that was provided in the context of explaining the vAstu grid. As we had
seen before this square grid with constituent gods “squashing” the
vAstupuruSha is central all constructions from dwellings to cities. We
also noted that the smArta vAstushAstra along with the vAstupuruSha were
incorporated into the sthApana tantra-s of the various tAntrika schools,
predominantly the saiddhAntika shaiva-s and the pA\~ncharAtrika
vaiShNava-s. Interestingly, in this process it appears that the
narrative of the vAstupuruSha was also modified by the saiddhAntika-s in
order to present shiva-paratvaM. It appears that this adaptation did not
occur in the ancestral sthApana tantra tradition of the shaiva-s: For
example, the ajitamahAtantra narrates the vAstupuruSha tale exactly as
in the smArta texts (paTala 8.1-7). Yet, we encounter alternative
narrative present shiva-paratvaM (see below) across a wide range of
texts of the IshAna-srotas across the subcontinent and beyond suggesting
that it emerged early in the saiddhAntika tradition: Such a narrative
may be found in the ritual manual of brahmashaMbhu deshika, who as a
renowned scholar and astronomer belonging to the mattamayUra vaMsha’s
karkaroNi maTha and affiliate of the paramAra court. We also find it
recounted by the IshAnashiva deshika as an extract from the sthApana
tantra-s in his famous manual (26.93-126). The account is further found
in fragments of saiddhAntika manuals in the grantha script found in the
royal manuscript collection of Thailand. It is also narrated by more
shaiva-influenced but non-sectarian shilpashAstra texts like the
aparAjita-pR^ichCha from the lATa country.

The narrative itself goes thus:  
In the former times the gods led by the city-busting indra and aided by
viShNu had smashed the asura-s in the great battle between them.
Agitated with violent wrath, the bhArgava purohita of the asura-s
sacrificed a goat and offered it as an oblation in the fire. As his
fertilizing sweat fell into the fire and mingled with its luster, the
goat became a goat-headed asura, ChAgAsura. Covering heaven and earth
with his gigantic form, expanding to the peak of the highest realm, the
terrifying ChAgAsura asked the bhArgava, as to what needed to be done.
Commanded by the bhR^igu it fell upon the gods to devastate their
realms. Uttering thunderous roars and emitting a great blaze from his
mouth ChAgAsura rushed around the three worlds destroying and burning
all his path. The gods shaken by this attack went to the god rudra
smeared with ashes from funeral pyres and asked him to counter the
violent asura generated by the bhArgava. From the fire leaping out due
to the opening of rudra’s third eye emerged a terrible bhUta. He
commanded by rudra to crush the bhArgava and burn ChAgAsura. The bhUta
chased the terrified bhArgava through the three world until the bhArgava
used his yoga to reduce himself to a minute form and entered rudra
through his ear. Coursing within rudra’s body he saw the entire universe
contained within it. Filled with wonder the bhArgava sought refuge in
rudra. Then rudra said he was pleased with the bhArgava and making him
his son, granted him the status of becoming the brightest planet
(Venus). Thus, rudra released him through his semen and hence, the
bhArgava’s name became shukra. Thus, released shukra worshipped the
cresent moon-bearing rudra. Then terrified ChAgAsura fell flat with his
face down at the feet of the bhUta and surrendered. shukra then asked
him to seek forgiveness from rudra for his sinful acts. He sought the
boon of having a residence with the good seated atop him, so that he too
might receive the worship as the gods are being worshiped. To this rudra
answered that since he as asked for a residence he shall be called
vAstupa and the deva-s will be seated upon him with his face down. Who
ever embarks on a construction will worship him as the vAstoShpati.

This narrative may be compared to that found in the matsya purANa
chapter 252: In that as rudra was fighting andhaka, each time andhaka’s
blood would fall to the ground a new andhaka would emerge. As rudra was
strenuously engaging in battle with the andhaka-s his fertilizing sweat
fell to the ground and from it arose the terrible vAstu. This being then
drank up the blood of andhaka before it could touch the ground and he
was finally killed by rudra. But there after vAstu performed tapasya and
obtained a boon from rudra to eat the universe. As he proceeded to do
so, the gods fell upon him, flattened him face down on the ground and
sat upon him, each in one part. He surrendered and received the boon
that he will receive bali when ever one embarks on a construction.

Now, the fertilizing sweat of rudra is an ancient motif that is already
seen in the mahAbhArata where in the jvarapuruSha who destroys dakSha’s
yAga originates from a drop of rudra’s sweat (in MBH 12.274). A similar
account for the emergence of jvarapuruSha has been incorporated into the
narrative of the destruction of the dakSha yAga by rudra in the brahma
purANa (Chapter 39). This being, the personified fever, manifested as
all kinds of diseases and also as fossil fuels. In the vAmana purANa
(chapter 70), as rudra was fighting the final battle with andhaka, his
sweat mixing with andhaka’s blood gave rise to a beautiful goddess
charchikA. Clad in lion skin, she licked up the blood of andhaka and was
installed on the mound of hai\~NgulatA (Now in Balochistan, TSP, where
the shrine is in a precarious state under the assault of the
marUnmatta-s). Those drops of rudra’s sweat that fell to the ground gave
rise to a red being kuja who also drank the blood of andhaka. After his
services, rudra made him the planet Mars. A similar account disconnected
from andhaka is narrated in the rudra saMhitA, pArvatI khaNDa (chapter
10), of the shiva purANa. Here shiva being separated from sati is lost
in tapasya. The sweat from his forehead due his exertions fell on the
earth and gave rise to a red four armed being. He was suckled by
pR^ithivI and was made the planet Mars by rudra. A similar account, this
time involving the fertilizing sweat of umA is given for the origin of
andhaka himself in the rudra saMhitA, yuddha khaNDa (chapter 42) of the
shiva purANa. When rudra and umA were sporting on the eastern ridges of
the mandara mountain, umA closed the eyes of rudra with her hands
causing darkness. Her hands sweating from the contact with the heat from
his third eye mixed with his giving rise to a blind, black, deformed and
terrible being. He was covered with fine hair all over his body and had
matted locks. He cried, danced and sang and kept darting his tongue like
a snake. This hideous being was given by rudra to the daitya hiraNyAkSha
as his son and became the lord of the daitya-s after hirANyAkSha and
hiraNyakashipu were killed by viShNu. It becomes clear that these motifs
were inserted into the andhaka narrative because we have an ancient
version of the andhaka narrative from the harivaMsha, viShNu-parva
86-87, which has none of these motifs in them. The saiddhAntika
narrative is further unusual in moving the fertilizing sweat motif from
rudra to the bhArgava. The entry into rudra’s body by the bhArgava is
also an old motif that seen by itself in the MBH, which is combined with
the andhaka narrative in various paurANika accounts like the one from
the vAmana purANa and yuddha khaNDa of the rudra saMhitA. The narrative
of the emergence of ChAgAsura from the ritual fire is also paralleled by
old motif of tvAShtR^i generating vR^itra from a fire ritual.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-ZUi05uPUQ4o/TxxyqmJTwJI/AAAAAAAACVk/E26sweAi24I/s640/mythic_motifs.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/HQlGsAZ400V-waR80Ee_FdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The evolution of these narratives can be represented as a graph (above).
Here the versions approximating the ancestral versions are shown to the
left along with example texts in which they occur. The fertilizing sweat
motif could be of older provenance, though in the current context it
emerges as an integral element of the narrative of the destruction of
dakSha’s yaj\~na. These then recombine in various ways as shown by the
pathways leading to the narratives on the right. The andhaka narrative
serves as a locus for insertion of other motifs into it; hence , it is
shown in disjointed form, accommodating those insertions. Of course the
motif might be inherited in many different ways: 1) directly without
much alteration; 2) with rapid evolution but retain the essential
character; 3) or through transfer of attributes to different characters.
There may be duplications like the fertilizing sweat myth is duplicated
to give rise to both Mars and the goddess charchikA. It is interesting
to note that the origin myths of two planets are connected in this
collection. Some of these are famous old motifs of astronomical
phenomena encoded as myths. For example, the tale of the swallowing of
the bhArgava encodes the disappearance of Venus during its conjunction
with the sun (symbolized as rudra) and it reappearance as the famous
shining drop (alluded to in mantra-s of the R^igveda and atharvaveda) –
the semen of rudra. Of course it should be kept in mind that the graph
shown above does not include other narrative motifs that are not
discussed here: These include the mAtR^ikA motifs from the kaumAra
narrative, which are inserted into versions of the andhaka episode (e.g.
kUrma purANa and rudra saMhitA, yuddha khaNDa, shiva purANa). In the
kUrma purANa these are transferred to nR^isiMha from kumAra while being
inserted into the andhaka episode. The goddess shuShka-revatI is
generated by viShNu in alternative version of the matsya purANa, who
plays the same role as charchikA in drinking the blood of andhaka. Here
again we notice the transfer of shuShka-revatI from the kaumAra
narratives to viShNu in the context of the andhaka myth.

An examination of the above figure immediately reminds one of the
modularity and recombination observed in biological systems, in
particular that seen in organization of genes in operons in prokaryotes
and of domains in proteins. In those circles there has been the
discussion (in large part due to workers like Lynch) if effective
population size or selection has been responsible for the emergence of
complex modular architectures. Indeed, this question becomes
particularly pertinent at certain evolutionary transitions such as the
origin of the eukaryotes and the emergence of metazoans, where one could
make a case that the emergence of numerous new protein domain
architectures had a role in the biological features characteristic of
those transitions. Interestingly, even in the mythosphere we observe
that certain transitions were accompanied by a proliferation of
recombination events. In particular, the rise of the shaiva, vaiShNava,
kaumAra, and shAkta shAsana-s saw a proliferation of myths along with
motif recombination. We would tend to argue that the expansion of these
shAsana-s was the primary driving force the emergence of these myths.
Now does this imply that the expansion of the shAsana-s resulted in: 1)
A spread of the mythic memes over a larger number of meme-bearers
thereby allowing diversification as it fostered the emergence of several
subpopulations under a given shAsana? Or 2) The rise of the new
shAsana-s specifically selected for certain mythic motif combinations
which were favorable for their own doctrinal positions: the ChAgAsura
myth certain seems to support this idea. Now again one could ask if
there is a selection process involved or whether the new recombinant
narratives are designed in a directed fashion. We suspect that there are
probably certain favored recombination pathways which are then under a
certain type of selection in the narrative-maker’s brain. Testing this
idea would be an interesting challenge.
