+++
title = "On a paramAra warrior queen and some Saracenic structures inxa0lATa"

+++
S and other members of aurvasheyI’s family have rich body of legend
concerning their tAntrika paraMpara. [We have discussed some of this
with the intention of mapping it on the historical background which
might have points of
interest](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/23/shri-shyamol-ram-the-vamacharin/).
We have presented one such tale before. At some point before the
paramAra-s rose to great power under bhojadeva, one of their princes
kanakapAla had gone to the kedAreshvara to receive saiddhAntika dIkSha
from the shaiva AchArya of the kShetra. He married a local princess and
settled there, never returning to mAlava. His successors eventually rose
in power in uttarAkhaNDa. Though the Mohammedan whirlwind suppressed the
paramAra-s in other parts of the bhArata, in these mountain strongholds
they continued to thrive. In the mid-1300s the legend goes that their
rAjA ajayapAla performed a vigorous mantra-sAdhana of various bhairava
mantra-s into which he had been initiated by a nAtha-yogin.
Consequently, he came to dominate the whole uttarAkhaNDa, and his clan
became its paramount rulers. In this period they used to have a lineage
of kAlIkula sAdhaka-s from the city of karNAvati in the lATa country
visit them and perform rituals for martial glory. Their power was
further consolidated during the reign of mahIpati shAha, when the
Tibetans accepted their suzerainty, at least in the western provinces.
After the death of this king, his queen, karNAvati, took over the rule
of the kingdom. She is said to have been an accomplished sAdhakI of the
kAlIkula, who gave a village grant to brAhmaNa-s from the lATa country.
These brAhmaNa-s are supposed to have held for centuries an idol of
mahAkAlI which was originally housed in a temple in karNAvati, Gujarat
that was vandalized by the monstrous Mohammedan Ahmed Shah. They
installed the idol in a temple of kAlI near the town of kArttikeyapura,
which was an ancient kaumAra kShetra and the capital of the pre-paramAra
rulers of the land.

Shortly there after, in 1640 CE the Mogol tyrant Shah Jahan dispatched
Ghazi Najabat Khan with the orders to extirpate the Kaffirs of the
uttarAkhaNDa. The warrior queen karNAvati is said to have prepared for
the invasion by leading the troops herself. She drew the Mogols to an
ambush in steep mountain slopes north of Dehradun and fallen upon them
with the advantage of height. The Mogol army suffered a major defeat.
She is said to have prevented their retreat by blocking their rear in
the narrow valley and captured several Jihadis. She is then supposed to
have sacrificed some as narabali-s for kAlI and had rest mutilated with
their noses and ears lopped off. Thus, they were sent to back to Delhi
as a strong message to Shah Jahan. Stung by the defeat Shah Jahan wanted
revenge and assembled another force under ghazi Kalilullah, this time to
march eastwards on the capital of the paramAra-s at shrInagara,
uttarAkhaNDa. The rANI, however, withdrew with a part of her troops from
the capital to her preferred stations at Newada on the southeastern dUn
of Dehra and kaulAgarH the fort on the northwestern dUn. The Mogols
moved in pleased with the lack of resistance only to find themselves
trapped by the rAjpUt-s. Then karNAvati resorted to psychological
warfare by sending a message to the Mogol court that she is could chop
of their noses, she could also chop of their heads. The Mogols panicked
and tried to force their way back, but were encircled and massacred.
Thus, the Mogol advance into the mountain passes was restrained by the
fierce karNAvati, even as mahAkAlI slew the dAnava-s. She is said to
have orchestrated number of hydraulic constructions, the most noted of
which was an irrigation system that prevented the water from sinking
underground as it exited the hill into the gravels leading to the
valleys. This, allowed agricultural development that allowed an
efflorescence of several towns in the region.This consequently fed a
local Hindu revival which was mainly seen in the form of various
production of certain tAntrika, legal, and medical texts under the
patronage of this dynasty.

In addition to her initiation into the kAlI-kula, the rANI was also
initiated into the system of shrIkula and performed worship of a
shrIchakra at her capital of shrInagara. It was in this context the
ancestor of S/R had journeyed from their station further to the
northwest to the queen’s station for a vidvat-sabhA. This sabhA is said
to have attracted tAntrika-s from several parts of India: there were the
kAlI-kula practitioners from the lATa, magadha and kAshmIra countries,
kAshmirian-s and nambUthiri-s practicing the hAdi-mata from the chera
country, “tailanga-s” practicing the kAdimata from either the andhra or
kali\~Nga countries, exponents of the shrIkula krama as per the
parashurAma kalpasUtra from the drAviDa country and exponents of the
dashamahAvidyA system from kingdom of the mahArANa-s of medhapATha. It
was in course of such sessions that the ancestor of S/R realized that
the kalI-kula system of those exponents from the lATa country was
distinct from their own mahAnaya system of kAshmIrian eminence. What was
the center of this lATa system and what are its peculiarities? Such was
discussion on which S and we had embarked.

After Ahmad Shah ravaged Gujarat he destroyed the old shaiva center of
anahila-pattana and established his capital in the vicinity of the
chAlukya karNAvati, which he renamed after himself as Ahmadabad. Here he
vandalized the temple of bhadrakAlI but did not succeed in fully
destroying it. It the following period the Muzzafarid Turk [Mahmud
Begarha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/08/06/a-pashupata-temple-desecrated-by-mahmud-begarha/),
another monstrous Ghazi, completely destroyed the temple and constructed
fortifications and palaces in its place. The secularists aided and
abetted by their mlechCha backers have been denying this as a Hindu
fantasy. The secularists have foisted several imaginary narratives on
the generally clueless Hindu masses: The old bhadrakAlI temple just
“disappeared” and then Ahmad Shah built his city; Ahmad Shah himself
was a worshiper of bhadrakAlI and he had her “stuck” to the wall of his
fort; The bhadrakAlI temple was never destroyed and her temple of
relatively recent provenance is the same as the old one; A Mohammedan
chief whose palace lies in the vicinity of the recent temple himself
allowed the Hindus to build the temple. These secular narratives might
be combined with claims such as the lack of any notable Hindu
constructions in karNAvati prior to the “coming” of Ahmad Shah. These
obfuscations hide many a historical reality. The current bhadrakAlI
temple is relatively recent reconstruction that was built by the Hindus
only after the mAhArATTa campaigns in the mid-1700s brought an end to
Mohammedan ruler of Gujarat. The original bhadrakAlI temple corresponded
to the spot of the bhadra-qil’a, the citadel of Ahmad and the
samosA-munching Mahmud in Ahmadabad. Excavations conducted by the
archaeological survey of India within this citadel area have revealed
several fragments of Astika and jAina prAsAda-s which were demolished
during the erection of the disputable Saracenic structures. This offers
material evidence of the existence of karNAvati and also the that the
bhadrakAlI temple was part of a major religious complex for both
Astika-s and nAstika-s. Indeed several Saracenic structures in the
vicinity contain masonry from these very demolished temples. But as is
typical of the Indian situation, with utter disdain for the glorious
Hindu past, the archaeological survey the secular government have made
no attempt to restore or make these excavated antiquities visible to the
Hindus. It is indeed from this region the kAlIkula tAntrika-s are likely
to have fled to the Garhwal region.

As an aside we were able to establish that indeed the author of the
[madanavinoda](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/10/05/takaraja-s/)
might have been from this branch of the paramAra clan.

There are some interesting aspects of this kAlIkula system as
transmitted to S and her siblings. It differs from the kAmakalA-kAlI and
guhya-kAlI of the mahAkAla saMhitA, the 13 and 17 kAlI krama-s which
were favored by mahAnaya-like systems and the dakShiNa-kAlikA system.
This system was focused on bhadrakAlI. She is conceived as a 16-handed
goddess of black color, with fangs like the crescent moon, with an upper
garment of elephant skin and a skirt of tiger skin. She is flanked by
nandin and mahAkAla.
