+++
title = "A laud of indra"

+++
For the Arya of yore there was nothing more inspiring than indra in his
dasyu-smashing manifestation. Indeed, only one who is touched deeply,
inspired to heavenly heights and invigorated in ardor upon hearing these
R^iks can lay any claim to understanding the spirit of the warlike
Arya-s. Fleeting glimpses of this spirit of indra can be seen in the
other branches of the Indo-European tree in the glorification of Thor
among the Germanic peoples or the poetic flourishes among the yavana-s
on the might of Zeus. But the R^igveda is unrivaled in its pure
exhibition of the lauds of the great indra.

tvam mAyAbhir apa mAyino .adhamaH svadhAbhir ye adhi shuptAv ajuhvata
|  
tvam pipror nR^imaNaH prArujaH puraH pra R^ijishvAnaM dasyu-hatyeShv
Avitha || (RV 1.51.5 )

You with your mAyA powers blew away those with mAyA, with self-manifest
powers those who made offerings into their own mouth. You, full of
manliness, have demolished pipru’s forts, and impelled R^ijishvAn in
dasyu-killing \[battle\].

tvaM kutsaM shuShNahatyeShv AvithArandhayo .atithigvAya shambaram |  
mahAntaM chid arbudaM ni kramIH padA sanAd eva dasyuhatyAya jaj\~niShe
|| (RV1.51.6)

You boosted kutsa during the killing of shushNa, and annihilated
shambhara for atithigva; you trampled the mighty arbuda under foot, and
verily arose in the ancient past for the killing of dasyu-s

tve vishvA taviShI sadhryag ghitA tava rAdhaH somapIthAya harShate |  
tava vajrash chikite bAhvor hito vR^ishchA shatror ava vishvAni
vR^iShNyA || (RV 1.51.7)

In you all powers are closely gathered up; your generosity is pleased by
drinking soma; The vajra that is held in your arms is known : shear off
all manliness of our enemy \!

vi jAnIhy AryAn ye cha dasyavo barhiShmate randhayA shAsad avratAn |  
shAkI bhava yajamAnasya choditA vishvet tA te sadhamAdeShu chAkana ||
(RV 1.51.08)

You discriminate the Arya-s and the dasyu-s, punishing non-performers of
rites, subjugating them to the ritualist (literally one who spreads the
barhiSh for the somayAga); be the ritualist’s powerful impeller; all
these acts of yours bring happiness during the soma ritual.

anuvratAya randhayann apavratAn AbhUbhir indraH shnathayann anAbhuvaH
|  
vR^iddhasya chid vardhato dyAm inakShata stavAno vamro vi jaghAna
saMdihaH || (RV 1.51.9)

indra subjugates the non-ritualist to the ritualist, enabling the
offerers \[of sacraments\] to strike down those do not do so. When vamra
when praised \[you\], he destroyed the fortifications of the builder who
was augmenting them to reach the skies.

Thus, savya a\~Ngirasa praises indra to bear him aid in the battle
against the dasyu-s by performing a soma sacrifice.

He concludes this praise with a mantra seeking the protection of indra
thus:  
idaM namo vR^iShabhAya svarAje satyashuShmAya tavase .avAchi |  
asminn indra vR^ijane sarva-vIrAH smat sUribhis tava sharman syAma ||
(RV 1.51.15)

Obeisance to him the self-ruling bull, this mantra is uttered to the
truly valiant and mighty one; may we with all the heroes and ritualists
together in this ritual enclosure, O Indra, be in your protection.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Some notes:  
\* The second quarter of RV 1.51.5 is difficult to translate. The main
problem being the meaning of the word shupti, which occurs as a singular
locative noun. It is a hapax legomenon in the R^igveda. Here we follow
the suggestion of the learned shAstrI from the va\~Nga country
manmathanAtha dutta for the translation, based on sAyaNa. The great
sAyaNa states that shupti means mukha (face). He then points to two
vaidika traditions to defend the interpretation of shupti as mukha: In
the shukla yajurvedic tradition of the vAjasaneyin-s it is stated that
during the conflict between the deva-s and asura-s, the latter said that
they would not offer sacrifice to anyone else. In the kaushItaki
tradition, the asuras are described as scoffing agni and making the
offerings to themselves. Thus, the “adhi shuptAv ajuhvata” is taken as a
reference to this incident, implying that the asura-s made the oblations
in their own mouth. The word shupti being a body part is consistent with
the following constructs for body parts in Indo-Iranian, all of which
have the ‘-ti’ suffix (probably inherited from proto-Indo-European):
vistati= palm; pR^iShTi=rib; muShTi= fist; shruti=ear (also hearing);
dR^iShTi= eye (also sight); niShTi= collarbone. However, inference based
on homology suggests that it means shoulder rather than mouth: In middle
low German schuft= shoulder blade of ox or horse; Dutch schoft; Avestan
supt; Middle Persian suft; Albanian sup all meaning shoulder. The
interpretation of sAyana could still be right, even if shupti actually
meant shoulder in the RV, with making offerings on shoulder being an
obscure way of stating that they sacrificed to themselves. But
translating this quarter with shupti=shoulder leaves room for
alternative interpretations. Could it be that it refers to a
specifically deprecated ritual associated with the enemies of the Arya-s
of making oblations on a shoulder blade? This is a possibility to be
explored further.

\* The term sUri in RV 1.51.15 specifically means the sponsor of the
soma yaga. From the context it is likely to be a kShatriya yajamAna,
whose R^itvik-s were the a\~Ngirasa ritualists like savya. Who could
have been his main patron? An interesting hint is provided by his
allusion to the young warrior sushravas tUrvAyaNa in addition to the
usual Arya heroes like kutsa and divodAsa atithigva. In savya-s sUkta-s,
sushravas is supposed to have even exceeded the heroes like kutsa,
divodAsa and the early pUru king Ayu and subjugated 20 kings of men
(jana-rAj\~no dvir dasha). But this illustrious sushravas is not
mentioned by most other R^igvedic R^iShi-s who do praise kutsa and
divodAsa commonly. Interestingly, we find the Iranian tradition
mentioning a warrior hero kavI husrava who was aided by the god hauma
(=soma). Could it have been that he was the cognate of the R^igvedic
sushravas tUrvAyaNa and savya sought his patronage after moving away
from the core territory of the rulers like kutsa or Ayu?

\* saMdiH is translated as fortifications in this context. Its use to
describe a wall appears to be related to its original root which means
to smear or to pile. This captures the actions of piling stones and
smearing with mud to build the early fortifications that were typical of
the Indo-Europeans. Indeed, fort-based warfare remained an important
aspect of Indo-European military activity wherever they settled after
radiating from their homeland in the steppes. Even closer to the
ancestral homeland the Indo-Iranian remnants of fortifications are seen
in sites like Arkaim. Not surprisingly there are several references to
fort warfare in the R^igveda. Certain terms like puraMdhara and
poliorcetes point to parallels between saMskR^ita and Greek in this
regard.
