+++
title = "The crows and the parasitic koel: a kaviâ€™s take"

+++
In saMskR^ita literature we have come across multiple references to the
brood parasitic behavior of the koel (Eudynamys). One good verse in this
regard is that by the kavi vallaNa. We do not know much of him other
than that he was in the court of the kalchuri king lakShmI-karNa
(1041-1072 CE) and was probably not very happy with him as a patron.
What we know of his religious proclivities are interesting and
reflective of a certain strain of Hindus in the final centuries of the
tAthAgata-mata in India. Given that he composed stuti-s to rudra, the
buddha and the nAstika deity ma\~njushrI as worshiped in the
ma\~njushrIya mUlakalpa, he was clearly eclectic, reminiscent of the
admixture witnessed in the late tAntrika traditions such as the Astika
shrIvidyArNava and the nAstika kAlachakra. There is a subtle play of
dhvani to achieve an epic ring in whatever survives of vallaNa. This
particular piece is given by DD Kosambi from a collection preserved by a
bauddha Acharya vidyAkAra, which was taken to Tibet even as nAlanda was
going up in flames during the attack of Ikhtyaruddin Bhaktiyaruddin
Khalji:  
yan nIDa-prabhavo yad a\~njana-ruchir yat khecharo yad dvijas  
tena tvaM svajanaH kileti karaTair yat tair upabrUyase |  
tatra-ati-indriya-modima-aMsala-rasodgAras tavaiSha dhvanir  
doSho .abhUt kalakaNTha-nAyaka nijas teShAM svabhAvo hi sa ||

As you emerged from their nest (niDa), as you are of black color
(a\~njana-ruchi), as you fly in the sky (khechara), as you are
twice-born (i.e. once from the mother once and then from the egg;
dvijaH), you are said to be (upabrUyase) one of their own (svajana) by
the crows (karaTa). But then your sensual (aMsala), sentiment-emitting
(rasodgAra) voice (dhvani) which delights (modima) the senses beyond
description (ati-indriya), they saw as a fault (doSha) as it was your
own nature (svabhAva), O male koel.

Only the black-colored male koel makes the melodious song alluded to
here. The spotted females make a shrill, repeated call. This
naturalistic characterization of the koel may be compared to similar
sketches by other Hindu poets:  
1\) [The verse of
bhavabhUti](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/02/bhavabhutis-avifauna-and-flora/)  
2\) The kingfisher by
[vAkpatirAja](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/30/the-kingfisher/)
