+++
title = "A brief note on the Spitzer manuscript and relatedxa0issues"

+++
In his famed kAvya the buddhacharita, ashvagoSha states that when the
tathAgata was about to renounce the world he had an
“akShaya-dharma-jAta-rAgaH”, i.e., a “passion” of the indestructible
dharma was born in him. When we encountered this term we realized that
it was a nAstika’s version of the term sanAtana-dharma. Thus, ashvagoSha
is continuing the trend in the bauddha-mata, seen right from its
founder, of repositioning the realizations of the tathAgata as the real
sanAtana-dharma as opposed to the shruti and its spirit transmitted by
the itihAsa-s and the darshana-shAstra-s. Thus, despite all his urge to
separate himself from the sanAtana-dharma, the bauddha needed it to
provide an essential background for the very existence of his mata. Even
the tathAgata, who seems to have seen his teachings as an absolute
supersession of the sanAtana-dharma, needed to place himself in the
context of its darshana-s. Thus, the bypassing of the yoga master ArADa
kAlAma and the shrauta ritualist urubilvA jaTila kAshyapa are important
events in his narrative. Even ashvagoSha in his kAvya tries to subtly
hint this supersession by stating that siddhArtha’s father shuddhodhana
was a great kShatriya soma ritualist in the manner of father manu the
lawgiver, and pointing out that the buddha being raised in such a
household was familiar with all that. Now the constant need for the
Astika backdrop among the tAthAgata-s is something that has been
misunderstood by several modern students of history, in part due to the
influence of the white indologists and their fellow travelers. The
primary misunderstanding is to interpret this background of
sanAtana-dharma as being an integral bauddha innovation that has later
been adopted by the Astika-s. For example, several have called
ashvaghoSha as the originator of “real” kAvya literature. Some (e.g.
Winternitz) have gone even as far as to claim that ashvaghoSha was the
original exponent of kAvya and even vAlmIki borrowed from him\! We also
heard a claim that ashvaghoSha preceded the mahAbhArata as we know it.
Of course there is much to suggest that none of these claims are
consistent with the available facts. First, there is ample evidence from
ashvaghoSha himself that he considered vAlmIki the founder of kAvya
(i.e. kAvya in the later sense, as distinct from the R^ik mantra-s of
the earlier vaidika kavI-s and their Iranian counterparts). Second, the
whole of the background of ashvaghoSha’s buddhacharita as well as
saundara-nanda is an Astika one, transparently borrowed from Astika
contexts including the itihAsa-s. He knows of the rAmAyaNa, the
mahAbhArata and paurANika tales like the burning of kAma by rudra and
the birth of kumAra and uses them for similes to describe the buddha’s
life. It was in this context that Spitzer manuscript was brought up to
present a more subtle argument that the mahAbharata was not yet in its
current parvan structure at the time of ashvaghoSha. While the Spitzer
manuscript is useless to support this claim, it is still of enormous
interest in terms of understanding the state of the indosphere in the
first two centuries of the common era and the also the general framework
of the Astika background within which the nAstika tradition placed
itself at that time.

The Spitzer manuscript is a highly fragmented Sanskrit manuscript that
was discovered in Qizil (Eastern Turkestan; today Han-occupied Xinjiang)
during the German expedition of 1906 (3rd of the Turfan expeditions).
Its exact date is not known, but is believed to be between the 100-300
CE. It appears to have been written with a broad-nib copper pen in
brAhmI script following a style similar to that seen in the time of the
kushAna-s, which forms the basis for the above temporal window. A very
difficult to find version has been published by Eli Franco and some
additional material in the form of fragments known only as copies has
been studied by Japanese researchers. The contents of the manuscript are
a rather diverse mixture of Astika and nAstika issues that are not
entirely clear due to the state of the manuscript. However, it can be
said this manuscript is rather unique in that there is no parallel text
that has been found to date. The account of the manuscript as edited by
Franco is presented below with a few comments.  
\* avidyA-lakShaNa; godAna vastra-dAna, criticism of the
ghR^ihastAshrama, brAhmaNa-s. None of this is clear as the pages are
rather fragmentary.  
\* An account of AjIvika theories such as dharma and adharma having no
consequence.  
\* Some account of sukha, dukha, death, bandha and mokSha, etc.  
\* An account of the properties (lakShaNa-s) of the primary substances
teja, vAyu, Apa etc. A detailed account of vaisheShika theory of guNa-s,
probably statement of a pUrvapakSha for a nAstika (?)  
\* The four Arya satyAni of the buddha and the concept of nairAtmya.  
\* Some account of principles of logical inference and argument.  
\* saMkSipta rAmAyaNa- a summary of vAlmIki’s epic. A parvan summary of
the mahAbhArata. It should be noted that this is fragmentary with the so
claimed missing virATaparvan being a lacuna in the manuscript with some
name starting in ‘a’ or ‘A’, which might have read aj\~nAtaparvan –
effectively the same as the virATaparvan. The missing anushAsanaparvan
cannot be confirmed as being really missing or: 1) poor preservation; 2)
some Mbh manuscripts outside India, like Indonesia, combine the
shAntiparvan and the anushAsanaparvan; simply accidental or ignorant
omission by the author. In conclusion, the evidence is just tenuous to
insist that this fragmentary parvan list from a unique manuscript from
uttarApatha (Central Asia) represented the state of the Mbh as was known
elsewhere in jambudvIpa at that age. Franco also places a fragment of
the text regarding the origin of daitya-s and dAnava-s, a legal
procedure, an account of the gandharva veda, the chatuH ShaShTi kalA-s,
vedA\~Nga-s, and the duties of each varNa in this part of the text.  
\* Brief account of upaniShad-s, mantra-s and brAhmaNa injunctions. The
concepts of adhidaiva and adhyAtman.  
\* Brief account of taxonomy of living beings.  
\* The claim that the buddha knew all of the veda, the vedA\~Nga-s,
astronomy, dance and music. Arguments \[possibly of an Astika\] as to
why the buddha could not have been all-knowing.  
\* The buddha as an authoritative teacher, the merits of building
stUpa-s, the evils of dishonest actions, destruction of desire by
knowledge, a meditation on the bodily processes to end desire, mokSha,
use of garlic vis-a-vis brAhmaNa-s and shaka-s.  
\* Nature of saMsAra, a refutation of Ishvara concept, law of
conservation of matter and the beginningless nature of saMsAra.  
\* An attack on the bauddha-mata \[Arguments of mImAMsaka-s\]: The
buddha’s teaching is not pramANa because he used prAkR^ita, examples of
vulgar prAkR^ita  
\* Debate regarding whether compassion is dharma because it involves
attachment to the object of compassion.  
\* sharabha and other animals.  
\* Existence of past and future dharma-s in addition to those of the
present – bauddha theory of sarvAstivAda, which was popular in
uttarApatha and among the chIna-s.  
\* Discourse on how the Arya satyAni of the buddha can be understood –
by a gradual process or in a sudden revelation. The text explains that
it is a gradual process.  
\* An attack on the Astika theory of the “self-luminescent”
consciousness.  
\* The tathAgata’s place in the saMgha and the obscure question of
whether making a donation to the saMgha is a donation to the buddha.  
\* The concepts of samyag-buddhi and mithyA-buddhi – correct and wrong
cognition.  
\* An attack on the kAshyapIya theory of the action continuing to exist
until it bears fruit.  
\* Lengthy philosophical considerations and debates between tAthAgata-s
and naiyAyika-s, mImAMsaka-s and sAMkhyavAdin-s.

What the text illustrates is the degree to which the nAstika-s needed to
place themselves in the context of the Astika-s. The darshana-bheda is
well-know as it goes back to the tradition of the tathAgata himself
trying to refute the darshana-s of other contemporary thinkers. But
there is also a second stream – that of taking up and transmitting
Astika knowledge regarding their texts and traditions. This is distinct
from the parallel nAstika tendency (both among bauddha-s and jaina-s) of
producing “fake” versions of the Astika traditions like the mahAbhArata,
rAmAyaNa and purANa-s in order to present their doctrines as being
superior to those of the Astika-s. Rather, the tendency which we note in
this text is the faithful acquisition of Astika knowledge, perhaps as
part of illustrating the omniscience of the buddha and also thereby
attempting to show all Astika knowledge as a mere subset of nAstika
knowledge. In historical terms, this appears to have accompanied to
conversion of various brAhmaNa-s to the nAstikamata (like ashvaghoSha
himself). Thus, we should see kAvya as being one of these appropriations
of the “kalA-s” for the omniscient buddha, even as kAvya-composing
brAhmaNa-s started falling for the seductions of the tAthagata -mata.
Thus, the urge to create a life of the buddha in kAvya is more naturally
seen as an imitation of the preexisting kAvya-s that Astika-s had
starting from vAlmIki whom ashvaghoSha as a brAhmaNa still salutes as
the first kavI.

In fact, we see more of a link between the Spitzer manuscript and
ashvaghoSha: 1) There is evidence that copies of the buddha-charita,
saundara-nanda and this bauddha play on the brAhmaNa student of the
buddha, shari-putra, were widely distributed in Central Asia. 2)
Tocharian plays have been recovered from the lost Indic civilizational
centers of the Central Asian oases like Kucha, Agni and the like, which
were destroyed by the invasions of Han imperialists and their Turkic
ally Arshina Shuoel. The plays are Tocharian versions of Sanskrit
originals that point to the transmission of kAvya to central along with
the bauddha-dharma. This, reinforces the idea that certain nAstika-s of
this period like ashvaghoSha saw it as important part of their tradition
to create kAvya with bauddha themes but mirroring the astika originals,
which is where a bulk of their metaphors and similes come from. 3)
ashvaghoSha shows a wide knowledge of the Astika itihAsa-purANa and also
strongly attacks saMkhya, vaisheShika and mImaMsa and vaidika
traditions. Moreover, he specifically goes into a refutation of
IshvaravAda (all of these through the mouth of maitreya who will come as
the buddha of a future age) and show sevidence for specific knowledge of
the upaniShad-s. These points covered by ashvaghoSha are key points in
the Spitzer manuscript all together with an account of the itihAsa-s.
Thus, we suspect that this manuscript represents some one belonging to
the same tradition of ashvaghoSha. There is much debate as to whether
ashvaghoSha was a sarvastivAdin or belonged to one of the many
proliferating schools of nAstika thought from that period. But we feel
this does not detract from the idea of a link between his school and the
manuscript as they share some basic similarities which go beyond the
general pUrvapakSha of Astika sources.

Finally, the case of the Spitzer manuscript illustrates how many ancient
texts of our larger tradition might have been lost. In some measure this
is due to climatic conditions in much of the sub-continent not being
very conducive for manuscript survival. The drier and cooler climes of
Central Asia are simply better for survival of manuscripts. Hence, the
spread of Indian traditions to central Asia along with the creation of
the greater India and indosphere helped in the survival of at least some
of these traditions. However, the case of Nepal and South India where
texts have survived to a much greater extant bring home the bigger
problem, which many like to deny, namely Islam. Destruction of Hindu
textual traditions by the wave after wave of depredations by the army of
Islam, left Hindus with only a part of what they originally possessed –
in fact over large swaths of northern India deeper Hindu traditions have
simply become extinct. Even what survives would have gone had not
certain Hindu rulers and officials in the courts of lapsed and active
Islamic tyrants (often despite the destruction all around them unlike
what white Indologists and secularists would tell us) had not taken
steps to preserve what they could. In central Asia the destruction of
traditions by the same army of Islam (the buddha-busters) brought a
closure to the transmission of traditions to those regions. This points
the importance of the need to spread the indosphere so that the
traditions might survive even if bhArata falls.
