+++
title = "A brief note on spies, subversionists, white indologists and “regionalxa0studies”"

+++
While today the US, as the leader of the leukosphere, is renowned for
its intelligence and subversion operations all over the world, it has
acquired this capability relatively recently in historical terms.
Although the FBI carried out various intelligence and
counter-intelligence operations, its activities were primarily conducted
on US territory rather than in other countries. Only during world war-2
the OSS, the precursor of the CIA was constituted in order to conduct
intelligence and subversion operations primarily aimed at the Germans
and the Japanese. The American elite quickly realized that they lacked
the depth of the operations conducted by their English allies and they
needed a robust force of their own that would give them complete
independence from the English. This became even more important for them
as the WW2 progressed because: 1) the English were taking a hammering at
the hands of the Germans and the Japanese and their abilities were
stretched to the limit. 2) The American elite realized that there was a
certain divergence in their interests with respect to that of the
English and they were already coming to see their role as a future world
hegemon in place of England. 3) They knew that they needed information
on areas/regions where England traditionally had a much lower level of
involvement. 4) After the Russians pulverized the Germans in the battle
of Stalingrad and later the Japanese in Manchuria, they realized that
they were in a compromised situation vis-a-vis the Rus. Hence, they
wished have a strong force of spasha-s and rAShTrabhid-s to penetrate
Russia. While this force (the OSS operatives) was developed in
Washington DC, many of its agents came right from the Ivy League schools
from the northeastern US. This included academics who would study
foreign nations to prepare reports and understand alien peoples, as well
as actual agents, such as the one from Princeton University who was
supposed to assassinate the German scientist Werner Heisenberg of
uncertainty principle fame. While certain Ivy League academics claimed
to tread on the path of German Jewish anthropologist Franz Boas and stay
away from such intelligence and sabotage operations, most seem to have
enthusiastically involved themselves in the OSS operations, including
some students of Boas.

Of primary interest to us here is the development of OSS activity in
India and the greater Indosphere. As we have mentioned before some
notable white indologists acted as agents as part of the OSS and related
operations. We had earlier talked about Daniel Ingalls and Richard Frye
of Harvard University. Another notable figure whom we must consider here
is W. Norman Brown of University of Pennsylvania, the father of South
Asianism. After the catastrophic defeat of the Indian army in the first
war of independence in 1857 CE, the English victors announced that they
would not overtly interfere with the religion of the Hindus or the
Mohammedans in the sub-continent. However, they covertly facilitated all
manner of white Isaistic subversionists to try to convert the Hindus to
the shavamata. Brown was the son of one such American Isaistic
subversionist who was active in Madhya Pradesh to plant pretAlaya-s and
reap a harvest of Hindu souls. Despite starting with subversionist
intentions the senior Brown became more and more sympathetic to Hindu
tradition and began seriously studying saMskR^ita and Vedic tradition
with the white indologist Bloomfield. Due to his early exposure to Hindu
traditions the junior Brown also acquired a sympathetic attitude towards
Hindu tradition leading to his academic study of Greek followed by the
devabhAShA. In the 1920s he took the Sanskrit chair at Penn and was
involved both in studies of saMskR^ita literature and the archeology of
SSVC sites such as Chanhudaro. Of course among those familiar with the
kaula-mArga he is best known for his translation of the saundaryalahari.
His other major contributions were the study of the kathA-sAhitya in
saMskR^ita, the folktales of India which he did in collaboration with a
Japanese scholar, and the study of the veda following his predecessor
Bloomfield. He started the American Oriental Society which was the
mainstay of indology in the US and also its journal that published a
wide array of scholarly indological papers. But what most Hindus are not
aware of is that he was an important OSS agent who was key to acquiring
knowledge regarding the India for the Americans. Like Ingalls, he was
active in trying to prevent an alliance between the Japanese and Indian
nationalists, though it appears from his notes that in general he was
not supportive of the English tyranny in India and had “strong
sympathies” for the Indian independence movement. This brings up an
interesting point regarding the American objectives in India. It appears
that there was a section of the American elite, including their
president Roosevelt, who had a degree of sympathy for the Indian
independence and the India nationalists. Roosevelt proposed in 1941 that
the English relinquish their hold on India:  
*“India should be made a commonwealth at once. After a certain number of
years–five perhaps, or ten–she should be able to choose whether she
wants to remain in the Empire or have complete independence.”*  
Indeed, after WW2 when the English saw that the Americans were unlikely
to militarily help them in the event of an armed struggle for
independence in India, they realized how tenuous their grip on the
sub-continent really was. There were others, like some OSS operatives
who during WW2 went to aid the English retain their hold over India;
however, even these operatives eventually lost their fervor to aid the
English against the Indian nationalism. Thus, it appears that although
the OSS agents were deployed for operations in India, on the whole they
were not entirely damaging for the independence movement, and some like
Brown might have even been involved in conveying a favorable opinion to
the elite – after all in 1939 itself he sensed that the svarAjya of
bhArata was imminent and declared:  
*“How can Americans who have never met India in their educational
experience be expected to live intelligently in such a world.”*

Brown himself displayed a largely correct understanding of the Indian
situation in certain matters; he outlined that: 1) India was essentially
an Aryan civilization. 2) the tradition borne by the medium of
saMskR^ita upheld by the brAhmaNa-s was the defining bond that held
India. 3) The Mohammedan invasions and imposition of Islam denuded this
bond and caused a decline of Hindu civilization. 4) He also correctly
realized that the partition of jambudvIpa into the India and the
Mohammedan terrorist state was due a clash of cultures arising from the
monotheistic zeal of Islam which is fundamentally incompatible with the
diversity of thought in Hindu tradition. But in other respects he held
views typical of most white indologists: 1) Hindus have no theory of
state other than that of a supreme tyrant or a feudal chieftain (e.g.
his statement of shivAjI as such a Hindu chieftain): a regurgitated
version of “the Indians should know that they would prosper under the
benign rule of the British rather than rot under an oriental despot”. 2)
Misunderstanding of the jAti-varNa system of the Hindus. 3) Hindus treat
their females badly. 4) The primary greatness of the Hindus lies in the
realm of religion and philosophy, especially development of theories
such as advaita. By silence it was implied that Hindus really did not
have much else to show in other quarters of intellectual endeavor. One
of the key things done by Brown during his tenure at the OSS was the
establishment of the concept of “Area” or “Regional” studies, wherein
the world is divided into several areas and American experts gather and
systematize information in each of these areas. While this movement
gathered steam in Washington after WW2 it moved to the Ivy League
departments along with the individual scholars. Thus, with Brown the
“Area studies” department focused on bhArata developed at Penn, which
he originally termed “India: A Program of Regional Studies”. But in the
coming years as the partition and independence followed the area was
designated geographically as “South Asia” and the program became one of
South Asian studies. While seemingly innocuous, this was later to be a
potent weapon in the delegitimizing the concept of greater India and the
indosphere. Ironically, this turn of South Asianism originated in part
from Brown’s expansive vision and OSS background – the department was no
longer a place only for philologists engaged in study of Indian
tradition but a place where all manner of studies on the area/region
would be conducted including political movements, archaeology, sociology
and anthropology. This was epitomized in the volume Brown wrote with a
strategic intention titled: “The United States and India and Pakistan”.

This inclusive South Asianism, which moved beyond the philological study
of Hindu tradition, was soon to become a container that would
accommodate all manner of subversionists directed against Hindus. Even
under Brown’s watch subversionist elements started operating in these
departments. For example, we have the case of Eleanor Zelliot who wanted
to “study” and popularize Ambedkar. She was correctly denied a visa by
the Indian authorities. However, Brown interceded on her behalf to get
her to go to India as part of the Penn’s South Asianist activities.
Here, she connected with the Dalit movement and worked as its
representative among the mlechCha-s. This was the beginning of American
support to Dalitism, which has been used as a potent tool in stirring
Indian affairs. Let us not forget how such Dalitists operating in the US
were mobilized by the Harvard Sanskritist Michael Witzel against Hindus
during the California textbook case. Once the “area/region” studies at
Penn came to include India in a broad sense it spawned several such
successor departments all over the US. As noted above Brown saw several
features of Hindu civilization in correct light and others wrongly.
However, as South Asianism evolved and the departments expanded those
aspects which he correctly envisioned were replaced by views inimical to
Hindus and the dharma, and those aspects he misunderstood were now spun
in new ways using the jargon of subterfuge. For instance, take the case
of the noted South Asianist from Columbia University (another Ivy League
school), Nicholas Dirks, who has looked back closely at his OSS
predecessors. He has specifically attacked the correct apprehensions of
Hindus and the dharma by Brown. He declared that saMskR^ita was not the
defining bond of “South Asia” as Brown suggested and further that the
Mohammedans did not suppress saMskR^ita. He has also taken the stance
that the pro-Hindu views such as those expressed by Brown are dangerous
because they are used by proponents of Hindutva and led to acts such as
the destruction of the despicable Babri Masjid. Indeed, today the South
Asianists of Penn are the hive of anti-Hindu/Indian activities, along
with several of their Ivy League colleagues from Columbia, Harvard and
Cornell. We recently saw the activism of some of these individuals
against the lATa-naresha, who is being repeatedly impugned for
protecting the Hindus of the gurjara desha against Mohammedan rowdyism.
These include saMskR^ita scholars like the Mohammedan, Daud Ali, who
invited various anti-Hindu/Indian activists and Naxalites who have aided
and abetted socialist terrorism in India and supported Mohammedans from
TSP.

Thus, the South Asianist departments and their effluents today play
roles fitting their origins in the intelligence community. For example,
we just need to see a recent US intelligence dispatch regarding India
that was leaked:  
*“We interact regularly with a cross-section of NGOs, both religious and
secular, that encourage inter-faith dialogue, secularism, and actively
counter religious extremism of all kinds, as well as providing material
comfort to victims of hate crimes. We ensure these NGO leaders
participate in the IV program; USAID and PA ensure that they have access
to USG funding. We express our support by visibly attending their public
events. We make sure that their information on the activities of
extremists is included in the Human Rights Report and the Religious
Freedom Report…*

*State and local governments in western India have a complicated
relationship with NGOs working on human rights issues and on religious
tolerance. NGOs often criticize state bodies for not doing enough to
deal with extremism. In Gujarat in particular, NGOs have pointed out
just how widespread the state was involved in the fueling of the 2002
riots and how it has failed to bring those responsible to justice. We
tend to support such NGO views on Gujarat.”*

The NGOs referred to in this leak include South Asianist bodies which
are fed by products of the Ivy League departments and people having
academic ties to such departments in Penn and Columbia among others.
Even before this leak [we had
realized](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/09/27/watching-the-kantaka-s-and-akranta-s/)
from the pattern of the response that these mlechCha forces were
involved in supporting the Mohammedans within India and attacking
Hindus, such as during the events following the train Jihad in Gujarat.
