+++
title = "Beetles and men: some glimpses of history through the contemporaryxa0lens"

+++
***The tale of poisoned arrows***  
The bushmen clans generally used to not fight each other because most
adult males are armed with arrows that have been smeared with deadly
toxins. However, when from the mid-1600s the Dutch started intruding
into their land and waging a war of extermination, the bushmen fought
unrelentingly and with much distinction putting their poisoned arrows to
good use against the invaders. The archeological investigations at the
Borders cave in South Africa has uncovered a poison applicator from 24
Kya resembling the equivalent device of extant bushmen suggesting that
they have been using such poisoned arrows for at least that point in
time if not older. Indeed this long-standing tradition of poisoned
arrows has continued from this most basal branch of humanity to the more
recent branches. Based on philological evidence we can say that it was
likely that the common ancestor of the Arya-s and the yavana-s within
the Indo-European sphere extensively used such toxic arrows. Right in
the R^igveda we have a mention of the poisoned arrow in the battle
incantations of the bharadvAja-s:

AlAktA yA rurushIrShNy atho yasyA ayo mukham |  
idam parjanyaretasa iShvai devyai bR^ihan namaH || RV 6.75.15  
Obeisance to the arrow goddess, this born of parjanya, smeared with
venom, with a point of deer-horn and metal.

Among the yavana-s we encounter the poisoned arrows being used by the
hero Herakles, which were later passed on to Philoctetes. Odysseus also
said to go to Ephyera to obtain poisoned arrows.

Over time a variety of toxins have been utilized on the tips of the
poisoned arrows. The bushmen as one of the earliest discoverers of the
use of toxins in this capacity have explored a wide range of
possibilities. They are known to use toxins derived from a variety
sources such as castor beans, the mamba snake, and certain chrysomelid
and carabid beetles. The beetles are what we are interested in talking
about here. The bushmen use larvae of three chrysomelid beetles:
Diamphidia nigroornata and Diamphidia vittatipennis most frequently and
Polyclada flexuosa less so. Most remarkably all these chrysomelids are
parasitized by the larvae of the carabid beetle Lebistina holubi and
some other Lebistina species. The adult carabids closely resemble the
adult chrysomelids and track them on the same host plant (the guggulu
plant). These carabid larvae attach themselves to full-grown Diamphidia
and Polyclada larvae and thus gain access to them when the enter
diapause within their cocoons . Here the Lebistina slowly sucks them dry
keeping them alive till the last larval stage. These Lebistina are also
used for their venom. We do not know if they derive at least part of
their venom from their hosts. However, from the reports of the bushmen
it is clear that there is a difference – they distinguish the parasitic
Lebistina larvae from the host and consider its toxin to be better as it
apparently loosens flesh from the bone. The full-grown larvae of the
chrysomelids migrate 0.5-1 meter into the ground and form an egg-shaped
cocoon in which they remain in diapause for several years. The bushmen
dig out these cocoons and prepare the toxin in many different ways: The
simplest is carefully crushing the larva on to the arrow heads followed
by heating them lightly in a fire. They might mix the crushed beetle
with plant extracts and their own saliva and then apply the mixture to
the arrows using an applicator as mentioned above. They may also dry the
larvae and then grinding them into powder which is mixed with a plant
gum and applied to the arrow.

We consider the use of these poison beetles an extraordinary discovery
of the bushmen. The beetle itself is hard to get (i.e. underground) and
its poison’s effect is not immediately apparent – it has no effect on
endothermic vertebrates if delivered orally. However, intravenously it
is lethal with no known antidote or treatment. Thus, the bushmen can
safely consume the animal they have killed with its toxin. Not
surprising they have evolved a code around its use: The cocoons can only
be collected by the chief hunters and they are stored live in ostrich
eggshell containers. From them they are taken out periodically to be
used sparingly. They are also supposed to be exchanged between clans
living throughout the Kalahari. The toxin from Diamphidia is a single
subunit protein of weight around 50-60 Kd but to my knowledge the
sequence of the gene coding for it remains unknown. Its mode of action
is still not fully understood but has been demonstrated to cause cell
lysis and apparently has no peptidase activity. It is only effective
against endothermic vertebrates. Interestingly, a similar toxin has been
reported from the North American chrysomelid Leptinotarsa and it
parasitoid Lebia. Hence, we cannot rule out the possibility that the
toxin is made or has been acquired by lateral transfer from a bacterial
endosymbiont – this comparable to the Black widow spider latrotoxin (a
protein toxin) which we had recently shown to have been acquired by
lateral transfer from bacterial endosymbionts.

Interestingly, there is a parallel story concerning the ancient use of
toxic beetles from bhArata that is today not widely know to our people.

The use of poisons in warfare are well-known in Indo-Aryan tradition.
Right in the RV we are informed in a mantra composed by kakShIvAn the
son of dIrghatamas the twin deva-s, the ashvin-s devised such a toxin to
slay the viShvAcha-s \[Footnote 1\]:

ajohavId ashvinA vartikA vAm Asno yat sIm amu\~nchataM vR^ikasya |  
vi jayuShA yayathuH sAnv adrer jAtaM viShvAcho ahataM viSheNa || (RV
1.117.16)  
When the quail had invoked you, O ashvin-s, you saved her from the the
wolf’s jaws; in your victorious march you two stormed the mountain
citadel and slew the clan of the viShvAcha-s with poison.

So was a beetle toxin known to the Arya-s? The answer to this question
leads to a rather convoluted story, which we shall begin with an
observation of Ctesias the yavana physician of the Iranian king
Artaxšaça-II in his Indica (Aelian’s citation of Indica book 4,
chapter 41):

*“In India there is a sort of bird as big as the egg of a patridge. It
is a yellow color and makes its nest on the mountains. Indians call it
dikairon. If any one takes of the feces of these birds so much as a
grain of millet-seed, and in the morning drinks it dissolved in water,
he falls asleep and must die in the evening. Poets, however, paint it as
the sweetest and pleasantest death in the world. The Indians on that
account place the greatest value on the possession of the same, for they
hold it in fact as an oblivion of evil \[of death\]. Thus, the king of
India sends it as one of the most costly gifts to the king of Iran who
treasures it as a preservative and preventative of incurable ills in
time of need. Therefore, among the Persians, no one possesses it but the
king and the king’s mother.”*

About a decade ago A. Mayor proposed that dikairon was not the feces of
a bird but actually a toxic beetle from bird nests, and went on to
suggest that it was actually either the Paederus or Paederidus beetle.
These beetles possess a Pseudomonas aeruginosa-like symbiotic bacterium
that produces the deadly toxin pederin. Interestingly, a similar
symbiont also produces related toxins in marine sponges. This toxin has
an LD50 reported from rodents of 20 micrograms/Kg body weight and if all
things remain equal one could extrapolate a 1.5-2 milligram lethal dose
for an average human – indeed it is reported to be more toxic than cobra
venom. This fits in well with the legendary efficacy of dikairon in
quantities akin to a millet-seed. However, there is one issue with
Mayor’s proposal – death by pederin is unlikely to be a pleasant one
as reported by Ctesias. Its ingestion would be expected to cause serious
internal damage as a consequence of inhibition of eukaryotic protein
synthesis at nanomolar quantities. Horses that accidentally eat these
beetles have severe damage of the gut mucosa. Thus, the death would be a
rather painful one. Hence, we are not convinced by Mayor’s idea about
pederin being the agent behind dikairon. Nevertheless, the possibility
of a beetle toxin remains valid for other reasons: The other deadly
beetle toxin, cantharidin does not seem to affect certain birds (e.g.
the turkey) and frogs and can be taken up from the beetles and excreted.
The French troops first got a taste of cantharidin by eating frogs which
had in turn consumed the beetles containing it. Similarly, cats eating
fowls which have consumed cantharidin beetles have died from it. Hence,
it is possible that the Indian birds of Ctesias indeed excreted a toxin
derived from their insect prey but his account does not match pederin or
cantharidin (which also causes a painful death) unless we selectively
take parts of it to be farrago.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-2wG14lhWsoA/UU6ojiKXqSI/AAAAAAAACnY/PWiqJvCZqpk/s400/beetle_toxins.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/6k0JmvPPjmU4zaUNiQ-QY9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

So while Ctesias’s dikairon remains mysterious what do the Hindu texts
themselves have to say about beetle toxins? To answer this we must turn
to the work of one our greatest men, the wise kauTilya. In his
arthashAstra he recommends that several secret poisons should be used to
assassinate adharmiShTha-s who threaten to harm Hindu society comprised
of its 4 castes:  
chAturvarNya rakShA.artham aupaniShadikam adharmiShTheShu prayu\~njIta |
(14.1.1) \[footnote 2\]

Among the poisons he describes many are made from arthropod, amphibian,
reptilian and plant sources:

chitra-bheka kauNDinyaka kR^ikaNa pa\~nchakuShTha shatapadI chUrNam |
uchChiTiNga kambalI shatakardama idhma | kR^ikalAsa chUrNaM |
gR^ihagolika andhAhi kakrakaNTaka pUtikITa gomArikA chUrNaM | bhallAtaka
avalguja sAra samyuktaM | sadyaH prANaharam | eteShAM vA dhUmaH ||  
The first preparation here is a powder made from an extract of the
chitrabheka frog, the insects known as kauNDinyaka, kR^ikaNa,
pa\~nchakuShTha and the centipede. The next preparation comprises of
dried uchChiTiNga beetle, and two toxic lepidopteran larvae. The next is
a powder of an extract from the Varanus lizard. There after comes a
powder made from the extract of lizard, slender coral snake (Calliophis
melanurus), the ray spine, and two insects. Each of these powders are
said to be mixed with the sap of the bhallAtaka (Semecarpus anacardium)
and avalguja (Vernonia anthelmintica). They cause death right away.
These might also be used as vapors or smokes.

kITo vA.anyatamas taptaH kR^iShNa-sarpa priya\~NgubhiH | shoShayed eSha
samyogaH sadyaH prANaharo mataH || (14.1.4-5)

The above insect powders might also be boiled and combined with the
toxin of the common krait and the extract of the plant *Callicarpa
macrophylla*. Then the mixture is desiccated. This is also said to kill
right away.

People have taken these recommendations of the great AchArya to be a
bunch of hocus-pocus. However, in light of the reality of beetle toxins
and the allusions of Ctesias and Aelian (both closer in time to
kauTilya), both of whom also mention the deadly snake venoms being used
in India, we take these seriously. It is interesting to note that Hindu
method also involves mixing the toxin with plant extracts just as done
by the bushmen. Of specific interest in this context is the use of the
uchChiTi\~Nga beetle – the very identity of this word has been obscure
to modern Hindus. For instance, questioning modern college Ayurveda
practitioners from the mahArATTa country one gets responses such as
“poisonous insects”, “some kind of scorpion”, “centipede”, a shrimp or
a venomous crab\! Clearly most modern Hindus have lost the naturalistic
spirit of their ancestors. But the key clue is given by the description
of the envenomation by the uchChiTi\~Nga in ancient Hindu medical
tradition:

hR^iShTa-romochChiTi\~Ngena stabdha-li\~Ngo bhR^ishArtimAn | daShTaH
shItodakenaiva siktAnya\~NgAni manyate ||(This is from the medieval
physician va\~Ngasena’s chikitsA-sAra-saMgraha but it is a quotation on
uchiChiti\~Nga intoxication taken from the great saMhitA of charaka:
chikitsA-sthAna 23.153)

Horripilations, priapism, violent seizures as though wetted by freezing
water are the symptoms of uchChiTi\~Nga envenomation. The mention of the
priapism supports this being a cantharidin producing beetle: In the case
of the French soldiers being poisoned by cantharidin the physician
Meynier reports that they had “érections doloureuses et prolongées”. One
of the symptoms mentioned by him is the lowered body temperature which
matches wetting by freezing water account of the Hindus. Apparently, in
the ancient world the Roman philosopher Lucretius Carus wanting to
achieve pleasurable dhvajonnati instead attained the realm of Pluto by
trying out cantharidin. Other arthropod toxins causing priapism are the
Brazilian wandering spider and certain scorpions. The former is not
known from India and also the Hindus clearly distinguished spiders in
the lUtikA shAstra. The scorpion envenomation is always given separately
in the Hindu texts under the vR^iShchika section and the ancient Hindus
always distinguished the two in their toxicological works. Neither does
it fit the sequestration induced toxicity of crabs and shrimps. Hence,
indeed a beetle identification is the favored one. Traditional
physicians in some parts of India use the potently toxic
cantharidin-bearing beetle Mylabris cichorii for treating skin tumors
making it a probable candidate. While the cantharidin-producing meloids
are good candidates we cannot rule out secondary
cantharidin-sequestering beetles (e.g. pyrochroids or anthicids); a bug
could be an additional cantharidin sequesterer, which was also used: the
pUtikITa of chANakya.

There are other beetles among kauTilya’s insects, such as the
pa\~nchakuShTa, of which we have a less clear picture. Indeed, it is in
this context, coming back to Ctesias’ Indian toxin gifted to
Artaxšaça-II, we take a more radical stance that it could be a beetle,
which still remains to be identified, with a different kind of toxin.
Precedence for this comes from work in the past 20 years concerning the
toxins contained by the poison dart frogs. Some of these dendrobatids
such as Phyllobates terribilis (among other members of the Phyllobates
genus), contain steroidal alkaloid toxins, the batrachotoxins that are
used by native South American tribes in Colombia for their blow darts.
This toxin is by far one of the most deadly, leaving pederin and
cantharidin far behind; \~ 100 micrograms are enough to kill a regular
human. When used by the tribesmen on vertebrates it kills nearly
instantaneously. Interestingly, the naturalist Dumbacher found this
toxin far away from South America in New Guinea, not in frogs but the
passerine birds Pitohui, Colluricincla and Ifrita. Following up on this
with Wako a local New Guinean naturalist, Dumbacher was able to show
that the birds obtain the toxin from mylerid beetles of the genus
Choresine. Likewise, the frogs appear to also acquire their toxin
directly from the beetle source (as an aside in this context we might
note that the chitrabheka of chANakya is a toxic frog, that might derive
its toxin from an insect source, though in this case we suspect it is an
ant-derived or millipede alkaloid similar to the Madagascar frogs.
Indeed the alkaloid-producing millipede Rhinotus purpureus could be an
alternative interpretation of chANakya’s shatapadI). The beetles
themselves are unlikely to synthesize such steroidal alkaloids by
themselves, rather they are likely to get it from a plant source
followed by modification by bacterial symbionts. The distribution of
beetles producing the batrachotoxin in both New Guinea and South America
raises the possibility that they might be found elsewhere in the world.
Mylerids are known from India but extremely poorly studied – in fact
after the 1920s even their systematic study has been largely ignored in
India, leave alone any examination of the natural products. Given this,
we would not be surprised if there is a potent small molecule toxin that
was sequestered from a beetle source by birds in India. Such a toxin
could have been excreted by the bird consistent with report of Ctesias.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-JdpTg0m5RG0/UVPYocNcLFI/AAAAAAAACnw/LCyUt7efkaE/s400/beetle_plant_toxins.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/k9HUwU7seoccN8x7dPPN09MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

On more general note chANakya appears to extensively rely on poisons
from insect sources which include some much neglected sources for toxins
(at least as far as India goes). He repeatedly mentions using the
uchChiti\~Nga with one or more lepidopteran larvae (kambali and
shatakardama). These indeed contain toxins which might be sequestered at
multiple levels of the food chain. Many of them derive their toxins from
plants such the milkweeds (the famed arka plants). The common milkweed
contains calotropin, a rather strong toxin which causes a drop in
heartbeat that can prove fatal, and is sequestered by larvae of the
monarch butterfly. The larvae of the cinnabar moth (Callimorpha
jacobaeae) and the moth Arctia caja obtain pyrrolizidine skeleton-based
alkaloids like senecionine from the plant Senecio, that can have
hepatotoxic effects. It could hence accentuate action of other toxins by
disabling liver detoxification. These plant derived toxins could also be
further modified by symbionts of these organisms. There was a report
that quails can eat monarch butterflies with toxin levels enough to kill
50 men but is unaffected by it. This suggests that this bird might be
immune to this toxin (unlike other birds) and probably sequesters or
excretes it. This makes lepidopterans another potential source for the
dikairon toxin. Finally, it might seem strange that chANakya mentions
the gecko (golika) as a possible toxin source. However, this might not
be entirely meaningless. While they do not produce any toxins of their
own, they could very well sequester toxins from their insect. Indeed,
such sequestration of toxic bufadienolides from toads has been noted in
the neck nuchal glands of the snake Rhabdophis tigrinus and of the
deadly tetrodotoxin from newt prey in the snake Thamnophis sirtalis.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-kPB_bo_F1us/UVPozgcbGHI/AAAAAAAACoA/uYh-YCuh57g/s400/tetrodotoxins.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/gcpYIRz3xyNCMZAm4yLTVNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Finally, we may note that the knowledge of highly poisonous insects and
their connection to birds does not begin with kauTilya rather it can be
traced back to our proto-toxicologist, the great agastya maitravaruNi
and our illustrious ancestors, the bhR^igu-s of the atharvaveda. In RV
1.191.16 agastya states that the poison of kuShuMbhaka (most likely a
beetle as per the account of the AV-S 2.32.6) is more poisonous than
that of a scorpion. In RV 1.191.11 he states that a small bird is immune
to the toxin of the insect and does not die when it eats (note the
above-mentioned account of the quail); similarly, he states that his
drug will block the action of the poison. In both the surviving AV
saMhitA-s, the atharvan-s also mention the kuShuMbhaka and its toxicity,
they also distinguish this from the toxin of the vR^iShchika (scorpion);
treatment of its sting with plant-derived drugs is mentioned e.g. AV-P
19.47.1-3 and AV-vulgate 10.4.15 and of various snakes. The AV-P 20.44.9
also mentions a poisonous insect ketulu\~Nga. The AV also mentions the
use of such drugs in the treatment of wounds from poisoned arrows (e.g.
AV-vulgate sUkta 4.6; this sUkta states that the poison is prepared by
grinding some material). Indeed, during the invasion of bhArata by the
Macedonian barbarians their general Ptolemaios was struck by a poisoned
arrow of a Hindu archer during the intense fighting along the sindhu
river. Alexander treated him with a plant-derived drugs obtained from
Hindu physicians (later exaggerated in Ptolemaios’ memoirs as a drug
revealed by Apollo directly to Alexander; in the AV-P 16.16 the drugs to
counter poison are similarly described as coming from rudra). The
AV-vulgate sUkta 8.8 mentions the use of poisoned traps envenomed by the
deadly castor bean toxin (tAjaDbha\~Nga) with spikes and hooks in the
war with dasyu-s. In AV-vulgate sUkta-s 11.9 and 11.10 two deadly
astra-s used in war known as arbudi and trishandhi are invoked. In the
former blood-bugs are deployed (11.9.17) while in the latter mosquitoes
(11.10.8) are deployed, along with snake venom in both. We suspect in
this context that the shitipadi which is placed on the arrows in the
trishandhi deployment is likely to have been an insect. Thus, the
knowledge and use of such poisons might go back a the earliest phases of
Hindu tradition.

**The beetle astronomer**

Indians need to be thankful to the dung-beetles. It was estimated ( as
of 1990s) that these beetles bury 1.8\*10^7 tons of human feces and
5.5\*10^7 tons of bovine feces in an year. Thus, they play a major role
in the subcontinental ecology facilitating the turnover of mammalian
excreta in the ecosystem and keeping the environment free of unused
ordure. It is also the answer to a mystery a that puzzles many urban
moderns as to how the Indians got away with open defecation in the past.
The tathAgata, as we have noticed before, was a keen naturalist and took
note of this phenomenon; however, sadly he took a very dim view of this
industrious beetle, making it a villain of one his many narratives – the
gUthapAna-jAtaka:  
*“Once when the tathAgata lived at jetavana there was a market town ¾
yojana-s away from it, where bhikkhu-s could get some food by presenting
a token. However, there was a lout who wandered in those regions and
made it tough for them by harassing them with his silly questions
followed by abuses. One day a bhikkhu of siddhArtha’s saMgha got into
brawl with him. The bhikkhu girding his dhoti bashed up the lout and
threw dung on his face. After that the fellow ran away from the
tAthAgata-s. When the new reached the buddha, he declared that this was
not the first time the bikkhu had thrown dung on the lout’s face and
went on to narrate an incident he had witnessed during his former
incarnation as a tree (or a tree yakSha). At that time there was a motel
on the road between a\~Nga and magadha where a bunch of travelers had
stopped their carts for the night. There they had a dinner of fish curry
followed by some beer. They left early next morning, when a dung-beetle
smelling the ordure arrived to get its share. Being thirsty it drank a
bit of the beer they had spilled on the ground and then started rolling
its dung ball. Being intoxicated it felt it was on top of the whole
world on the dung ball and when the moist dung gave way a little it
exclaimed that the world itself cannot bear its weight. It was just then
that an elephant in musth arrived at that spot. The elephant disgusted
by the smell of the ordure retreated, when the intoxicated dung-beetle
thought that the elephant was afraid of him and fleeing. Thinking
himself to be crushing the globe itself the dung-beetle challenged the
elephant stating that they are great heroes and should have a fight so
that both a\~Nga and magadha would come to see their valor. The elephant
responded that he was not worth being struck by his hoofs, trunk or
tusks, rather as an ordure-eater he need to be struck by feces. So the
elephant defecated and then urinated on the beetle killing him right
away and ran into the forest trumpeting. Then the sugata exhibited his
buddha-hood by stating that the the lout was in his former janma the
beetle and the bikkhu who bashed him the elephant.”*

While the tathAgata took a negative view of the beetle, the chIna
commentator shramaNa Zhiyi in his reformulation of the bauddha-mata for
the chIna-s took a more positive view. He declared the supremacy of the
dung-beetle because it was through it that the sAkhya-muni was able to
express his buddha-hood. Now the tathAgata’s image of the dung-beetle as
being on top of the globe was accorded a far more positive connotation
by the ancient Egyptians before him. To them it was a manifestation of
the deity Khepri who was an aspect of the supreme solar deity Ra.
Indeed, they considered it the sign of rebirth and also the force that
turns the earth around as a ball of dung or moves the sun as a ball of
dung during the night to get it back at day. The yavana Plutarch in his
account of the Egyptian religion records a fallacious myth: “The race of
beetles has no female, but all the males eject their sperm into a round
pellet of material which they roll up by pushing it from the opposite
side, just as the sun seems to turn the heavens in the direction
opposite to its own course, which is from west to east.” The yavana
tales of authors like Aristophanes suggest that they borrowed the motif
of the dung-beetle from the Egyptians. This link between the sun and
beetle rolling it through the night to bring it back at day has more to
it than it meets the eye.

Work in the past decade by Dacke et al on the African dung-beetles
Scarabaeus zambesianus and Scarabaeus satyrus have shown that they can
use both the moon and the sun as guides during dung rolling. Dung
rolling is not an entirely trivial process: The beetles have stiff
competition from rivals and may be waylaid by thieving beetles who take
their ball away. Hence, they need to roll along the fastest track away
from the dung source; i.e. approximating a straight line as far as
possible. It is for maintaining this approximate straight line
orientation of the rolling path that they need astronomical cues. They
do not use the direct position of the sun or the moon, but polarization
pattern of light of these celestial bodies (i.e. Rayleigh scattering of
light caused by molecules in the atmosphere). S.zambesianus rolls dung
when the sun is up using the polarization pattern of the sun as a guide.
On full moon nights it extends its rolling activity through the night by
switching to the moon. However, when the moon no longer rises within 30
minutes sunset it stops its twilight rolling. In contrast, S.satyrus
starts rolling dung 1 h after sunset. It was shown to use the
polarization patterns of moonlight all the way from the full moon down
to the crescent moon. Most remarkably, by a series of elegant
experiments recently Dacke et al demonstrated that S.satyrus can use the
Milky Way as guide to roll dung when the moon is not above the horizon.
This use of stellar cues for nocturnal navigation places S.satyrus in a
currently rather exclusive league of vertebrates, namely Homo sapiens,
the seal Phoca vitulina and several passerine birds who can do the same.
Further, the use of polarized light is reminiscent of recent reports
that the northern Germanic sea-farers, the Vikings, may have used
polarized light patterns detected by means of the calcite crystals
(“sunstones”). The authors suggest that such navigational abilities
might be more widespread among animals such as nocturnal bees, night
wandering spiders, and tenebrionid beetles but remains to be tested. We
also suspect that the Egyptian choice of the scarab beetle at the center
of their celestial myth might not be coincidence. Perhaps, they had some
idea of its astronomical capabilities.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-G0-b3PLA6V0/UVkpCQ5SpyI/AAAAAAAACoY/OU4xC95LiFA/s400/Dungbeetle.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/_3KvHqjae6eRH9JvhPExjdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Foonote 1: A lead-based toxin of the ashvin-s is deployed in AV-vulgate
6.50 to counter pests that target granaries.

Footnote 2: Here the aupaniShadikaM are methods that are only taught and
used in secrecy.
