+++
title = "The verse of thexa0sword"

+++
[chitrabandha-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/between-the-rasarnava-and-the-chitrabandha-s/ "Between the rasArNava and the chitrabandha-s")
are widely represented in classical works on kAvya. The bandha-s of the
form of the sword find mention in agni-purANa, the kAvyAlaMkAra of
rudraTa and the praise of chaNDI by the other Kashmirian Anandavardhana.
Sword-shaped yantra-s comparable to the poetic chitrabandha-s are to our
knowledge seen first in the kubjikAmata texts in the pashchimAMnAya of
kaula tradition. This sword with the mantra’s arNa’s on it was said to
be like the vidyAdhara’s sword. Such inscriptions on swords were also
transmitted to other cultures which acquired tantrika traditions – for
example, the inscription of the marIchI mantra on the swords in Japan
\[the solar goddess marIchI was homologized on occasions to the native
deity Amaterasu\]. Below is the verse of the sword, a shAkta praise of
umA as the supreme deity.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-f8IgjaGktmY/UsJWg2NzJ-I/AAAAAAAAC1I/ijGcMbdQhvY/s640/sword_durgA.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/XGycuS8K-fkC_d6GSeBLSNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

mArAri-shakra-rAmebhamukhair AsAra-raMhasA  
sArArabdhastavA nityaM tad Arti-haraNa-kShamA ||  
mAtA natAnAM saMghaTTaH shriyAM bAdhita-saMbhramA  
mAnyAtha sImA rAmANAM shaM me dishyAd umAdimA ||

mArAri= the enemy of death (shiva); shakra= indra; rAma=the dark
one(viShNu) ibhamukha=the elephant-headed god; AsAra-raMhasA=by them who
are rapidly assailed; sArArabdhastavA-\>sAra-Arabhdha-stavA= One whom
them eloquently commence to praise; nityaM= always; tad= then;
Arti-haraNa-kShamA= one who is the pain-removing forgiving one.  
mAtA natAnAM=Mother to the supplicants; saMghaTTaH shriyAM=collection of
riches; bAdhita-saMbhramA: one who removed confusion; mAnyAtha sImA
rAmANAM= moreover venerable as the chastity of auspicious women; shaM me
dishyAd= may confer felicity to me; umAdimA-\>umA-AdimA= umA the primal
goddess  
\[I would like to thank shrI vishvAso vAsukiputra for pointing a proper
reading for an element of this verse\]

Approximately:  
The forgiving one, who when the enemy of death (shiva), the powerful one
(indra), the dark one (viShNu) and the elephant-headed one (vinAyaka)
are rapidly assailed, commence to eloquently praise always removes pain;
mother to the supplicants; richly endowed removeress of perplexity;
moreover one venerable as the chastity of auspicious women; may umA the
primal goddess confer felicity on me.

[A biochemical aside: We had earlier compared some chitrabandha-s as the
linguistic analogs of the histone-tails and such other low complexity
sequences such as silaffins which constitute a protein component of
diatom shells, where many different meanings can be written via
epigenetic
modifications.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/between-the-rasarnava-and-the-chitrabandha-s/ "Between the rasArNava and the chitrabandha-s")
Such examples, like the sarvatobhadra, are by definition low in
complexity but different meanings are obtained by means of differential
saMdhi splits, which act like “epigenetic” information superimposed on
the underlying low complexity. Extending such analogies, one might
compare chitrabandha-s, such as the one provided in this note, with
well-structured RNAs such as tRNAs, rRNAs or riboswitches, which enforce
regions to maintain complementarity (stem) and those that do not
(loops). These loops in such RNAs contain the key binding sites: In
tRNAs the anticodon loop supported by a rigid stem is central to reading
the genetic code by complementarity. In riboswitches one or more loops
or bulges might come together to form a binding site for a ligand (see
figure below). This may be compared to this class of chitrabandha-s
wherein the stem like constraints like the sword haft support the
structure of the sword (the loop).

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-EoFEykgS5S4/UsCCmMsk36I/AAAAAAAAC0Q/mRNY0pzITEc/s640/riboswitches.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/zkaymHOm9Ptp5gJU4uBH5tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)
