+++
title = "A record of the nAstika attack onxa0hi~NgulA"

+++
Hindu historical tradition holds that bauddha-s of the sindhu had made
common cause with the the Arab marUnmatta-s as they launched invasion
after invasion into jambudvIpa. This is not entirely surprising given
that the bauddha-s (at least the sthaviravAdin-s) from the sindhu (along
with those of shrIlankA) had show a notable iconoclastic streak before
they themselves fell prey to the buddha-busting beards. We have accounts
that they burned vajrayANa tantra-s and demolished images of heruka-s
such as hevajra at gaya. So it is hardly surprising that they made
common cause with the marUnmatta-s blissfully unaware that the fate that
they hoped for the Astika-s was to soon fall upon them, not just in the
sindhu but throughout jaMbudvIpa. We also have some evidence for earlier
iconoclastic activity on their part even though this is narrated in a
perhaps anachronistic fashion in the bauddha chronicles such as the
history of the lAma tAranAtha and chIna chronicles of the major
saMghakAra-s.

Legend holds that upon the death of satI, rudra was disconsolate and
wandered carrying her calcined body. To relieve rudra of his sorrow
viShNu hurled his chakra and cut the body of satI into fifty one pieces
that fell all over bhAratavarSha defining its sacred geography by
founding the sites of the shaktI pITha-s. Her brain is said to have
fallen to the western boundary of bhAratavarSha and founded the pITha of
hi\~NgulA. It lies in the Makran desert (today in the Balochistan
province of TSP) and is associated with several mud volcanoes. The
nAstika-s narrate an account of how this shrine was “subjugated” by a
tAthAgata:

*“The shAkyasiMha had prophesied to his cousin Ananda that 300 years
after his death (parinirvANa) a great bauddha would emerge who would
spread their shAsana all over India. In a city called bhR^igukachCha in
Gujarat there was a chieftain called darshana belonging to the kShatriya
clan of the pANDu-s. He had a son called sudarshana who was richly
endowed in wealth and had a retinue of beautiful women. One day while
going to his garden with his ladies he saw an bauddha arihant known as
shukhAyana. He bowed to the arihant who offered him a lecture on the
bauddha-mata. sudarshana underwent an instant conversion and sought to
renounce the world and become an arihant himself. He then sought his
father’s permission who instead bound him in chains. Then sudarshana
showed miracles like levitation, emitting light and the like and his
father acceded to him becoming an arihant. Thereafter he also converted
his father to the bauddha way. Eventually, he became the supreme leader
of the bauddha saMgha and acquired a great following among all the four
varNa-s. In the sindhu lived a mighty yakShiNI hi\~NgulAchI with great
powers of mAyA. She caused epidemics in various lands and when people
tried to flee those lands she assumed dreadful forms and blocked their
paths. They used to offer her food drawn in a large cart by six oxen and
also a man, a woman and horse. Then sudarshana decided to crush her. So
he took alms of cooked food from a village in the sindhu and went to the
temple of hi\~NgulAchI and began eating it. He then desecrated her place
by washing his mouth there. Furious, she showered stones and weapons at
sudarshana. But he being an arihant meditated in undisturbed on
compassion as these showered on him and his followers. Then using his
own miracle powers he set fire to the place. Burnt by it hi\~NgulAchI
became afraid and sought refuge in the arihant. He preached the
bauddha-mata to her and converted her to the the bauddha way. Since her
conversion no flesh or blood has ever been offered to her. Realizing
that after him there would be none to crush the yakSha-s and nAga-s who
did not follow the bauddha-mata he went on a mission of subduing 500 of
such and established vihAra-s for the saMgha to propagate the buddha’s
way. Then he went to the chIna-s and spread the bauddha-mata among them
to an extant.”*

What is interesting in this account is that the description of the
hi\~NgulA pITha is fairly specific: 1) It is described as being in the
west of bhAratavarSha in the sindhu province. 2) The custom of offering
a large amount of food is mention – a practice which continued to a
degree until recently despite the heavy hand of Islam over the region.
Offerings were made in large amounts and carried to the mud volcano
where they were offered directly into the geothermal vent. 3) The
hurling of stones and weapons by hi\~NgulA is probably an allusion to
the volcanic activity of the site. The event is supposed to have taken
place at the time of ashoka’s reign because sudarshana is supposed to
have attained nirvANa just before ashoka’s death. It is possible that
the bauddha chronicles composed much later anachronistically placed this
attack on hi\~NgulA in ashoka’s time and attributed it to an important
arihant who is supposed to have been greater than the subsequent
arihants. The figures in these chronicles are primarily early
sthaviravAdin-s whose history was supposedly recorded by a
kShemendrabhadra, the source of tAranAtha. It is possible the
sthaviravAdins attributed the “conquest” of hi\~NgulA back in time to
sudarshana and this was taken up by the vajrayANa chroniclers later.
