+++
title = "The sixth cycle of samarAichcha kahA: a vaNijaxa0tradition"

+++
The jaina AchArya haribhadra sUri collected a series of old tales and
presented them in a didactic form for emphasizing jaina principles in
the novel known as the samarAichcha kahA. It was written in a vulgar
prAkR^ita which was most likely spoken in the north of the mahArAShTrI
domain as it is tinged with shaurasenI. The tales themselves might have
had an independent existence (much like the bR^ihatkathA) either in
earlier novels written with a non-didactic intent or as popular
narratives peculiar to certain communities. The sixth cycle of the SK
contains a story that appears to have been a vaNija tradition and throws
light on the ways of the India vaNija-s from the second half of the
first millennium of the common era. We retell this tale here:

dharaNa was the son of a sea-faring merchant in the town of mAyandI who
sailed down the ga\~NgA and into the sea. He had a wife named lachChI.
One day he was entering the town gate on his chariot when he found
himself opposite to devanandin, the son of another rich merchant. Filled
with pride devanandin said he had the right of way because he was
richer. But dharaNa claimed it was him and two refused to give way to
the other blocking the traffic at the town gate. For this they were
summoned by the town authorities who severely rebuked them for holding
up the traffic merely on account of their ancestral wealth despite being
good-for-nothing themselves. While devanandin laughed it off dharaNa was
ashamed. He proposed that they should take the same capital investment
and make money by themselves over the next year and who ever had made
greater profit should be given primacy. They agreed to this and signed a
document to the effect, which they kept at the town office of records.

dharaNa started off in the direction of the Punjab taking his wife
lachChI with him. On the way he saw a mantravAdin hemakuNDala who was
stuck up with a mantra in which he had forgotten a word. dharaNa helped
him recover that word and in return hemakuNDala gave him a medicinal
plant that healed wounds. As he proceeded in a forest he came across
kAlaseNa, a shabhara chieftain, who had been wounded by a lion. dharaNa
healed him with his herb. Then dharaNa saved moriya, a chaNDAla, from
being wrongly executed. Finally, he settled in Ayala-Ura in the Punjab
and made a large profit in trade of commodities. On this return journey
he was attacked by shabara-s but he managed to escape with lachChI. In
course of this they were direly short on food but he feed her his own
flesh to keep her alive. They finally reached a small town where lachChI
eloped with a thief and left some stolen goods beside dharaNa who was
sleeping. He was soon arrested and sentenced to death, a task assigned
to moriya the chaNDala. But moriya remembering his good turn let him go.
The thief in the meantime fearing the murderous nature of lachChI had
left her. dharaNa found her and took her again not knowing of her
nature. In the meantime kAlaseNa realized that he had plundered his
ex-benefactor’s caravan and sets off to find dharaNa. dharaNa had by
then been captured by the shabara-s to be sacrificed to caNDikA, but
kAlaseNa releases him and restores his goods. dharaNa in turn advises
the shabara-s to stop killing people. Back in his home town he wins the
contest, but no longer wishes to participate in the contest for primacy.
Instead he seeks to continue his business and make more wealth.

dharaNa traveled with lachChI to vejayantI on the east coast and took a
ship to go to do business in chIna. As he was near Indonesia his ship
was wrecked in a storm but he somehow managed to reach Sumatra on a
raft. There he discovered a gold deposit and extracted gold from it made
several hollow gold biscuits with his name stamped inside them. He then
put up a “rescue me” flag and waited. A merchant suvadaNa, who traded in
chIna, bound to deva-Ura in bhArata , was passing that way and offered
to take him. He found on the ship that lachChI had already been rescued
by suvadaNa from a nearby island and on board. As they were making their
way back to bhArata, the yakShinI hiraNyakA demanded that they either
give her a human victim or return her gold they had taken from Sumatra.
At this point dharaNa offered to be the victim and was dragged into the
sea by the yakShinI. His evil wife was delighted and asked suvadaNa to
take her to back to bhArata with the gold. But to the luck of dharaNa,
he was sighted by the mantravAdin hemakuNDala who was proceeding to the
island of Bali. hemakuNDala pulled him out of the ocean and takes him to
a mountainous region in Bali where they find several gems. Having
collected these gems they fly back to deva-Ura by means of hemakuNDala’s
magic. There dharaNa stayed with the merchant Toppa and went out to meet
the ship of suvadaNa when it arrived at the port. By then lachChI had
taken suvadaNa as her mate.

Seeing dharaNa, they concealed their relationship and instead arranged
for a great feast for their reunion. In course of the banquet on the
beach dharaNa was thoroughly drunk and passed out when lachChI strangled
him and left him there. However, the next day when Toppa’s attendants
were sent to find him they managed to get him and revive him. Finally,
he became aware of lachChI’s true nature and urged by Toppa went to
reclaim his gold biscuits. He goes to court when lachChI and suvadaNa
claimed to have never known him. In the court the kShatriya ordered a
goldsmith to open the hollow biscuits and found dharaNa’s name stamped
within it. Thus, he was granted his gold, while lachChI was sentenced to
banishment and suvadaNa was sentenced to death for larceny. However,
dharaNa asks that suvadaNa be spared. He shares part of his wealth with
Toppa and even suvadaNa as payment for having ferried his gold back to
bhArata. Finally dharaNa returned home with the rest of his enormous
wealth. However, he kept thinking of his wife’s betrayal and pricked by
it decided to renounce the world and become a shramaNa.

While wandering as a shramaNa in tAmalitti, dharaNa was sighted by
lachChI who hatched a plot to frame him as a thief. He was sentenced to
death by impalement on a shUla. But the shUla sunk to the ground. The
kShatriya took this as a sign that dharaNa might be innocent and
initiated a new investigation. He found that lachChI was missing and had
been living with suvadaNa. So he arrested suvadaNa who finally confessed
the whole plot. But lachChI who had escaped to the forest was eaten by a
lion and proceeded to naraka. Eventually dharaNa committed suicide and
attained the deva realm.
