+++
title = "A brief rant on the Indian political system"

+++
The coming elections in the secular, socialist, democratic republic of
India certainly seem to be a rather important fork in the road. A member
of the clan mentioned that an exuberant Hindu politician had declared
that this election will mark the beginning of the great rise of the
Hindus. This made us give some thought about whether things were really
looking so rosy. Of course we can hardly lay claims to prophetic
insights, which belong to the domain of the sUta-s of the bhaviShyata
purANa; however, we do have some expectations based on the current
situation that hardly match the estimates of that politician. The
short-live collaboration between the Hindus and the Islamic Jihad during
the First War of Independence in 1857 CE came to a catastrophic closure
with the genocidal victory of the English. However, it had poisoned the
wells of Hindu sustenance beyond what the English could inflict. It laid
the seeds of the idea that somehow the marUnmatta-s were acceptable
brethren of Hindus despite their being infected by the West Asian meme.
Hence, rather than seeking to cure their infection, or quarantining, or
removing the infected it was thought that it was alright to have them
live side-by-side the uninfected. To add insult to injury the wonders of
western education brought with it the side-effect of making the Hindus
immunocompromised to the toxicity of marUnmAda and also lowered their
group fitness. This was particularly terrible because the marUnmAda
infection increased the group fitness of the marUnmatta-s. This meant
that living beside their infected brethren was an eventual death
sentence for the H. The events that played to close to independence only
enhanced this. The marUnmatta-s seized large chunks of our land for
themselves reminding Hindus that the battle with the English was only a
passing sideshow and that the millennial Jihad was still unfinished but
not unforgotten business. The immunocompromised and fitness-depressed H
instead were saddled with a secular republic where they continued living
beside the marUnmatta-s. In the midst of all this, they were further
stabbed from within by the greed of various jati-s who exploited the
reservation provision to ensure that residual bhArata does not put forth
its best people to meet the challenges of the world. Rather it placed
ill-trained and cognitively weaker members of society to face the harsh
challenges of a real world, where even in the Asian backyard the threat
from the the cognitively well-endowed prAchya-s presented itself. It was
unable to channelize its cognitive elite who left it shores to serve the
West (or in the least seek a home in the West for there was really
nothing for them in bhArata).

The Hindu imitation of the English democratic system, by turning its
back on the collective wisdom of manu, yAj\~nvalkya, bhIShma,
viShNugupta and a host of others resulted in a fundamental
misunderstanding of numerous issues:  
1\) Democracy works best in relatively uniform populations with the same
basic cultural bonds. It will start having problems as soon as diversity
is introduced in the form of groups that are held by fundamentally
different bonds from that of the majority. Experiments establishing this
can be seen in the form the events in the past decade in France and
Scandinavia among others. As this type diversity increases democracy
will collapse.

2\) Genuine democracy will lead to “systems failure” when there is great
cognitive differential between the masses and elite. This has been
diagnosed and correctly described by [Amy
Chua](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/10/03/watch-out-democracymarxism-is-for-all/)
several years ago.

3\) Democracy will have negative effects if the host population has a
depressed group fitness relative to the two West Asian monotheisms which
reside in its midst.

4)The Aryans upon their entry into India actually gauged the nature of
the social diversity pretty well and created systems that could create
functional systems despite this diversity, which would have normally
crippled formation of any mega-system. In this the democratic system was
restricted to local governments. However, on the global scales the
meritorious rAjan, and saMrAT were the one who held sway. Thus, the
democracy worked within relatively uniform local groups while they were
held in place in the mega-system by the mobile elite comprised of the
brahma-kShatra that offered a unifying large-scale ideology and
law-enforcement for allowing the vaNija to carry out his trans-regional
economic activity. The Indo-Aryans also weakened the transformation of
diversity into separate identity by fostering their functional
diversification and thereby creating dependencies between the elements
within the overall diversity. This large-scale ideology was reinforced
by the grand shrauta rituals. Hence, a Hindu modern nation can only
survive if it shelves any notions of secularity and reinforces its
identity through the performance of grand national rituals of the type
of the rAjasUya, vAjapeya and ashvamedha or the tAntrika temple rituals
that bring together all sections of the society.
