+++
title = "Dinosaurian endothermy"

+++
Modern dinosaurs are endothermic but were the extinct Cenozoic dinosaurs
endothermic? If so were the Mesozoic dinosaurs endothermic? Modern
mammals are endothermic, were the extinct Cenozoic mammals endothermic?
Were the Mesozoic mammals endothermic and what about the Permian stem
mammals endothermic?

Interestingly, the scientific logic to answer these questions was
relatively vague until recently. Rather the answer depended more on a
certain incomplete intuition rather than logic. When it came to
dinosaurs most workers could easily recognize extinct Cenozoic dinosaurs
as cognates of modern ones and considered them endothermic. However,
when they slid back to the Mesozoic, not all workers could easily
recognize the link between those dinosaurs and the modern ones, even
though as early as Thomas Huxley the link was already becoming apparent.
So there was the great debate as to whether the Mesozoic dinosaurs were
endothermic or not. In the case of the mammals the intuition ran almost
the opposite way. Few people even thought it as being a worthwhile
question to investigate whether Mesozoic mammals were endothermic – they
simply had to be\! For many this even organically extended to the
Permian with everything within clade Theriodontia or even Therapsida
being considered endothermic. It was only after the great anatomist
Witmer clearly outlined the principle of the extant phylogenetic bracket
(EPB) that people realized what the logic was to tackle such questions.
Since crocodiles are exothermic and extant dinosaurs are endothermic the
principle of the EPB showed that it simply could not be assumed that the
stem mammals or the stem birds, i.e. Mesozoic dinosaurs, were
endothermic. It needed independent biological arguments to establish
their physiological status. At the same time the intuitive reasoning
could be converted to a more evidence-based version based on the idea
that if several unique derived features were shared by a subset of
fossil stem groups and their extant crown then it is more likely that
they also shared the un-preserved features: a higher Bayesian prior.
Thus, though Rhizodontiformes, Osteolepiformes and Tristichopteridae are
stem birds they are less likely to be endothermic than the stem bird
Eodromeus.

Ironically, the anti-Darwinian anatomist Richard Owen was the first to
hint that the dinosaurs might have been endothermic in a monograph he
wrote in 1842:  
“The Dinosaurs, having the same thoracic structure as the Crocodiles,
may be concluded to have possessed a four-chambered heart; and, from
their superior adaptation to terrestrial life, to have enjoyed the
function of such a highly-organized centre of circulation to a degree
more nearly approaching that which now characterizes the warm-blooded
Vertebrata.” -British Fossil Reptiles

However, given the bias of the incomplete intuition, and lack of
Bayesian inference, until the efforts of Ostrom and his successor
Bakker, the collective wisdom deemed the Mesozoic dinosaurs to be
coldblooded sluggards trudging along in the slow lane, not surprisingly
doomed to become extinct. Bakker’s colorful advocacy for Mesozoic
dinosaurs catalyzed a great deal of introspection on this question. Not
all of this was great science. Indeed, one of the great smokescreens of
the entrenched slow lane advocates was the myth of gigantothermy
(something hammered by the artist Paul as early as 1990):  
“They claimed that the dinosaurs came in all shapes and sizes, so they
should have had a “diversity” in thermal physiology. Grudgingly they
admitted that the smaller Mesozoic theropods might have had true
endothermy, although perhaps lower metabolic rates than their extant
representatives. But they insisted that no way could the sauropods,
large ornithischians and even large theropods have had endothermy.
Instead, they brought out the bizarre idea of gigantothermy – i.e. their
giant sizes allowed them to retain heat and thereby achieve buffering of
environmental temperature changes to become inertial homeotherms. While
the physics of this was rather straightforward, few questioned the
biological utility of this claim. When it came to mammals no one thought
it very meaningful to question how a mouse had a similar thermal
physiology as a blue whale. But for these guys the thermophysiology of
Compsognathus had to be different from that of Brachiosaurus or
Shantungosaurus.”

The true ineffectiveness of inertial homeothermy was put to actual test
recently by Seymour by using crocodiles that at large sizes are good
models this mode of thermophysiology. The crocodiles were approached at
night and secured with a barb and cord causing them to thrash violently
till they were exhausted. The time they took to get completely exhausted
was recorded and then their muscle and blood lactate was measured. With
this their anaerobic power generation was calculated. Summing this up
with their aerobic power generation their total power production was
determined. The results are shown below.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-hns5VezDSQw/UeJQ1lAyz8I/AAAAAAAACs4/CQj-fWvTG48/s800/Croc_power.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/aI6vn_2ci5qPGYP9bIPqnNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Seymour concluded: “A 1 kg crocodile at 30°C produces about 16 watts
from aerobic and anaerobic energy sources during the first 10% of
exhaustive activity, which is 57% of that expected for a similarly sized
mammal. A 200 kg crocodile produces about 400 watts, or only 14% of that
for a mammal.”

The importance of this observation that gigantothermy is no match for
true endothermy. A corollary to this was dinosaurs could not have
excluded endothermic mammals from most high mass terrestrial ecosystems
if they were merely gigantothermic, they had to be endothermic. Of
course this argument would not hold if one suggested that the Mesozoic
mammals were exothermic. However, this suggestion is seriously
compromised by the phylogenetic inference that rhe common ancestor of
monotremes, placentals and marsupials was genuinely endothermic even if
with a somewhat lower body temperature. There is no doubt that this
common ancestor dates back to the Mesozoic.

Now do modern and Cenozoic ecosystems support this proposal?

Crocodilians and predatory mammals share the same ecosystems in several
parts of the world; however, the crocodiles never compete for exactly
the same niche as the mammalian predators. Throughout the Cenozoic there
is little evidence for exothermic crocodilians displacing predatory
mammals from their niches when they crossed paths. The primacy of
crocodiles and other exothermic reptiles like large Varanus lizards in
apex predator roles is mainly observed in isolated ecosystems where
there were few mammals with predatory preadaptations. From our anecdotal
observations, on the occasions when crocodiles and mammalian predators
of comparable mass (namely the tiger in India, the lion in Africa and
the jaguar in the Americas) do cross paths, the mammals on an average
tend to hold the upper hand due to superior wattage during direct
conflict. In contrast, throughout the Cenozoic terrestrial dinosaurs
have tend to at least make multiple attempts to occupy predatory niches
in direct competition with mammals: the gastornithids in Europe and
North America, the uncertain Zhongyuanus in Asia, the phorusrhacoids in
South America, Lavocatavis in Africa and Bullockornis in Australia. At
least in South America the dinosaurs remained the apex predators for
most of the Cenozoic. These observations would seem to support the above
contention that with gigantothermy alone the dinosaurs could not have
excluded the endothermic mammals from many niches in the Mesozoic.

However, one might raise the counterexample of Australia, where despite
the emergence of several marsupial predators, there is some evidence
that mekosuchine crocodiles might have taken the place of apex
predators. Certain anatomical features suggest that Quinkana might have
even re-evolved a degree of real endothermy, so it might not really
count as a counter-example. The same might have been true for the
pristichampsid crocodiles from the Eocene of North America and Eurasia.
But the Australian situation is apparently even worse because there is
some evidence that the giant Varanus lizards might have given a good run
for the place of the apex predator. There is no evidence that these were
ever endothermic. Moreover, even in other isolated ecosystems, e.g. the
Komodo islands, it was the varanids rather than crocodiles that took the
place of apex predators. In conclusion, by itself, the argument for
genuine endothermy in Mesozoic dinosaurs as a corollary to the lower
power production from inertial homeothermy has some ecological support
though not of an unequivocal kind (given the Australian example).

However, what in our opinion is strong support comes when it is combined
with another study of Seymour et al. This study also throws light on the
Varanus anomaly. Seymour et al postulate that the blood flow rates are
proportional to an index of blood flow, Qi = r^4/L; where r is the
effective radius of the nutrient foramen through which the blood vessels
enter the bone and L is the length of of the bone, both in cm. The power
output during exhaustive exercise appears to be positively correlated
with the index Qi rather power production at rest. This suggests that
increased blood flow to the long bones is related to the degree of
maximal power production during exercise rather than resting metabolic
rates. This might be because during exercise the bone undergoes
micro-damage from the stresses it is subject to needs increased supply
of nutrients for its rapid repair. So more the exercise power production
more the need for bone repair and the larger the nutrient foramina.
Thus, the scaling of Qi with body mass should give a measure of power
production during exhaustive exercise. Moreover, since Seymour’s recent
work has established that an proper ectotherm cannot reach the levels of
an equivalent endotherm, this can be used to assess the status of
dinosaurian thermal physiology. Below is the plot created by Seymour et
al:

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-WU-6Xk9XWhI/UeYr3kMokyI/AAAAAAAACtM/QdOC2LIIoZc/s640/Qi_BM.large.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/YGdO38CwKSZsqoGqZhfzUtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The conclusion is plain: Mesozoic dinosaurs had a clearly higher Qis for
body mass than corresponding mammals. This establishes that the Mesozoic
dinosaurs were in all likelihood endotherms with an active lifestyle
comparable to the dinosaurs of today. The modern ectothermic reptiles
fall lower than mammals. Since this plot used mainly adult dinosaurs the
increased blood flow was not merely a consequence of their growth rate
but of greater capacity for physical activity. One could say that this
might be an exaggeration due to pneumaticity invading the long birds as
in subset of bird clade within dinosauria. However, none of these
Mesozoic dinosaurs show evidence for pneumaticity of their femora.
Indeed Seymour et al were unable to use birds due to the confounding
effect of their pneumatic foramina which are coupled with the nutrient
foramina.

Interestingly, in this plot the varanid lizards are above the regular
ectothermic reptiles. They apparently are not significantly different in
Qi values from mammals. At least certain large varanids have cortical
vascular canals in their long bones like active endotherms. Whereas
varanids have a basal metabolic rate not very different from other
lizards, turtles and crocodiles they are capable of far greater aerobic
power production than these ectotherms. This is consistent with the need
for elevated bone nutrition and a proportionately large nutrient
foramen. Importantly, while running the undulating locomotion of lizards
compresses one lung while on the run and cause the air the flow from
lung to lung rather than allowing intake of fresh oxygen. Hence, their
breathing is less efficient and need to repeatedly pause to fill their
lungs during prolonged running. The varanids have overcome this
constraint with pumping action of their gular pump which keeps fresh air
flowing into the lungs while running. This adaptation probably allowed
them to evolve more efficient aerobic capacity, which together allowed
them become more active predators. This probably accounts for the
success of the varanids in competing for otherwise mammal-occupied
niches in places like Australia.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-QrqiK4ouA-I/UeYr3_APOUI/AAAAAAAACtQ/97cP2YDywkI/s400/godha.bmp.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/p6L2xwigMZkXouCRMINDXNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
*Varanus consuming mammalian prey*
