+++
title = "The Euro-American academic system: few morexa0thoughts"

+++
[The neglect of human
sociobiology](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/06/29/the-neglect-of-human-sociobiology/)  
[Our intellectual tradition: non-existent, decadent, or congenitally
dilute?](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/27/our-intellectual-tradition-non-existent-decadent-or-congenitally-dilute/)

One may see the following as rollovers from the above.

As we have stated before on these very pages, one thing the old Hindus
were good at was creating knowledge, systematizing it and teaching it.
So the Hindus had a legitimate academic system. Among other
Indo-European peoples such a system appears to have existed among the
yavana-s and to a degree among the Iranians. We also know that at
different points in the ancient world parallel academic systems were
created by some of the West Asians, prAchya-s and in the krau\~ncha
dvIpa-s by the Maya civilization. Among all of these ours was one of the
oldest solid academic systems (notwithstanding claims to the contrary
among white indologists), and we can state with some confidence that it
was one of the most extensive among those seen in the ancient world. It
is the mental edge that this system conferred on it is custodians, the
first varNa, which has enabled them to survive in modern academic
systems dominated by other hostile groups. Despite this, we can say that
today the Hindu academic system is in a shambolic state – not so much
from the absence of creative individuals as from the lack of a more
fundamental vision of its structure. Instead, the Hindu is forced to
operate within the Euro-American academic system that is presented as
the only one that exists. To be more clear, when we talk of the
Euro-American academic system we are talking of the system that came
into place in the leukosphere (even as leukospheric identity was just
emerging) coeval with the phase that they term the “enlightenment” and
was expanded primarily by the Germanic and Romance speakers in course of
the second half of the 1800s and the 1900s – a period during much of
which the Hindus were subjugated by the leukosphere. Certain scholars,
such as the white indologists spearheaded by the American Sheldon
Pollock, are certainly aware of the existence of an alternative Hindu
academic system and study it closely. Nevertheless, the general attitude
in this group is that the former Hindu academic system is a museum piece
that does not deserve a de-extinction program, rather it needs to remain
in the collections just as the skeleton of a dodo or a native American’s
codex, with a few chosen items allowed for general display. We do not
blame them for such a view as it is not their system but their object of
study. But we certainly need to be concerned about their activities
because it is our system and their actions could harm its revival. On
the other side some people might realize that this \*is\* the
Euro-American system but most do not even realize it – they believe that
it is the only one that exists and has ever existed.

The only large scale reaction that has been observed in this context in
recent times is from the prAchya-s. This has emerged in the first place
because, as noted above, certain prAchya-s have had an independent
historical academic system. But its modern form under Euro-American
dominance has, not surprisingly, followed the path reflecting the
general prAchya mode of imaging the self – for prAchya-s it is important
to receive a second-person report on oneself in order to construct an
image of self. Hence, they crave a report from the leukosphere in order
to construct an image of their performance in the dominant Euro-American
academic system, for after all the metrics of that system were set up by
the former. Thus, they act much like vishvAmitra for whom being
confirmed as a brahma-R^iShi by the deva-s not sufficient, rather he
needed this to come from the mouth of his former rival vasiShTha. This
tendency has gone hand-in-hand with metrics developed by the anglosphere
for human capital. The not-so-distinguished cousin of Charles Darwin,
Galton, had declared more that a century ago that the Hindoos were
idiots whereas the prAchya-s were of superior intellect and that they
could colonize Africa by edging out the cognitively less-endowed
denizens of that continent. This image coming from the mlechCha has been
of great importance for the prAchya-s and they have striven ever since
to repeatedly earn assessments such as that offered by Mr. Galton
(including the claiming ownership of African resources by chIna-s).
Thus, their response to the Euro-American academic system has been to
study it closely and game it at every level so that they come out as
winners. Here we see distinct trends among different prAchya-s. The
Japanese have shown greater innovation that certainly challenges the
Euro-Americans at their own game. The chIna-s have shown more of artful
and not so artful plagiarism accompanied by mass production to achieve a
bulk that cannot be matched by mlechCha-s or their cousins from the
islands. In this the Koreans are similar to the chIna-s but on a smaller
scale. They back these actions with a careful manipulation of Galton’s
“original sin” i.e. cultivation of an image that they are cognitively
superior to the mlechCha-s under the same metrics used by the
mlechCha-s. Thus, what we have here is not a the creation of alternative
knowledge system by the prAchya-s but an aggressive gaming of the
mlechCha one. This could at some point even break the mlechCha hold on
it – it could then be digested just as other systems under the prAchya
legalistic framework. However, given that that they depend heavily on
mlechCha approval for the measurement of their success, the mlechCha-s
have thus far held the trump card. It is common for scientific
institutes in prAchya lands like Japan, China and Singapore to call
powerful mlechCha professors to assess their programs and advise them of
whether they are doing good or bad. It is also common in these countries
for a scientist’s net worth to be determined by papers published in
certain tabloids and journals for which mlechCha-s have cultivated a
universalist image. Thus, the study of the system by the prAchya-s,
however careful, is only designed at discovering the best approach to
the mastering game, not the the reasons for why the game exists and whom
it favors. In a sense he is interested in being the player bought and
sold at the IPL trade for a largest fee, rather than being the one who
figures out who is raking in the millions by formulating such a bizarre
version of the game.

Hence, it is not via the accepting glance of the prAchya but via the
approach of an anatomist cutting up a cadaver that we need to look
deeper into the Euro-American academic system. When we were in
bhAratavarSha we only cared about the knowledge produced by the system,
for its sociology and structural scaffold was something with which we
never intersected. Within our first few months in the mlechCha-land we
got the chance to more closely investigate the scaffold, because some
mlechCha-s viewed us as something of a curiosity and invited us to some
of their sabha-s. It was then that we began discovering features of the
system that show how it is structured. We placed these under several
distinct categories such as 1) Systems of entry into the power
structure; 2) Systems of legitimization; 3) the social dimension; 4) the
code of unstated norms that must be adhered.

The formal mechanisms for entry into the power structure of the
Euro-American academic system are rather complex and multi-tiered
despite appearing superficially simply. Our own entry at the lower rungs
of the system began in bhArata itself where the mlechCha administered to
us an IQ test. We wondered then as to why we need to participate this
rather idiotic exam when we had already attained a much higher
education. Perhaps, due to our low IQ it took us some time realize that
this was a thinly disguised IQ text and the mlechCha did not really care
for what your true knowledge capital was. Instead, he was interested in
knowing if we possessed sufficient cognitive capacity to serve as cannon
fodder in the intellectual conquests of professor Big. Thus, the
Galtonian yardstick was the primary entry point into the system, even as
in the early days of our clade females chose males by the ratio of their
shoulder to hip and the length of their member. We are not at all the
type who denies the mensuration of intelligence or its predictive value,
but what became apparent to us was that in the mlechCha system it was
institutionalized to obtain high quality brain for use by the
sUtradhArin-s.

Continued ..
