+++
title = "Some musings on the age of thexa0ichthyosaurs"

+++
Ichthyopterygia (colloquially ichthyosaurs in this note), like many
other reptilian clades, is well known to the lay reader but remains
mysterious in terms of its origin. The ichthyosaurs first appear in the
fossil record around the second half of the Olenekian age of the
Triassic (\~248.5 Mya) and continue to be present till the
Cenomanian-Turonian boundary (Cretaceous, \~93.9 Mya), thus spanning a
total of 154.6 My through much of the Mesozoic. Interestingly, unlike
many other Mesozoic reptiles, they seem to disappear from the fossil
record approximately 30 My before the catastrophic close of the Mesozoic
era. Thus, on the whole they appear to have survived along side several
other phylogenetically distant clades of marine reptiles, such as the
various branches of sauropterygians, the archosaurian crocodiles,
turtles and pleurosaurs, through the Mesozoic. When they disappear from
the fossil record we see a concomitant rise of the mosasaurian marine
lizard clade for the last part of the Cretaceous. However, the age of
dominance and diversification of the ichthyosaurs was in the Triassic
for a window of about 46 Mya. Several recent studies are throwing
considerable light on the biology of these animals and present some
interesting questions in terms macroevolutionary phenomena.

Through their history the ichthyosaurs covered an extraordinary size
range from the tiny Chaohusaurus at 70 cm, through the great predators
like Thalattoarchon and Himalayasaurus at around 9 m, to the gigantic
piscivorous or squid-gulping forms like Shonisaurus (16 m) and
Shastasaurus sikanniensis (21 m). The remarkable diversification of the
ichthyosaurs was nearly complete by the first 35-40 My of their 154.6 My
fossil record and the above size spectrum was already achieved in that
period. Over this period they appear to have rapidly evolved from forms
that swam within the continental shelves to forms that swam in the open
oceans. Several lines of evidence are pointing towards early emergence
of homeothermy in ichthyopterygia:

First, from early in their history there is evidence that the
ichthyosaurs had the ability to cover large distances in the sea across
the globe, actively pursue prey and also conduct deep dives in sampling
prey through a wide temperature gradient. We know that homeothermy has
convergently evolved in fishes and sharks that pursue such predatory
strategies on multiple occasions: In tunas, marlins, sailfish, swordfish
among actinopterygians and the white sharks, makos and porbeagle sharks
(the lamnid clade) among the sharks. Thus, the Japanese researcher
Motani used such arguments to suggest that it is quite likely that
convergent adaptations also arose among the ichthyopterygians. It could
have either been regional endothermy, as in the sharks and fishes,
wherein metabolic heat is conserved by vascular countercurrent heat
exchangers to elevate the temperature of the slow-twitch locomotor
muscles, eyes and brain, or viscera, or full-fledged endothermy seen in
crown members of the dinosaur and mammal clades.

Second, recent studies by a French group compared the oxygen isotope
compositions of the tooth phosphate of marine reptiles to those of
coexisting fish to determine their body temperature and fluctuations
therein. The results suggested the both ichthyopterygians and crown
sauropterygians maintained a rather constant body temperatures. While
these researchers caution that these values are most reliable for
Jurassic ichthyosaurs, there is no reason a priori to dismiss the
Triassic data without more careful investigation.

Third, investigations on the bone structure of derived ichthyosaurs had
indicated that the more derived ichthyosaurs had a rapid growth rate and
cancellous inner organization suggestive of a fully marine cruising
life-style. But recently, a more striking result was presented regarding
one of the most basal ichthyopterygians, Utatsusaurus. It was shown to
possess inner cancellous bone and also rapid bone deposition suggestive
of rapid growth rate and by extension possible homeothermy. Thus, it is
quite likely that homeothermy had emerged at the base of ichthyopterygia
and that they were well-adapted for an open marine life-style even
before they gained a tuna-like body shape.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-d7U97R8cHSw/UQzAMmf558I/AAAAAAAACj8/SdDqwNMjN44/s640/ichthyosaurs.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/C5Y1kt70gqQFKmcWmPxWf9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*The progressive evolution of a tuna-like body shape in
ichythopterygians*

The conclusion that the ichthyopterygians were possibly homeothermic
from the start leads to the biggest mystery in their natural history –
what were their ancestors or closest sister groups? High metabolic rates
did not evolve in all reptilian lineages. Currently we only have
evidence for such physiology in the archosaurs, crown sauropterygians
and ichthyopterygians. Among the lizards, while the varanoid clade has
adaptations for much higher performance than other lizards, they still
do not reach archosaur levels. Furthermore, those varanoids which
invaded the sea as active predators, i.e. the mosasauroids, appear to
have only achieved partial homeothermy, which was still short of that
seen in ichthyopterygians. This, suggests that from a clade with no
preadaptation for homeothermy (but some other high performance
adaptation e.g. the gular pump), namely the varanoid lizards it was not
entirely easy to reach homeothermy. Thus, one could argue that the
ichthyosaurs probably came from a clade with greater pre-adaptations.
Now which was this clade? We can say with some certainty that
ichthyopterygia actually emerged from within diapsida and are more
derived than the basal diapsids such as Araeoscelis, Petrolacosaurus,
Lanthanolania, Tangasaurus and Youngina. We also hold that they are
likely to be within Sauria (i.e. archosauromorpha+lepidosauromorpha).
Now they like the sauropterygians have a euryapsid skull. Less certain
are answers to the questions such as: are these euryapsids monophyletic
(first presented by the nasty Englishman Richard Owen in form of the
enaliosaurian hypothesis)? If not, do both or subsets of them fall in
archosauromorpha or lepidosauromopha?

The current morphological phylogenetic analyses have generally been poor
at establishing the affinities of highly derived forms such as the
sauropterygians, ichthyopterygians and turtles. However, we favor the
euryapsid monophyly – this hypothesis has been supported by early work
by Caldwell, to a certain extant in Rieppel’s work and most importantly
Merck’s which is mentioned on his website but not yet formally
published. We suspect that at the Permian-Triassic boundary, during the
rebound from the extinction there was an explosive radiation of
euryapsids in aquatic niches resulting in extraordinary disparity in
their body forms, thus erasing most obvious phylogenetic signals in
morphology. We have no evidence for genuine homeothermy ever emerging in
the the lepidosaurian clade. However, there is reasonable evidence that
it emerged relatively early in archosauriformes, even though it might
have been secondarily lost in the extant crocodile clade. Evidence for
homeothermy emerging in the euryapsid clade might indicate that they
were archosauromorphs (as suggested by Merck’s analysis), and were able
to exploit certain preadaptations of this clade for acquiring this
physiology. On the other hand viviparity has never evolved in
archosauromorphs, even if they acquired a complete marine life-style
(like the turtle). This suggests that the crown archosauromorphs
(turtles+crocodile-line+dinosaur-line) had a fundamental biological
constraint in being able to move from laid eggs to live birth. However,
there is strong evidence that both ichthyopterygians and sauropterygians
were to a large extent viviparous. In lepidosauria we have evidence for
numerous independent origins of viviparity or even ancestral viviparity.
About 20% of the extant lizards are viviparous and we also have evidence
for this from the Mesozoic in the form of the basal mosasauroid
aigialosaur *Carsosaurus* and the terrestrial lizard *Yabeinosaurus*
from the early Cretaceous. This feature would be more in line with
lepidosaurian affinities for euryapsida. However, in Merck’s phylogeny
the euryapsids emerge as a basal branch of archosauromorpha. Hence, it
is conceivable that the euryapsids branched off from the rest of the
archosauromorphs before the biological constraint preventing vivipary
came into being.

The links between homeothermy, vivipary and the invasion of the seas are
interesting because these traits certainly help high performance,
predatory life-styles in the high seas. Reptiles (defined as the clade
uniting parareptilia and eureptilia) had already invaded aquatic
environments in the Permian itself. However, we have no evidence for
invasion of such environments in a serious way by the synapsids or the
stem mammals in the Permian. Among the Permian reptiles we have the
parareptilian mesosaurs, which appear to have reasonably specialized
themselves for an aquatic life-style. They even appear to have been one
of the first amniote groups to acquire vivipary. Among the eureptiles we
have the basal diapsid clade of Tangasaurus, Hovasaurus and
Acerosodontosaurus which were well-adapted for an aquatic life and also
a closer sister-group of the saurians, Claudiosaurus. However, none of
these were particularly large (greater than a meter) nor showed
specializations suggestive of active pursuit of large prey in the high
seas. The fact that these types of ancient aquatic reptiles did not
develop the level of high-performance marine life-style seen in multiple
euryapsid clades suggests to us that the latter were distinguished from
early in their evolution by physiological specializations that allowed
them to effectively dominate marine niches. These might have included a
tendency towards homeothermy, or respiratory adaptations as were seen in
the archosauriformes. Thus, after the Permian extinction, these
adaptations probably helped the euryapsids to explosively radiate into
the Early Triassic seas to occupy various ecological guilds at a scale
way beyond what was achieved before by the Permian reptiles. The first
to seize the initiative on a large scale were the ichthyopterygians.
While the sauropterygians too diversified into many niches in this
period, the ichthyosaurs probably achieved somewhat greater diversity if
not disparity in body form.

This adaptive radiation through the Triassic included several
interesting strategies. As marine predators, piscivory or predation on
soft-bodied molluscs was common place across most of their size range in
ichthyosaurs. By the middle Triassic, some forms like Omphalosaurus and
Phalarodon developed broad posterior teeth to crush hard shelled
molluscs. But some workers have claimed that Phalarodon instead crushed
prey with soft exteriors like belemnoids. Then there is the somewhat
mysterious Contectopalatus, with long jaws and blunt conical teeth. It
also displays a prominent crest formed by the nasal, frontal, and
parietal bones which might have formed a surface for attachment of
muscles that operated the jaw. Thus, it could have technically delivered
a strong bite, despite those peculiar teeth. The general interpretation
has been that it specialized in a certain type of shelled cephalopod. By
the beginning of the late Triassic, the gigantic shastasaurids displayed
another notable specialization in hunting thin long cephalopods such as
squids and belemnites, i.e. by sucking them into their toothless jaws. A
parallel to this specialization was to be reinvented only much latter in
[squid-hunting sperm
whales](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/01/a-killer-sperm-whale/).
Even more enigmatic were the forms that arose closer to the end of the
Triassic such as Leptonectes, which were succeeded by related forms in
the Jurassic, such as Excalibosaurus and Eurhinosaurus. These were
characterized by an upper jaw which form a sword-like structure
extending way beyond the lower jaw. This extended region was equipped
with teeth and it is unclear it was used for probing or stabbing prey or
in intra-specific conflict. Among the marine amniotes this morphology
was again recapitulated only much later among the Miocene dolphins,
Eurhinodelphis and Macrodelphinus, which had a similarly elongated upper
jaw. However, most dramatic were forms like Thalattoarchon and
Himalayasaurus which had large bicarinate, triangular teeth which were
clearly adapted for cutting out large chunks of flesh. Thus, these
icthyosaurs were probably the apex predators on the middle Triassic sea
which preyed on other actively swimming ichthyosaurs and sauropterygians
in addition to various marine vertebrates and cephalopods.

The rapid rise of the euryapsids in the Triassic with the ichthyosaurs
taking the role of the apex predators represent a new theme in marine
ecosystems that was to play out over and over again: The obligate
air-breathing tetrapods tended to become the largest marine forms and
often apex predators. The largest teleost fish rarely matched them in
size and on few occasions sharks grew large enough to compete in size.
This suggests that directly absorbing oxygen from air is probably more
efficient in facilitating greater growth, a feature in which crown
tetrapods are eminently better adapted than any teleost or shark.
Further, their higher growth rates and performance allowed them to prey
on large teleosts or sharks which would have acted a barrier for them
getting really large. In this context, the mass extinction event at end
of the Triassic, which gave the dinosaur-line dominance on land brought
and brought to the rule of the crocodile-line, also had its effects on
the oceans. In the oceans the victims were the ichthyosaurs. While they
did not become completely extinct, they failed to recover their
morphological disparity and roles as apex predators. Although they
adapted even better to a marine life (the tuna-shaped thunnosaurs), they
were a pale fraction of their former disparity. This resulted in the
loss of certain trophic modes which were never occupied again till the
rise of the marine artiodactyl radition in the form of the whales during
the Cenozoic. In the post-Triassic world the loss of the ichthyosaur
dominance gave an opportunity for certain sharks and teleost to grow
particularly large (e.g. Leedsichthys) but the role of apex predators
now passed on to the other euryapsid clade, the sauropterygians. Thought
the sauropterygians suffered extensively in the end Triassic extinction
leaving behind only the plesiosaurian clade, the pliosaurs among them
rose to become the apex predator till almost the end of the Mesozoic.

Finally, we are left with one question: If the ichthyosaurs and
plesiosaurs were high performance marine predators why did they not
reach sizes comparable to those of the cetaceans? We suspect that the
euryapsids branched off from the rest of the archosauromorphs before the
development of a more efficient circulatory system typical of the crown
archosaurs. This probably resulted in them still falling short of the
cetacean efficiency in terms of distributing oxygen optimally to sustain
a sufficiently large body.
