+++
title = "Some notes on the dispersion of the kaumAra-shAsana"

+++
In the early 1900s the English archaeologist John Marshall began
excavations at Bhita (pronounced: bhITA) near prayAga, modern Uttar
Pradesh. He wrote an account of this excavation aided by the native
assistants in the archaeological survey of India’s annual report of
1911-12. In that account he describes and pictures a baked clay seal
which was discovered during the excavation. It bears the writing in
brAhmI:  
“shrI vindhyA-vedha-mahArAjasya maheshvara-mahAsena
atisR^iShTha-rAjyasya vR^iShadhvajasya gautamIputrasya”

This is taken to mean: “\[Seal\] belonging to the great vindhyA
penetrating king, who donated his kingdom to the great god mahAsena \[or
whose kingdom was created by the great god mahAsena\], vR^iShadhvaja the
son of gautamI”

Similar phrases are seen in [two
inscriptions](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/10/28/royal-kumara-worshippers/)
very far away from prayAga. The first of these comes from the
inscription of nAla arthapati bhaTTAraka found at Kesaribeda, Koraput
district modern Orissa from the 7th year of the reign of the said ruler.
The second, bearing the same phrase is from the inscription of the nAla
mahArAja bhavadattavarman from Rithapur in Amaravati district of
Vidarbha (modern mahArAShTra).: “maheshvara-mahAsena atisR^iShTha-rAjya
vibhava…”

In his study of the Bhita seal Marshall noted that the characters were
similar to those found far away from prayAga at jaggayyApeTa (Krishna
district, modern Andhra Pradesh) in the context of a ruined bauddha
chaitya. Since the jaggayyApeTa shrine is associated with 3 distinct
flavors of the brAhmI script, belonging respectively to the mauryan,
ikShvAku/kekaya and another from a latter dynasty. The characters
Marshall is talking about are those from the ikShvAku/kekaya period
which as we have seen before was a [high point of kaumAra worship in the
andhra
country](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/03/14/the-southern-kekaya-s/).
Marshall was hence inclined to date the seal as being contemporaneous
with ikShvAku-s, i.e. from the 200-300s of he common era. At the same
time he noted that this seal, which “excels any object of this class
which has yet been found in India” might be connected to the andhra-s
because they bear matronymics similar to those of the rAjA to whom the
seal belonged (e.g. gautamIputra shrI-shAtakarNi. In the same excavation
at Bhita he also uncovered more seals that belong to kings of this
potential dynasty. These include those bearing the names of gautamIputra
shrI shivamegha (two copies) and vAsiShThIputra shrI bhimasena. Their
andhran connection is strongly supported by the “pile of ball” or
“chaitya” symbol along the with sun and moon signs, which are
characteristic features of the andhra coins, on all these seals. The
former andhra symbol is a motif retained since the days of the Indus
valley. Another interesting set of finds from this excavation was a
collection well-made stone balls ranging in diameter from 3.4-21.6 cm
(which would approximately correspond to 1-6 a\~Ngula-s) to be used by
ballistas of various sizes. We have some accounts that ballistas were
used by the maurya-s against the Macedonian invaders (as per Greek
accounts also supported by the arthashAstra). So these could belong that
period or they could have be those of the andhra-s used in their
invasion of the north. We suspect that this gautamIputra vR^iShadhvaja
penetrated the vindhyA-s from the south leading an Andhran conquest of
the north, which is faintly remembered in the Indian folk history as
shatavAhana’s conquest of vikrama.This might also explain how the
essentially south Indian dynasty of the andhra-s entered the pan-Indian
dynastic tradition as a successor state of the kANva-s with a northern
center of influence.

In this context is of interest to note that in the terminal part of the
andhra list in the purANa-s we tend encounter theophorous names with
“skanda”: shiva-skanda shAtakarNi; skanda shAtakarNi; skanda-svAti.
The reality of such theophorous names is supported by multiple lines of
archaeological evidence: 1) Coins belonging to an andhra ruler
vAsiShThIputra shrI skanda shAtakarNi have been found in the (i)
wATegAon hoard, wALwA tAlukA, Sangli, Maharashtra; (ii) the tarhALa
hoard from mangruL tAlukA, Akola, vidarbha region of Maharashtra; (iii)
brahmapurI hoard near Kolhapur, Maharashtra. This indicates that the
purANa-s were recording at least one real theophorous name with skanda
among shAtavAhana-s. Also some of these coins bear the same symbols as
seen in the Bhita seals. 2) Among the late andhra inscriptions we
encounter a ruler named as skanda nAga shAtavAhana (kanheri near Mumbai)
or banavAse in Karnataka as shiva-skanda nAgashrI. These observations
suggest that the worship of kumAra was probably a direct link between
the andhra-s and those northern rulers.

However, there are a few issues that suggest that the matter of the
dynastic identity of these kings is not entirely simple. The exact names
of these kings as seen on the Bhita seals do not figure in any
traditional purANa in the andhra list. So we are not sure if they were
simply forgotten kings or clansmen of the southern andhra-s who founded
their own dynasty after settling in the north (the purANa-s mention a
line known as AndhrabhR^itya who appear to have been some kind of branch
of the andhra-s, which may have included rulers like skanda nAga
shAtavAhana of the Kanheri inscription). On the other hand, we also have
some purANa-s mention a dynasty called the megha that ruled a koshala
(i.e. with ayodhya as center of power):  
koshalAyAM tu rAjAno bhaviShyanti mahAbalAH |  
meghA iti samAkhyAtAH buddhimanto navaiva tu ||

Some have suggested, based on the name shivamegha, that this dynasty
might actually correspond to that of the 9 megha-s who ruled before the
gupta-s. The relative temporal position of these rulers in not
inconsistent with that of the above kings. However, there is nothing
solid to support this view as the purANa-s do not give the names of
these rulers.

Despite the many lacunae in our understanding of Hindu history, what
does emerge from these observations is that there were connections
between the southern, northern and Orissan rulers encompassing the
andhra, ikShavAku, nAla and the dynasty of gautamIputra vR^iShadhvaja,
in the form of the kaumAra shAshana, particular brAhmI fonts, royal
symbols on coins and seals and the form names. This web of connections
linking geographically proximal and distant sites was central to the
pre-gupta dispersion of the kaumAra shAsana over the subcontinent. This
spread of the kaumAra shAsana, which was already underway by the time of
the terminal shatavAhana kings continued through their successor states
in the south and east (ikShavAku/kekaya and nAla) as also the gupta-s.
This period was when all the ogha-s of the kaumAra shAsana corresponding
to the sacred geography of bhArata were all simultaneously active at
their greatest vigor. The ground work for this was probably already in
place due to the movements of the vaikhAnasa-associated brAhmaNa-s who
worshiped both viShNu and kumAra.
