+++
title = "The Indo-Australian connectionxa0thickens"

+++
The arrival of the European Christians in Australia was a catastrophic
event for the aboriginal peoples of that island. They never recovered
from that encounter and today eke out a shambolic and reduced existence,
almost as though the karma-phala of their exterminating the megafauna of
the island had caught up with them. Human genomics is now revealing
their remarkable genetic heritage. Recent studies have shown that they
and their cousins from the highlands of New Guinea are actually the
result of the [admixture of at least 3 distinct
populations](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/the-proto-australoid-deep-within-us/).
The first being an ancient wave of out of Africa immigrants moving east
in the direction of Sahul (the combined continent of New Guinea and
Australia). Even before this population reached Sahul it mixed with the
non-Homo sapiens population of Denisovans (who are closer to the
Neanderthals) somewhere in the South East Asia (probably Philippines)
and then proceeded further east. In the meantime they appear to have
been reached by a second wave of immigrants coming from the west (the
“Onge-like” wave), with which they mixed to give rise to the
aborigines of Sahul.

This “big picture” has apparently subsumed within finer but remarkable
strands of the genetic heritage of these peoples. First, for a long time
there has been a suspicion of some kind of connection between the
aborigines of Australia and Indian populations. In academic terms, this
idea was first presented in the form the anthropological study of
Birdsell and Tindale which proposed a “trihybrid” model for the peopling
of Australia. According to this model the first settlers of Australia
were the negritos, whom he thought were similar to the negritos of
Andamans, the Jehai and the Mamanwa. Indeed, negritos with similar
morphology were recorded and photographed by the above anthropologists
in Australia itself. The second wave of people to enter Australia were
believed to be the Murrayians, who partly displaced or mixed with the
old negritos. Birdsell suspected that these Murrayians might have in
someway be connected to the old Asians, such as the Ainu of Japan. The
monophyletic Pama-Nyungan languages were supposed to correspond to
Murrayian wave. This wave was supposed to be followed by Carpentarian
wave that came from India and had a morphology similar to the Veddoid
negroids. These peoples were supposed to have a distinct group of
languages and their remnants are supposed to constitute to the
non-Pama-Nyungan languages distributed in North Australia closer to the
coast. This trihybrid model was largely forgotten over time, but other
lines of evidence have been brought up to suggest an Indo-Australian
connection. For example, the morphology of the dingo dog has been found
show similarities to the Indian pariah and Iranian wolves suggesting
that it was first transported from the Indus valley. This time of
introduction of the dingo is also coeval with the emergence of
microliths in Australia, which is clearly well after the time they first
appear in India. This had led to suggestions by archaeologists that the
dingo and microliths are parts of a single Indian influx into Australia
approximately around 4000 years ago. These suggestions have been
countered based on studies of the mitochondrial genomes of the dingo
which has been proposed to be non-Indian in origin. At the same time
there has been support for an Indo-Australian connection from some Y
chromosome and mitochondrial DNA studies. However, in none of these
studies (except one Y-chromosome study) it is clear if this connection
is a recent one or part of the second wave that moved eastwards (the
“Onge-like wave”).

It is in this context that a just-published study of Pugach et al is
rather striking. Their study based on the analysis of genomic data of
several populations presents the following salient results:  
1\) They confirm the previously reported specific relationship between
the Australian aborigines, the New Guineans and the Mamanwa negritos of
Philippines. These groups are marked by their shared heritage of the
hybridization of the Denisovans and the first wave of east-moving Homo
sapiens. Their divergence is estimated in this work to be about 36,000
years.  
2\) They identify a specific admixture between Indians and Australians,
which they estimate as taking place around 141 generations ago, which
with a liberal estimate of generation time as 30 years gives us a date
of 4,230 years bp.  
3\) Using a variety of south east Asian populations (e.g. Timor, Flores,
Alor, Hiri, Roti, Borneo, etc) and New Guineans the authors find no
evidence for gene flow between Indians and these populations. Hence,
they rule out an indirect entry of Indian genetic contributions into
Australia via Southeast Asia. In contrast, it supports a direct entry
into Australia after the Australian aborigines had separated from the
New Guineans.  
4\) They estimated the Indian contribution to the Australian genome to
be around 11% and find this thus far among the aborigines from the
Northern Territories, who overlap with those speaking non-Pama-Nyungan
languages or the Carpentarian wave in the trihybrid model.  
5\) In terms of Indian populations, they see a the greatest frequency of
the shared Indo-Australian component with Chenchus, Kurumbas and
Dravidian-speaking groups from Andhra and Tamil Nad. Unfortunately, they
do not define that group properly, resulting in some issues in terms of
inferences that can be drawn. Further, they have strong evidence that
this Indo-Australian component is specifically closer to these mainland
populations than their Onge sister group, suggesting that it is distinct
from any contribution which might have occurred from the Onge-like
second wave.  
6\) In conclusion, the authors suggest that this Indian influx into
Australia was the one which brought the microlith technology, dingos and
caused a change in plant processing technology in Australia.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-qiFS_E-lrQQ/UPeuDyFWacI/AAAAAAAACik/ghLbHtB05Dc/s640/abos.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/dR5TxZjGvfMlLHC6s-VTLtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*The PCA analysis reported by Pugach et al. Note the Indian cline and
the deflection of the aborigines away from the New Guineans towards the
Indian cline*

The most remarkable aspect of this study is the dating of the Indian
influx into the aborigines to around 4200 years ago. This was the height
of the Indus(Sindhu)/Sarasvati civilization. So was this journey to
Australia actually achieved by SSVC/IVC mariners? This civilization was
certainly a bronze age civilization, so why is it nothing more than
stone age microlithic technology got transferred, why not metal
technology. The latter question can be answered by positing that the
mariners lacked knowledge of metal smelting technology even though they
came from a metal-using civilization and even if they did know the
technology they were not able to establish such industry in a distant
land like Australia. However, they were probably bearing the microlithic
technology, which anyhow existed in the SSVC sites. The microlithic
background, which is known from the SSVC sites in Gujarat close to the
coast, does match well with the microliths appearing suddenly in
Australia. Alternatively, were these mariners from peninsular India,
which was still in the stone age at that time. The former alternative
seems more attractive if we go with the estimated time, because we know
that the SSVC had reasonable maritime capabilities at the time the
authors believe this influx happened. There is some evidence that they
reached as far as Egypt and certainly operated closer to home throughout
the West Asian coast, but there is no evidence currently for them
reaching Shri Lanka or any where east. Though a potsherd with the SSVC
script has been found in Thailand recently, its date is uncertain and
could very well be from a later period, as SSVC signs were retained on
pottery or coins by themselves and alongside the brAhmI script in
bhArata for at least 2000 years after the demise of the major SSVC
cities. On the other hand by the time of the beginning of the common era
there was already a vigorous maritime connection between peninsular
India and the whole of East Asia. This culminated in the spread of Hindu
tradition to the far East, which still tenaciously survives in Bali to
this date. We know that this type of maritime network was probably
already in place around the time of the tathAgata and a little
thereafter, which initiated from the southern part of the Peninsula and
involved the andhra empire and the three major Tamil kingdoms. Indeed,
we even have tales centered in the andhra kingdom of the journey to
krau\~nchdvIpa. While the above would fit well with the affinity of the
genetic connection being to south India, it seems at least more than
1000 years to early for this.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-eZvoDeomppc/UPet9UWgMQI/AAAAAAAACic/LY5umeI06rE/s640/Coins.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/bAnA1PlZH8EHncAXTksmBdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*andhra coins showing their ships from around the early part of the
common era.*

This leaves us with some alternatives: 1) There could be a problem with
the authors’ unique method of age estimation using the StepPCO program
and the signal might actually correspond to a younger age for admixture,
which brings it more in line with the peninsular naval expeditions from
to the east. 2) The age estimate is genuine and opens the door for an
unexpected maritime capability of the Indus era. Even if reaching
Australia was unintentional, they appear to have been able to transfer a
reasonable number of individuals to leave a mark on the aboriginal
genetic make up. 3) The time estimate is correct and the genetic
affinities actually reflect a Dravidian-type substratum that is seen in
coastal western India. After all certain old Tamil clans retain memory
of coming from dvArakA which was a notable Indus-era port.

In any case this discovery raises the possibility that the long ignored
trihybrid model might have an element of truth to it, albeit not as
originally proposed. Of course for a more clear picture we would need
data from the Australian negritos, if they are still alive (or perhaps
there are some DNA-yielding samples in one of late Birdsell’s
collections at Harvard?). What seems to be the case is that the genesis
of the Sahulian peoples after the original *Homo sapiens*-Denisovan
hybridization involved further admixture with a population closer to the
Onge-like wave and much later, to a smaller extant, with the Indian wave
in Australia. So in a sense there is a trihybrid structure, but part of
this might have happened even before they reached Sahul and certainly it
hard to interpret in terms of a concordance with the Australian human
fossil record.

:::::::::::::::::  
Genome-wide data substantiate Holocene gene ﬂow from India to
Australia  
Irina Pugach,Frederick Delﬁn, Ellen Gunnarsdóttir, Manfred Kayser and
Mark Stoneking  
doi/10.1073/pnas.1211927110
