+++
title = "The fake scientist"

+++
He was born in the Gangetic doab in a clan of vaNija-s. He had inherited
the skill honed by centuries of selection in business transactions of
“cracking the situation”. However, he did not have deep introspective
skills or a passion for acquiring knowledge in a wider sense. He passed
his way through school and eventually reached college to get what in
India is called an ordinary B.Sc. degree in something related to
biology. After two more years of listless college life he added yet
another degree in the same subject to his name, this time called the
M.Sc. At this point he felt like he had hit a dead end – there was
nothing more for him to flow into. Vicissitudes of time had washed away
the ancestral business of his vaNija family and he had other siblings
competing for what remained of it. But then he had already mastered the
art of “cracking the situation”. So he decided to find a way out. Those
were the heydays of the Nehruvian attempts to uplift national education.
In the great rAjadhAnI of indraprastha a new medical institute had
arisen – it was supposed to be the leading light of modern medical
practice and research in India. The said vaishya now equipped with a
degree in the biological science wondered: “That is the place I should
go. Let me imbibe the good life of indraprastha and get an even greater
degree, the PhD\! With that I will probably make some good money.” Since
he was a master of “cracking the situation” he cracked way through the
entrance exam and found himself in the PhD program of the said
institute. Not being a man of learning, and incapable of the attention
spans needed to acquire vast knowledge of several domains of inquiry, he
was not really capable of tackling any major research problem. However,
being the cracker that he was he always had something show for this PhD
adviser. Those were also days when research in bhArata was still in an
embryonic stage and little progress could go a long way. Soon he
realized that if he had 5 years worth of labor, irrespective of the
significance or clarity of his findings, he could put something together
that would pass off as a dissertation. After all even the institute was
eager to graduate PhD students. Thus, after 5 years the young man was
now addressed as Doctor. There was no employment in the country for such
Doctors, unlike the medical variety which the institute also produced.

Just then the great mlechChadesha of krau\~nchadvIpa was becoming more
open for the asitavarNa-s of bhArata and the tiryagnetra-s of the far
east. So he soon found a way of converting his Doctor degree into a visa
to the shores of the shiny mlechChadesha and landed a job as a
post-doctoral fellow in an Ivy league school in the nagara of
navyAshrama. There he found himself as a minion of a great shvetatvacha
lord, one of the many professor Bigs who roved the by lanes of
navyAsharma. In that lord’s dominion were several other minions from the
prAchya desha-s who hardly spoke any English. The lord soon took the
vaNija’s reasonable level of grammatical correctness in the English
language as a sign of great technical competence. For his part, the
vaNija being the cracker that he was realized that the shveta lord was
also no great vidvAn but an effective cracker with a good nose for what
brought money and fame to his lab. Thus, he realized that it did not
take much to put on a display of technical supremacy before the mlechCha
lord. However, befooled by the mlechCha’s sweet, praising words he
thought he was really a mahArathI, when in reality he might have been
knocked down by an infantryman on the real field. Thus, when the
mlechCha said he needed to take up a technically challenging problem,
which had never been solved before, the vaNija felt he was really up it.
But then when he actually started working in the lab, he found that he
was no match in energy or finesse of the hands of the prAchya-s who
worked with a demonic ferocity, as though they were raising a wall for
Chin Shi Huang. Thus, for a few years he fumbled, even as the prAchya-s
pounded out results that the great mlechCha lord wrote into papers
published in glossy magazines.

It was for the first time in life he felt his cracker skills were being
sorely tested in the field of actual technical competence. But he
somehow survived in the lab using his English skills to be a valued
intermediary between the wordless prAchya-s and the mlechCha lord. It
was around this time he discovered a computer program called Adobe
Photoshop. He was fascinated by it. He soon learned that his gels and
blots, which the mlechCha overlord rejected as not being good enough,
could be cleaned up to a satisfactory state with this program. Thus, for
the first time he had presentable images he could show his master. This
worked like magic; soon his master was converting his images into papers
that were the talk of the day in magazines. After a few such magazine
hits, he hinted to his master that he would like to be a lord himself.
Pleased with the vaNija’s services, the mlechCha lord wrote a glowing
recommendation, which got him the job of an assistant professor at a
newly started institute in the mahAnagara of hastinApura in the big
southern state of the mlechCha country. There he started his own lab but
hardly any students joined it. So he turned to his compatriots, some of
whom were at that point desperate to reach the mlechCha shores by hook
or crook, and enticed them to join his lab. Not being too skilled, these
men could not perform the groundbreaking experiments he needed to run
his venture. It was around this time that the mlechCha country had
boldly declared war on cancer, drugs, and other things. Being the vaNija
that he was, he soon realized that there was money waiting to be
harvested from the war on cancer. So he told his army of stragglers to
girdle up and get ready to participate on the great war on cancer. He
quickly made a few observations: First, to survive in the institute he
needed to raise funds. There was no better way of raising funds for
research than claiming that one was fighting tooth and nail in the great
war on cancer. Second, he needed to put in a few papers in magazines and
nail a few more in high “impact factor” journals. Third, he realized
that there were certain kinds of proteins and experimental procedures
that the cancer research cartel considered to be worthy of “high impact
factor” publications.

Alas, the said vaNija’s ramshackle army was not up to doing any research
that would break the above barriers to reach the realms of
high-impact-hood. But he was after all a cracker and he suddenly
remembered how Photoshop could propel him on to trajectories which no
man had gone before. Soon the vaNija realized that all he needed to do
was to string together a title which might have something claiming
phenomenology around few “hot” molecules such as NFkB, the STATs, the
JAKs, nitric oxide, p53, TNF, estrogen receptor and the like, with a few
miRNA with atrocious matches to targets added to the mix. With these
names in the title, and a whole bunch of phenomenology woven around them
with a truth claim regarding cancer, one could brazenly march into the
august British tabloid, or the venerable American magazine or any of
other lesser high-impact factor journals if the magazine turned down the
effort. Ironically, if one sent these same tabloids and journals some
genuine fundamental research they would curtly tell you that it was of
no interest to their “broad” readership. Working feverishly with
Photoshop the vaNija started manufacturing gels, blots and cell images
that suited his whims. With gay elan he rubbed off a band here or
introduced a non-existent band there. Thus, sometimes he made cells look
the way he wanted, other times he produced audacious interactions
between proteins and epigenetically marked peptides in histones, and yet
other times he made proteins remodel nucleosomes submitting to his
will\! With practice he moved from a cheap con-artist to an artful
dodger. Lo and behold\! His delicate Photoshop pieces were soon gracing
the English tabloid, which Chinese would kill to publish in, or the
venerable journals of biological sciences or the awfully bloated cancer
research journals. The Journal of Cell Biology was well-known for its
stiff stance towards manufactured data, taking pride in claiming to be a
“high impact” journal and a pioneer in calling out data manipulation.
But the said cracker sneaked one of his Photoshop masterpieces in, right
through the defenses of JCB. Looking admiringly at his manuscript’s
proofs he knew he had truly come of age, a dhUrta like him had not
existed – he was invulnerable\! He had vanity articles prepared about
himself: they declared him to be a great scientist though he knew not
what scientists really did. Even the mlechCha-s bought that and feted
him in their rAjadhAnI as a titled professor.

An inner circle of compatriots he corrupted with his duNDukatva and
initiated them into the inner secrets of the hastini gharAna of cancer
research. Thereafter he placed them in universities in the US and in
IITs and other respectable educational centers of the secular republic
of India. Armed with the guhya rahasya-s of Photoshop and more recently
GIMP they were to conduct cutting edge research. Thus, millions of
dollars and lakhs of rupees were consumed and are being consumed in
supporting the brilliant Photoshop artwork of these fearless cancer
warriors while draining the exchequer that could have aided fundamental
scientific discovery.
