+++
title = "The basis for philosophy in science (especially biology) and religion"

+++
We did not want to write this epistle as we have said things along these
lines a few times before, and have spoken even more of it to our
friends. Richard Dawkins had once said something like philosophers do
not add much to knowledge unlike scientists; hence, they are pretty
stuck up with or even confused about issues. Yet, the same Dawkins had
admitted that it is interesting that the sense of self is something we
have, even though the molecules constituting our physical selves, even
neurons undergo a turnover through our lives, being replaced by other
equivalent atoms derived from our nutrition. On the other hand there is
a philosopher Daniel Dennett who presents nothing more notable than
principles enunciated by Darwin over 150 years ago and calls that
philosophy. Against this backdrop, our attention was brought back to
these issues by an article kindly pointed to us on Twitter. This article
was written for the popular press by a professor from an Ivy League
university, which some colorful characters associated with our life have
made their kShetra. In it he makes the below statements:

“*Darwin did not supply a major set of new principles that could be used
to derive general conclusions about life and its history: he crafted a
framework within which his successors construct models of quite specific
evolutionary phenomena.*”

“*To understand the fundamental processes that go on in living things —
mitosis, meiosis, inheritance, development, respiration, digestion and
many, many more — you need a vast ensemble of models, differing on a
large number of details. Spelling out the explanations requires using
metaphors (“reading” DNA) or notions that cannot be specified generally
and precisely in the austere languages of physics and chemistry (“close
association”). But the phenomena to be explained also decompose into a
number of different clusters.*”

These statements, in our opinion show that the learned professor is
outright wrong or at best wading into a rather inextricable quagmire. He
is a man famous for being a philosopher of biology among other things;
so we felt perhaps a discourse on this matter might be worthwhile even
if we might be repeating ourselves in someways. A presentation like the
above statements could play right into the view that philosophers have
nothing of worth to contribute. But that is not a line we seek to
pursue: First, we are descendants of ancient natural philosophers;
hence, philosophizing is too integral a part of our approach to
knowledge. Second, we do believe a philosophical framework, in
particular, as close an approximation as possible of the right ontology,
is required to approach every domain of knowledge. Third, we belong to a
tradition, which was prevalent among the subset of the Indo-Europeans
(as far as we can see, attested among Greeks, Iranians and Arya-s)
wherein axiomatic thinking emerged (Which would equate to the
professor’s Newtonian principles: “*Newton looked forward to a vision
of the cosmos in which everything would be explained on the basis of a
small number of physical principles.*” But we do not see this as an
original idea of Newton, rather it goes back to the early thinkers among
the above Indo-European thinkers. The chIna-s too might have had
something like this, among other civilizations, but we are not sure if
it was an original innovation among them.). So the idea is to present a
prolegomena to a scientific philosophy, which is actually based in
science, with particular reference to biology.

***Did Darwin really not “supply a major set of new principles that
could be used to derive general conclusions about life and its
history”?***

In principle, these were not new because some version of them had
already been posited in the ancient world by the sAMkhya thinkers among
the [Arya-s and
Empedocles](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/02/empedocles-and-vasishtha-agrigentum-and-mithila/)
among the yavana-s (as pointed out by Haldane). This idea among the
Hindu sAMkhya thinkers was even recognized by and enthusiastically
described by the Islamic scientist al Biruni (despite his dislike for
Hindus and misunderstanding of other spheres of their knowledge). Yet,
Darwin and Wallace were the ones who, closer to our times, clearly
presented these ideas along with a reasonable body of support for their
presentation ([Of course it is a different matter that Wallace did not
take the thing all the way to its natural conclusion, though Darwin did
exactly
that](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/06/18/did-wallace-completely-understand-evolution/)).
Now Darwin’s principles are not just a framework, they are principles
that can indeed give a general conclusions about life, unlike what the
professor says. Some successors of Darwin, like Fisher, Wright and
Kimura, presented these principles in a mathematical language. However,
irrespective of whether one uses that language or not (“the austere
language”), the only principles in the game for explaining actual life
processes are essentially Darwinian in nature (More on Neo-Lamarckism in
biology later). More importantly, these principles stem from underlying
chemistry, physics, and above all geometry. It is a different matter
that majority of practicing biologists and their applied variants
(biotechnologists and physicians) have an insufficient grasp of
practically using evolutionary principles. This gives an illusion that
the Darwinian principles are not proximal to the actual studies in
biology. Likewise, despite what the prolix socialist raconteur SJ Gould
tried claim, nothing of what he considered profoundly distinctive about
his explanations of biology lies outside of Darwinian principles.

Darwin did not have the advantage of knowing genetics or biochemistry;
hence, it might appear that his principles are ad hoc patches applied to
explain “quite specific evolutionary phenomena”. However, once we
introduce biochemistry we see that his principles can be tethered to
more basic foundations that lie within basic chemistry and geometry.
Before we do this, we need to look at one issue regarding explanatory
domain of a science in order to see the problem in the professor’s
statement that: “*you need a vast ensemble of models, differing on a
large number of details.*”

This might be placed along side Albert Szent-Györgyi’s statement (In our
opinion wrongly pessimistic). “*In my quest for the secret of life I
started my research in histology. Unsatisfied by the information that
cellular morphology could give me about life, I turned to physiology.
Finding physiology too complex, I took up pharmacology. Still finding
the situation too complicated, I turned to bacteriology. But bacteria
were even too complex, so I descended to the molecular level, studying
chemistry and physical chemistry. After twenty years’ work, I was led to
conclude that to understand life we have to descend to the electronic
level and to the world of wave mechanics. But electrons are just
electrons and have no life at all. Evidently on the way I lost life; it
had run out between my fingers.*”

The valence of carbon is typically 4. This knowledge is sufficient to
explain a whole lot of biochemistry – it can be taken as an axiom for
biochemistry. That does not mean it is an universal axiom. In other
areas of physics or chemistry it is something that arises naturally from
even more basic principles like the formulation of Schrödinger equation
for an atom. Now, when you are doing biochemistry and you want to
explain why a biomolecule has a certain structure, you do not typically
need to go back to deeper quantum mechanical principles, rather you can
make do with a knowledge of carbon’s valence and some geometrical
principles associated with that as axioms. However, that does not mean
that the underlying quantum mechanics does not ultimately explain the
biochemistry – just that you do not need to think of and use that
low-level principle constantly while operating at a higher level. To
given an analogy: When you write a script in a high-level language to do
some simple operation, like say leaching a series of web pages, you are
not too concerned about bits handled in the assembly code, but that does
not deny the underlying foundation resting on assembly code. Likewise,
if you are studying neurobiology and want to understand how neurons
interact with glia you may take glial molecules like D-serine and
TNF-alpha as givens, mere entities or blobs as model-building molecular
biologists tend to draw things. Now, one could say that we have a
detailed specific model of neural-glial interactions in which the above
molecules are mere entities which could be as well be called “X” and
“Y”. However, that does not mean that their underlying biochemistry
does not matter. In fact ignoring the fact the D-serine is a small
molecule and TNF-alpha a protein could make a great difference to the
model – so more likely than not the basic geometrical consideration in
the least and biochemistry are fundamentally impinging upon matters.
Moreover, the very fact that a molecule like D-serine is used, as
opposed to the more common and prevalent L-serine is something which can
only make sense in light of the underlying chemistry that allows
molecules to come in two chiralities. Thus, even if specific models
might be built for a domain of knowledge they have a continuous
explanatory chain based on an deeper domain, which in turn might go down
to an even deeper domain. Thus, there is no violation of the idea that a
few basic principles can explain much of existence, on which the more
domain-specific models rest (As the old Hindus would say – it rests on
the puruSha).

***Now one may ask where do Darwin’s principles matter for all this?***

The simple answer to this is that biology is a historical science, i.e.,
a biological system is not an engineered system but a product of
contingencies of raw material and history. Thus, an intricate model to
explain a biological system merely represents one of many alternative
engineering solutions. To explain why one particular model was actually
selected in biology over all the alternatives we need to go back to look
at its evolutionary history and not principles of engineering
optimization. Beyond geometry, the only principles that explain
evolutionary history are the Darwinian principles. Thus, when faced with
a problem like *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria in Africa the solution
arose in *Homo sapiens* in two major ways: 1) The hemoglobinß E6V (S or
the sickle cell anemia allele); 2) The hemoglobinß E6K allele (C
allele). The S allele is by far the most widespread seen through much of
Asia in addition to Africa in the falciparum belt. The C allele in
contrast is rare and seen only in pockets of Africa and Thailand. The C
allele has no visible cost but it offers protection against malaria
apparently as good as the S allele. However, its protection acts
primarily in its homozygotic state (i.e. CC individual has protection
while AC has very little). The S allele homozygotes (SS) get sickle cell
anemia and are eliminated from the gene pool, thus resulting in a loss
of fitness. But AS heterozygotes do much better than AA in the presence
of the selective pressure of malaria. Thus, evolution has resulted in
the AS solution being favored as it is going to dominate even if
imperfect as opposed to the superior CC (A consequence of the 2\*x\*y\>
y^2 term in the Hardy-Weinberg: x^2+2\*x\*y+y^2\* when a new allele is
born and naturally at low frequency). This is how a historical solution
plays out as opposed to an engineered solution, where contingencies
select an inferior solution rather than the superior solution, simply
because of the nature of the underlying number game). This is how all of
life is, especially our nervous and immune systems, which show great
evolutionary plasticity in response to very proximal selective
pressures.

Briefly returning to glia-neuron interactions, the ultimate question of
why a certain model is applicable, for example, why D-serine and
TNF-alpha are used as signaling molecules by the glia, or for that
matter why glia exist at all, can only be answered by Darwinian
principles. Indeed, several years ago we and our colleagues were able to
discover a key step of how TNF-alpha elicits its action only because we
applied evolutionary principles that immediately led us to the right
answer. Likewise, evolutionary principles are the only ones, which tell
us how and why this molecule and several others typically used in immune
contexts are also shared with neural signaling. Thus, unlike what the
professor says, the meta-explanations of the peculiarities of life and
in diverse process come from Darwinian principles. Indeed, the common
and unexpected unifying skeins we might uncover passing through as
disparate life processes as “*mitosis, meiosis, inheritance,
development, respiration, digestion and many, many more*” are all
explained by Darwinian principles (e.g. the ATP-utilizing protein
engines driving chromosome separation in mitosis/meiosis, controlling
gene expression during development or converting mitochondrial
respiration to biologically usable energy have all evolved from a single
common ancestral molecule through the process of divergence under
selection for biological function and biochemistry).

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-OSkN0SfgHsI/UjQDCWVdCGI/AAAAAAAACu4/5my__1hj_HA/s800/TNFalpha.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/GViqW5A2cvUTdkxRVmSFKtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
*Evolutionary principles help answer questions regarding biological
systems such as how two very distinct molecules like D-serine and
TNF-alpha came to act as signals used by glia to communicate with
neurons*.

Having argued for the validity of Darwinian principles in explaining the
processes of life, we shall now move on discuss the basic axioms these
stem from. Then we shall argue that from these we can build upwards and
explain biological phenomena and use it as a tool to distinguish between
actual “hard problems” and not so hard ones. Finally, we shall come to
the issue of religion, which the professor stated that some people felt
was “mumbo-jumbo” in the proposals of Thomas Nagel whom he calls “one of
the world’s most eminent philosophers”.

***Axioms for biology***

We posit that biology rests on:  
Axiom-1= Genetic information cannot be copied backwards from a folded
biopolymer to the biopolymer that linearly codes for it, but it can be
freely copied between linear coding biopolymers.

This axiom is a very basic form of what was called by Francis Crick as
the Central Dogma. It is also related to the protein-folding problem.
Complete genetic information cannot flow back from folded proteins to
nucleic acids or to other proteins. Even in prionic templating the
normal protein that will undergo prionic conversion needs to be encoded
in the first place by a nucleic acid. However, information can be freely
copied from one form nucleic acid to another. This axiom stems directly
from stereochemistry: A protein needs to collapse into a globular,
fibrous or disordered structure to function and does so as soon as it is
synthesized. Hence, it is not natively available as as a template for
templating. Nucleic acids on the other hand are suitable to templating
even if they undergo some folding as their primary interactions involve
complementarity rules, whereas the primary interactions in the protein
simply cause it to fold and obscure linearly coded information.

A corollary to this axiom is that a large part of evolution has to
proceed through natural selection: With proteins as the major agents of
biochemical and biological function, one cannot have information from a
protein go back to the nucleic acid. Hence, nucleic acids cannot receive
an adaptation made to the protein directly (e.g. an epigenetic mark or a
direct protein mutation). Instead mutations in nucleic acids have to be
selected at the protein level and one cannot be certain, despite certain
protection offered by the structure of the genetic code, that the
nucleic acid mutation would lead to a useful change in the protein. This
is decided post facto by natural selection. This axiom is also the basis
for why recently claimed neo-Lamarckian phenomena primarily involve
information transfer from nucleic acid to nucleic acid and not protein
to nucleic acid or vice versa.

Axiom-2= Biological and biochemical function primarily depend on
interactions between globular folded biopolymers and each interaction
necessarily involves only a small surface area or volume of the folded
biopolymer.

This axiom stems from the geometric approximation of compactly folded
biopolymers, in particular proteins, by spheres (See figure below).
Sphericity implies that contacts between two such entities or one such
and a rod-like entity are approximated by points. The primary corollary
to this axiom is that in protein evolution convergence can at best be
local not global. So protein function evolves primarily through
localized tinkering of interactions. However, at every other level of
biological organization, forms are constrained by geometrical
constraints available at that level and these geometrical constraints
can act like “Platonic ideals” or “attractors” that allow convergence
towards them (e.g. the case of the repeated emergence of the biological
spear but the restriction of the biological wheel to molecular
assemblies, [which we discussed
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/09/21/macranthropy-and-the-sambandha-s-between-microcosm-and-macrocosm/ "Macranthropy and the saMbandha-s between microcosm and macrocosm")).

Together, these axioms imply that in their early stages of development
biological systems are unlikely to be capable of using intelligent
design as an evolutionary mechanism. This is because it would entail
cognition of how spatially distant positions on the linear coding
biopolymer will come together in the globular biopolymer it encodes and
subsequent intelligent mutation of those positions with the prior
knowledge of what functional change the mutations in the coding
biopolymer would cause in the folded globular polymer. After 3 billion
or more years of evolution on earth we have not yet seen intelligence,
which can achieve such mutagenesis to the degree required by biology.
Much of human genetic engineering has only recently reached capabilities
that were evolved by natural selection in bacteria and their viruses
long before even a rudimentary brain came into being (e.g. the mutagenic
reverse transcriptase based systems). And our own intelligent design is
rather basic in comparison to all the inventions of natural selection.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-WMO8IJo7VBE/Uk-9pscm4CI/AAAAAAAACv4/SuERfGbU-sY/s800/methylase.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/zqAetNVJshzHUgaKuf8lptMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
*Note the linear coding polymer (here DNA in a double stranded
complementarily paired helical form) and the compactly folded globular
protein (here the methyltransferase HhaI). Note that the globular
protein makes contact with only a limited part of its structure with
DNA. It will also be clear that those contacting positions are not
neighbors of each other in linear sequence of the protein polymer. This
illustrates some of the main points being made above*

***The biological self***  
The first of the above axioms in particular is the basis for how natural
selection results in the emergence of what might be termed the
biological self. Simply put it describes the selection of systems
centered on coding biopolymers that are able sustain the maintenance and
production of their own system including new copies of the coding
biopolymer while discriminating themselves from other such entities that
fall in the category of non-self. Now, this category termed “self” is a
subtle one: The coding biopolymer, let say DNA or RNA, might sustain a
damage in which its coding capacity is partly erased. However, its
maintenance function allows it to repair such damage in several cases.
When such repair happens it is able to direct an apparatus that replaces
the lost information with new atoms that reconstitute the lost
structures, which were encoding the information, thereby restoring the
original coding capacity. Thus, the self is not per say the physical
molecule, because that has undergone turn over with replacement by new,
albeit equivalent atoms, but an abstraction in the form of information
that allows reconstitution of molecules. This self thus extends to
copies of the same system, which are physically different sets of
molecules albeit following the same organization as the original. Thus,
non-self is something that does not possess the same coding capacity and
consequently not the same organization as it. If a system only makes
non-self systems rather than itself or allows itself to be used for
replicating non-self systems then it will be weeded out by natural
selection \[Footnote 1\]. Thus, biological systems tend to evolve a
strong sense of self versus non-self with self extending to kin of a
given system \[the basis for kin-selection and group selection type
arguments in biology\]. Thus, the basic axioms of biology strongly argue
for the emergence of this abstraction termed the “self” and it might
indeed form the foundation for the concept of agency or intentionality
\[Footnote 1\]: e.g. an organism moving towards a substance that it
senses as food.

What does not directly emerge from the axioms is that this biological
self should be associated with a first person experience of being a
self. Importantly, it suggests that emergence of intentionality or
agency is not the basis for experience of agency or intentionality.
Often this agency or intentionality is conflated by western thinkers,
philosophers and biologists alike, with the conscious experience of the
same \[Footnote 2\]. Moreover, modern biologists have a strong tendency
to relate consciousness with sophisticated neural apparatus for
intentionality. However, examination of evolutionary solutions
displaying intentionality do not favor such an interpretation. We would
illustrate this with an example which has been fascinating us, namely
the origins of medicine. Humans and other closely related apes, like
chimpanzees and orangutans, as also monkeys like baboons, self-medicate
intentionally with natural products when under (or threatened by)
infection. This was seen as intentionality commensurate with their
sophisticated primate brains. However, studies have shown that certain
tiger moths and also some of their caterpillars self-medicate with
plant-derived pyrrolizidine alkaloids with experimentally demonstrable
intentionality. However, their intentionality is not accompanied by the
sophisticated architecture of the primate brain. Likewise, even a
collective of amoebozoan slimemolds (*Physarum*) solve puzzles with a
display of intentionality despite lacking brains in the first place.
Hence, taking refuge in complex neural architectures as possible sources
of consciousness is more a product of the inability to distinguish it
from intentionality evolved by biological systems as directly predicated
by the underlying axioms. In fact, while the axioms suggest the
emergence of a biological self, they are unable to say if this
biological self is a philosophical zombie (i.e. lacking first experience
or what are termed qualia or consciousness) or not. This in our opinion
is the hard problem that the learned professor seeks to brush aside
under completely explainable (even if only eventually and after much
scientific labor) neurobiology that stems from the axioms.

***Religion***  
Years ago, when we were still imbued with the vigor of youth, we did not
attend our educational institution until past midday on full-/new-moon
days. A teacher of ours, among the sharpest biologists in jaMbudvIpa,
albeit an ignored one, remarked that he was surprised that as scientist
we were given to observing brahminical “religion and superstition” (What
he meant was ritual \[Footnote 3\]; of course, he, despite his
brahminical origins, was an enthusiastic but not a vocal follower of
Dawkinsianism or some such mata). We told him why not? After all we
embraced all the wonders that the evolutionary process based on
Darwinian principles had produced in us without passing a serious value
judgment on them . Then why leave out religion which itself is a product
of the evolutionary process? Since the days we had this conversation, at
least one strand of evolutionary thinkers have realized that religion is
very much a product of natural selection (e.g. popularized by Blume or
the science writer Wade); furthermore, it is not entirely a
fitness-reducing parasitic meme-complex riding our brains nor a Gouldian
spandrel but actually confers a certain selective advantage on its
practitioners. Of course there are its pathological versions (marUnmAda
and pretonmAda), which are tilted more in the direction of a parasitic
memeplex, [but there is no denial of their potential fitness enhancing
effects, even if only in the short
term](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/ "khilonmAda-charchA").
To his credit, when I met the said teacher more recently, he declared
that he should not have said so to me earlier and that he now had his
own evolutionary theory for religion.

Now religion is some what fuzzy in its definition but is typically seen
to include three elements: 1) Household and public rituals along with
their body of vocalizations, actions and backdrop of legend (often
termed mythology); 2) Experience of atypical first person experiences;
3) Conceptions, directives or enforcements of behavioral ideals: often
termed “values”, “ethics” and “morals”. An examination of humans shows
that all branches of humanity, be it the early-branching bushmen, the
pygmies or the Denisovan-admixed Australians primitively have religion.
Archaeological evidence pushes it back to the [Middle Stone
Age](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/12/04/oldest-archaeological-signs-of-ritual/ "Oldest archaeological signs of ritual?")
(\~7\*10^4 years). There are elements of the behavior of other closely
related apes that might be cognates of religion. Thus, the empirical
evidence suggests that it was there in the common ancestor of extant
*Homo* and most probably before that. This means that it is not some
maladaptive meme that would be forsaken at whim of a secularist but
something more enduring that it very much a product of biology. Hence,
the western philosopher Nagel need not open the door for religion but
the evolutionary process has already brought it into our lives, whether
we wanted it or not.

One question of primary interest in this regard is why three apparently
disparate phenomena listed above tend to be coupled under the pigeonhole
of religion. In particular, the issue of ethics/morals/values might be
considered here: Modern white “atheists” and their imitators are often
criticized by their religious counterparts for entirely lacking or
having a defective moral compass. They tend to fight back by either
stating that ethics and religion are decoupled (often bending over
backwards to establish their “goodness”) or by stating that
ethics/values do not stem from religion but are product of evolution. Of
course those not belonging to the unmAda-type religions would do not see
ethics/values as \*coming\* from religion but they still see them as
part of the same complex to memetic transmission that includes religion.
So this connection is real and a more deep rooted one, which can be
empirically established by examining diverse human groups. In fact the
evidence for ethics/values being generated by the evolutionary process
is strong as cognates of it can be identified more easily in our sister
groups than other manifestations of the religion complex. So its
connection with the other phenomena in the religion category should not
be seen a priori as a misapprehension of unerudite modern humans but
possibly a reflection of a deeper biological link.

We posit that the link between these three apparently distinctive
strands lies in the basic evolutionary trend of refining the means of
detecting and discriminating biological self. When specific neural
modules evolved for such in animals they offered a powerful means of
discriminating self from nonself and often interfaced with modules for
behavioral reciprocity (e.g. sharing of resources), anticipation of
threat, ability to read same signal differently in kin and non-kin
contexts, and ability to sense intentionality in other agents. When the
precursors of the religious behaviors and constructs arose they too
interfaced strongly with basic self-nonself discriminating modules. The
components \#1 and \#3 of themselves can contribute to the reinforcement
of the biological self, thereby directly having an adaptive value.
Indeed, there is a reason why loose self-nonself descrimination was seen
as pathological by the old Hindus: the wise viShNusharman advises
through the case of a jackal that “vasudhaiva kuTuMbakaM” leads to
misfortune. Indeed, the human condition, Williams syndrome, arising from
an abnormality in chromosome 7, which is characterized by near total
lack of social interaction inhibition and high verbal ability is
deleterious and fitness-nullifying. Thus, we say in sense there was a
certain truth to the statement of the yavana kavI Xenophanes when he
spoke of the gods of non-human animals: they must resemble their own
self images than nonself images. We also tend to interpret the listing
of vibhava-s as first encountered in the vaiShNava tradition preserved
in the bhagavadgIta in similar light – i.e. the vibhava appears as an
epitome of the respective self category rather than one image across all
categories, such as: ashvatthaH sarvavR^ikShANAM; uchchaiHshravasam
ashvAnAM; airAvataM gajendrANAM; narANAM cha narAdhipam; sarpANAm asmi
vAsukiH | : Each organism has to be well-established in its own self
group and not be anchored in nonself signals.

This leaves us with \#2: Why then are the atypical first person
experiences so much part of the religion complex? Common approaches have
been to pathologize it or regard it as an accident of the apparatus. The
pathology angle is not entirely out of place: several “saint” figures in
the larger Hindu system from the days of yore (like the tathAgata,
maskarin goshAla and the digaMbara) have nullified their fitness due to
the quest of alternative or atypical first person experiences. Indeed
the precursors of the above para-Hindu figures lie within the core Hindu
tradition, as the saMnyAsa stream, which actually praises
fitness-nullifying and contra-ritual tendencies rather than deprecating
them. They recite formulae such as:  
na karmaNa na prajayA dhanena tyAgenaike amR^itatvam AnashuH |  
pareNa nAkaM nihitaM guhAyAM vibhrAjad etad yatayo vishanti ||  
Not by vaidika rituals, not by progeny nor wealth, but by renunciation
the few attain immortality; that \[immortality\] attained by the
renunciates rests beyond the compass of the physical universe but shines
from within their interiors.

Thus, the alternative first person experience of the renunciates
\[yati-s\] is described as an “immortality” that makes them deprecate
the biologically relevant immortality through genetic transmission
(prajA). Addiction to this state can thus result in a
fitness-nullification, which is typical of most yati-s even to this
date. Similarly, in a [parallel
essay](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/09/21/macranthropy-and-the-sambandha-s-between-microcosm-and-macrocosm/ "Macranthropy and the saMbandha-s between microcosm and macrocosm")
we had described how certain atypical first person experiences induced
by substances could potentially nullify fitness.

Yet across humans there is a persistent quest for such experiences and
also ritualized methods for their practice. For instance, kuNDalinI
yoga-like practices are seen in very distant human branches such as the
Bushmen, Australians and Indo-Europeans. Thus, if the quest for such
experiences was completely maladaptive then its persistence is puzzling.
One, possibility is that they are parasitic memes that spread like
addictions to certain substances. Another is that certain forms of such
experiences, especially if properly controlled or limited to certain
members of the kin-group, actually have a positive side to them. We
suspect that it is actually the latter. In this regard one might look at
the experiences in Hindu tradition and Altaic shamanism. The practice of
yoga as described in its earliest forms (e.g. in the mahAbhArata)
emphasizes it as a means for attainment of omnipresence. Moreover, the
practice of yoga is supposed to result in siddhi-s like indifference to
the amount of food, ability to go on reduced sleep, improved control of
bodily processes and sexual capabilities. Thus, at least we have
evidence for such experiences being advantageous rather than
deleterious. In the case of the Altaic shamans their atypical
experiences play a major role in the unifying of tribal ingroup during
public rituals where he has such experiences. They also serve in the
recognition of agency of non-human animals whose identity the shaman
might assume during his “shamanic journeys”. In a sense assuming these
alternative animal identities is similar to the yogin who in his
omniscience assumes the identity of various deities. In conclusion, we
would say that these atypical first person experiences probably gives a
reinforcement to the perception of the biological self in an hostile and
unpredictable environment full of entities, which cannot be easily
distinguished as being agents or not – a lion can be an agent with
intentionality; however, a storm even if appearing seemingly agent-like
may not be really an intentional agent. In a sense these might be
ultimately seen as a extension of biologically inbuilt altered states of
experience such as the state of dreaming or deep sleep \[Footnote 4\].

***Epilog***  
The main thrust of these prolix meanderings is that:  
1\) The underlying philosophy of a science should be consistent with the
empirical knowledge accumulating in that science.  
2\) Closer examination reveals that a science like biology does emerge
organically from a few simple principles. The use of elaborate devices
to explain details does note deny the underlying presence of simple
principles which in the case of biology in large part correspond to a
modern version of Darwin’s original proposals.  
3\) The proper delineation of these principles allow the distinction of
hard from arduous but still eventually solvable problems. One cannot
take refuge in the complexity of an difficult biochemical and biological
but eventually solvable problems to dispel the non-hardness of a problem
like first person experience or what in the west are termed qualia.  
4\) This admission in itself does not “open to door” for religion that
is detested by many western scientists. Rather, religion itself is a
consequence of the mutational processes acting on genes and memes
followed by selection.  
5\) Within the rubric of religion lies the peculiar pursuit of altered
first person experience. The physiological and biochemical readouts
associated with these states might confer advantages that are channeled
by selection just as other aspects of religion.  
6\) Nevertheless, these first person experiences still remain first
person experiences; hence, in the domain of the hard problem.
Importantly, if one chooses to privilege them over the more mundane
first person experiences, then one develops a radically distinct world
view; To borrow terminology from sAMkhya we could have two world views:
one is based on prakR^iti wherein the evolutionary theory and philosophy
of science operates. This is in a sense a modern version of the [ancient
evolutionary
models](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/02/empedocles-and-vasishtha-agrigentum-and-mithila/ "Empedocles and vasiShTha : Agrigentum and Mithila")
proposed by the early sAMkhya thinkers. The other is based on puruSha.
This tends to take those atypical experience as a genuine starting point
for discourse and uses them as axioms for explaining all else. Thus, it
is conceived that just as one wakes up from a dream, wherein one felt
one was experiencing reality to the “true” reality of wakeful existence,
one day one may wake up in brahman and realize that that reality of
wakeful existence was just like a dream. The pauruSha approach tends to
be dominant in several expressions of religion but that itself neither
negates nor casts the prAkR^ita view in [lower
category](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/06/16/the-broken-chain-and-the-chain-of-knowledge/ "The broken chain and the chain of knowledge").

As the old Hindus would say, by vichAra alone on the mundane first
person experience we can perceive the existence of the difficult to
bridge realms of praR^iti and puruSha. Perhaps, they are bridged as the
kaula tAntrika-s proposed. Then perhaps, you need to attain success in a
yoga leading to an unprecedented first person experience to have an
entirely different window into all this.

\~o\~O\~0\~O\~o\~  
Footnote 1: We should point to the thinkers Maturana, Varela and
Kauffman, who at different points have presented concepts comparable to
those in this section. Varela and Maturana term it autopoiesis which
roughly maps to the biological self we define this section. They use it
to explain intentionality which is similar to Kauffman’s arguments for
agency in biological systems.

Footnote 2: To be fair, to a degree of such conflation is seen the work
of one of our great intellectuals, the polymath vAchaspati mishra, [as
we have pointed out
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/03/16/experience-phenomenal-and-accessional/).
Many other Astika and nAstika thinkers before him including shaMkara
tend to show an element of this.

Footnote 3: [We had earlier argued that this issue of science and
religion being compartmentalized is not really applicable to
Hindus](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/07/09/western-generalizations-of-religiosity/ "Western generalizations of religiosity").
Rather it was something unique to the mlechCha situation that is
unnecessarily absorbed by Hindus who been cut off from their moorings.
In essence, the so called science-religion divide can be simply
described as the universalization of the conflict between empirical
knowledge and the pretamata that played out in the mlechCha lands.

Footnote 4: The link between deep sleep and the first person experience
that was characterized as brahmAnanda was recognized by the Hindus of
yore. Not for nothing shaMkarAcharya stated that deep sleep feels good
because it is that state that one rests in brahman.
