+++
title = "Some anti-Astika stories of thexa0jaina-s"

+++
The nAstika-s, smarting from their poor performance relative to the
sanAtana-dharma, resorted to several distinct tactics: imitation,
appropriation and distortion. But one of the problems they faced was
that their hard-won converts tended to lapse back into the Astika ground
state – this was especially so when the nAstika-s started imitating and
appropriating the Astika traditions. Thus, even the virulent anti-Astika
polemicist, the jaina yogin haribhadra sUri, concedes that the jaina-s
might worship Astika deities, or even the tathAgata, in addition to the
nagna. But still they needed mechanisms to keep their flock from
dropping the ford-makers or the tathAgata-s from their respective
pantheons because that was the most likely outcome. In particular, the
itihAsa-s being the most important vehicle of the sanAtana-dharma across
all socio-genetic strata they focused their attack on them. Thus, we
hear buddhaghoSha proscribing the saugata-s from listening to the
mahAbhArata and the rAmAyaNa. The jaina-s in contrast also created their
own distorted versions of these texts in which the original heroes are
down-graded and made to give way to promulgators of jina doctrines.
Another approach was to insert tales into traditional collections of
stories or invent new story collections to show the original deities and
traditions of the sanAtana-dharma in poor light or as being ineffective.
We review below some such creations of the jaina-s, which also throw
some light on the sociology of the era. One such is from the jaina
bR^ihatkathA of hariSheNa – massive work from the first half of the 900s
of CE that was printed in the 1940s (kathA 54):

*In Gujarat there was a town called guDakheDaka, rich in wealth and
food, and endowed with many scholars. Therein lived a zealous jaina
couple, the man called jinadatta and his wife jinadattA. They had a
daughter called jinamatI who was skilled in various kalA-s and also a
zealous jaina. In the town was also a rich vaNija known as nAgadatta
with a beautiful wife called nAgadattA. They had a son called rudradatta
who was handsome, virtuous and an ardent worshiper of rudra. Once
nAgadatta asked jinadatta to give jinamatI in marriage to rudradatta.
However, jinadatta refused saying that there was no way a zealous jaina
could marry a pious shaiva, adding that they felt that those who worship
rudra are dismal idiots. But the young rudradatta butted in saying:
“Indeed all religions lead to the same end; there is no difference
between them. Uncle I will become a jaina today”. Saying so (in reality
he was motivated by lust towards jinamatI), he went to the jaina school
and and acquired jaina dIkSha from the teacher samAdhigupta and gave up
the shaiva-mata. When jinadatta heard of this he gave his daughter to
rudradatta. Upon marriage, rudradatta gave up the jina-mata and returned
to the shaiva fold.*

*One day after lunch, when jinamatI was resting, rudradatta decided to
introduce her to the shaiva tradition. He said: “beautiful girl, shiva
had taught a great dIkSha, which brings and end to duHkha and uplifts
the sinful. This dIkSha can succeed even if one has committed crores of
sins and those who are imbued with zealous hatred.” Then he cited to her
a shloka regarding this from a saiddhAntika tantra. He then told her to
give up the jina-mata, which is not for knowledgeable people and accept
saiddhAntika dIkSha that brings the bliss of mokSha. jinamatI retorted
by saying that she had no intention of forsaking the jina-mata and
advised rudradatta to forsake shiva and follow the jaina path, which she
said was the was actual way of the intelligent people. The charming
husband and beautiful wife then started quarreling and arguing a lot
about their respective mata-s each trying to lecture the other on their
respective traditions. After some days rudradatta angrily remarked that
if he ever caught jinmati go to the jaina shrine or giving food to jaina
mendicants he would evict her from the house. However, he would dote on
her if she went to a rudra temple or gave food to wandering pAshupata-s.
She threatened to commit suicide if he forced her to do so. She then
proposed that if he eschewed visiting shaiva temples then she would not
visit shrines of the nagna. Then they settled on a compromise with each
worshiping as per their own mata.*

*To the east of the town was a dense jungle in which lived violent
tribesmen. One day a tribal band raided the town and set fire to it. As
the fire started nearing rudradatta’s house, the beautiful jinamatI told
her husband that the deity who saves them from the fire will be the one
whom they would follow. To this rudradatta declared that the fire was a
small problem and that he would worship shiva to quench it. Facing the
southern face of rudra he worshiped rudra and the lokapAla-s with
various mantra-s. He called upon rudra to protect him and his wife in
total conviction of the shaiva dIkSha. Each time he recited a name of
rudra the fire on intensified and threatened to engulf them. At this
jinamatI said may be the rudra mantra-s do not work so deploy other
deties. rudradatta invoked brahmA, kumAra, viShNu, agni, sUrya, soma,
gaurI and then the navagraha-s but their mantra-s also failed to quench
the fire. Then terrified he said all these deities whom most people
worship are not real gods. He implored jinamatI to invoke the nagna to
save them from the conflagration. She then renounced all attachment to
pleasure of the world invoked the ford-makers. Standing in deep dhyAna
she made an offering to the nagna and right away the fire and the hordes
of tribesmen vanished. At this miracle rudradatta gave up the
shaiva-mata and became a jaina. Likewise many others from the town also
did so seeing jinamatI’s miracle.*

A second sample which we present is from samarAichchakahA a prAkR^ita
collection of stories written by haribhadra sUri, which is also retold
by hariSheNa in his bR^ihatkathAkosha:  
*The king yashodhara surprised his wife amR^itamatI while she was
committing adultery. To save herself she poisoned the king and his
mother chandramatI when they were sacrificing a piShTa-kukkuTa to
chaNDikA. yashodhara was reborn as a peacock and chandramatI as a bitch.
In the mean time yashodhara’s son yashomati ascended the throne as the
king and acquired these animals as pets. The peacock had a brief
recollection of his past birth and seeing former adulteress wife having
sex with her lover pecked both of them. They struck the peacock wounding
it. It was then attacked by the bitch (chandramati reborn) and killed.
The king disturbed in his game of dice by all this clubbed the bitch
killing it. Then yashodhara reincarnated as a mongoose to blind parents,
while chandramatI is reincarnated as a cobra. One day while the mongoose
was in a fight with this cobra, a hyena attacked them and killed both.
Then yashodhara was reborn as a fish while chandramati reincarnated as a
crocodile. The crocodile met an untimely death and soon was reborn as a
wild female goat. The fish (yashodhara) was caught and fed to the
adulteress queen mother amR^itamatI. He was then born as a wild male
goat. In this life he was in copulation with the female goat
(chandramatI reborn) when a rival male goat struck him with his horns
and killed him even as he was discharging his semen. Now yashodhara was
reborn as his own son via chandramati in female goat birth.*

*The king yashomati on a hunt killed the female goat chandramati but
spared the baby goat yashodhara. Now chandramati was reborn as a
she-buffalo. One day yashomati was planning a sacrifice of twenty
buffaloes for the great goddess kAtyAyanI. One of the sacrificial days
amR^itamatI the former queen did not want buffalo meat and instead
requested mutton. So the goat (yashodhara reborn) got killed and fed to
his former wife. Likewise, chandramatI reborn as a buffalo was
sacrificed to kAtyAyanI and eaten by the royal court. Both of them were
reborn as a cock and hen reared by the hunter chaNDakarman. One day
chaNDakarman met a jaina yogin in the mold of haribhadra sUri, who
started teaching him jaina yoga. In course of this he noticed the cock
and hen and tells chaNDakarman their past lives and said that they were
suffering these births due their adherence to kShatriya dharma. The
birds hearing of their past life decided to accept the jaina-mata and in
the joy of conversion started crowing. At this point yashomati is
hunting with his wife and killed both birds with a single arrow. They
were reborn as twins of yashomati’s wife.*

*One day when yashomati was hunting he ran into a jaina muni who asked
him to stop hunting. Enraged he sent his dogs to kill the jaina, but
they refused to do so. Seeing this he spares the muni who told him of
the past births of his twin children. He also said that their births
were all due to worshiping a cruel goddess with a piShTa-kukkuTa. The
king became a jaina right away. His children became jaina ascetics and
made the entire kingdom forsake vaidika and tAntrika animal sacrifices.
They eventually committed jaina suicide and attained a divine state,
which is followed by the whole kingdom becoming jaina.*
