+++
title = "The strange case of a person from South Carolina: Revisiting human archaism and modernity in Africa andxa0elsewhere"

+++
It was in the year yuvan, which we were passing through for the first
time in our life, when skanda freed us from the vile dasyu who was
tailing us for a while. In the city of the great dancers our eyes fell
upon a remarkable paper on the library racks – the upper Semliki valley
harpoons of Zaire (today DR of Congo). Having read it and made some
notes we stumbled out taking a eastern route through the wooded track.
ST joined us but we were so engrossed in the thought of what we had read
that we did not converse with her for a while. What so striking about
all this?

For a while it had been supposed that anatomically modern Homo sapiens
appeared in Africa sometime between 130-100 Kya. Between 130-60 Kya
Africa is dominated by what are known as Middle Stone Age (MSA)
technologies. By around 40 Kya there is a notable technological shift
observed in certain parts of Africa, with a new microlithic
technologies, the preparation of bone tools and the use of ostrich
eggshell beads (something still used by the bushmen of the Kalahari).
These technologies are termed the Later Stone Age (LSA). In western
Eurasia and Central Asia we see the middle Paleolithic Mousterian stone
tool technology dominate till around 35 Kya. Here, somewhere between
40-30 Kya we see the emergence of the prismatic blade cores, bone and
horn tools, advanced fire places, ornaments, and symbolic art. By 30 Kya
these features start dominating, marking the transition to the late
Paleolithic. At least in West Asia and Europe this transition seems to
have been coeval with the rise of Homo sapiens and the decline of Homo
neanderthalensis. In India the situation is very murky due to limited
data. However, we know that around 80-70 Kya we have MSA technologies
resembling those seen in Africa. [It is believed that in India from
around 30 Kya a gradual replacement of MSA technologies with more
LSA-like technologies happened as opposed to the more abrupt transitions
elsewhere](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/07/12/giant-volcanos-and-humans/)
(However, this contention is based on limited data). It was against this
background that the Semliki valley bone harpoons were striking – they
were dated to around 90 Kya, squarely within the African MSA. Such
barbed weapons were to be found in Ishango in DR of Congo and also
Tsodilo Hills in Botswana only 60 Kys later. In Europe such barbed tools
are only 14 Ky old. Thus, despite anatomically modern Homo sapiens
apparently existing in Africa by the time of these tools, nothing
comparable to this type of tool-making is seen in Africa or elsewhere
for a long. So here we have an unusually precocious record of modernity
from the MSA of Africa, which does not temporally correlate the
emergence of advanced technology elsewhere.

The related harpoons from more than 60 Kys later (thus a LSA site from
\~26 Kya), found at Ishango, DR of Congo, in the same general region of
Africa, points to a certain continuity with the earlier MSA technology
over a rather long period of time. Along with these tools de Heinzelin
recovered remains belonging to at least 9 humans – while rather
fragmentary there are some well-preserved mandibles, femora and other
bones. A recent study of these bones, so far only reported in abstract
form, finds evidence for archaic features in them, i.e. morphological
elements typical of representatives of Homo prior to anatomically modern
*H.sapiens* (AMHs). Thus, as late as 26 Kya we still have evidence for
possible inter-breeding between more archaic Homo coexisting with AMHs.
While this report is still preliminary, we have a rather well-worked out
study by Stringer, Harvati and colleagues that looks at the LSA remains
dating to about 11-16 Kya from Iwo Eleru, Nigeria. This partial
skeleton, includes a calvaria, mandible and fragmentary postcranial
remains and is accompanied by LSA artefacts and charcoal dating to 11.2
Kya (consistent with the bone’s date). Strikingly, the calvaria of this
individual had features that resembled archaic fossil Homo represented
by skulls such as Omo1/2 (195-200 Kya, Ethiopia), Saccopastore 1 a
primitive Neanderthal-like skull (100-130 Kya, Italy) and Ngandong, i.e.
the Solo man or a Homo erectus-like skull (\>143 Kya, Java). A principal
component analysis of calvarial landmarks including the Iwo Eleru human
shows that it groups outside the cluster of modern and almost all Upper
Paleolithic humans and shows affinities with Homo heidelbergensis and
Homo neanderthalensis. Thus, it is rather notable that as late as 11-12
Kya in Southern Nigeria there were individuals who still retained
archaic features that were present in representatives of Homo more than
150,000 years before that time. This is the remarkable archaism of
Africa that appears to go alongside with the precocious modernity noted
above. For a while we have felt that in the vast continent of Africa
there should be signs of interbreeding between Homo of archaic and
modern aspect resulting in hybrid morphologies. These remains do seem to
point in that direction and suggest that the so called AMHs and archaic
Homo have been diverging and them merging again, never fully isolated
from each other.

A few days ago Mendez et al reported a remarkable finding. A deceased
African-American from South Carolina had submitted his DNA for
genealogical studies. Surprisingly, his Y chromosome displayed the
ancestral state for all known Y chromosome single nucleotide
polymorphisms. Further analysis showed that his Y chromosome was well
outside of all the previously known human chromosomes, including the
extremely early branching ones of the Bushmen of Southern Africa. An
estimate of the age of divergence of this Y chromosome from the rest of
the human males showed that it was 338 Kya (95% conﬁdence interval
237–581 Kya). This is well beyond the age of any thing which has been
considered AMHs\! Interestingly, this African-American was not alone in
having this Y-chromosome. Further investigations by the authors showed
that related Y-chromosomes could be seen in multiple males among the Mbo
people of Cameroon not far from the Nigerian border. This Y-haplotype
was given the label A00 to mark it as bearing the ancestral state for
all known Y SNP markers used to date. Even with the accelerated mutation
rates proposed by Cruciani this Y-chromosome has a divergence age from
the rest of the males going back to a time before any fossils with
features typical of AMHs. Importantly, it is present among the Mbo
tribesmen of Cameroon rather than in one of the known basal groups of
humanity like the two great Bushmen lineages, the basal Mbuti pygmies or
the more crown-ward Baka and Biaka pygmies. The Mbo belong to the great
Bantu radiation in Africa (i.e. the classical “Blacks”) many of whom
were brought as slaves from Sub-Saharan Africa to the New World. It is
thus the ancestor of the man from South Carolina would have ended up in
the USA, perhaps from a region in the general the vicinity of Cameroon.
This Bantu radiation is a much later branch of humanity, a sister group
to the Eastern African lineages and the rest of humanity. So a likely
explanation for this surprisingly archaic chromosome among the Bantus is
that it was acquired by introgression from an archaic Homo outside of
the sapiens lineage. This now fits in well with the morphological
inferences from the Iwo Eleru Skull, which was found as noted by Mendez
et al “less than 800 km away” from the homeland of the Mbo tribe. While
this probably the first strong case for Y-chromosomal inheritance from
archaic Homo, this is not the only evidence for introgression from
archaic Homo into the sapiens lineage in Africa. The recent sequencing
of the genomes of sub-Saharan hunter-gathers belonging to the pygmy,
Hadza, and Sandawe lineages found several potential genomic regions
shared between them that were marked by introgression from an ancient
lineage. Most of these appear to have predated the divergence of the
crown-ward pygmies from the rest of humanity. This suggests early Homo
sapiens in Africa, even after the divergence of the bushmen had
undergone one or more introgression events with archaic Homo. Another
study by Hammer et al suggested that about ≈2% of the genome of
contemporary Africans was introgressed around 35 Kya from an archaic
population that split from the H.sapiens lineage around 700 Kya. Thus,
the mutually consistent evidence from both archaeology and genetics is
that Homo sapiens and archaic forms of Homo coexisted and mated until
relative recently in Africa, thereby mirroring the admixture with
Denisovans and Neanderthals outside Africa.

It is becoming increasingly clear that this overlap between archaic Homo
and H.sapiens was happening in various parts of the world. When
H.sapiens started migrating out of Africa they encountered the archaic
Neanderthals. It has been known for sometime that the two clades
overlapped in Western Eurasia for anywhere between 10-20 Ky. In this
period they mated over a geographical widespread zone but very
infrequently. Based on simulations (while very approximate in terms of
assumptions) Currat et al propose that 197-430 matings between H.sapiens
and Neanderthals would account for the roughly 1-3% of the genome that
has introgressed into Non-Africans from Neanderthals. This suggests that
in general what happened was rather expected: Neanderthals and H.sapiens
kept to themselves even though they lived near each other with rare
matings that might have been as infrequent as 1 in 50-100 years. But
more extensive admixture might have happened further East with cousins
of the Neanderthals. Strongest molecular support for this has been from
New Guinea and Australia, where around 5% of the genome has introgressed
from the Denisovans. Furthermore, as per the model of Reich’s group the
original mating might have resulted in a population with up to 10%
Denisovan introgression. Recent archeological discoveries in the East
are presenting a rather dramatic picture of the coexistence of archaic
and modern forms. we have the somewhat controversial dwarfed Homo
floresiensis from Flores. However, we suspect that this form is unlikely
to have ever mated with H.sapiens and was probably a considerably more
primitive member of the Homo lineage. Second we have some remarkable
finds from continental Asia that clearly suggest a long temporal overlap
between H.sapiens and the archaic forms. In 2012 a skull was reported
from the Tam Pa Ling cave northern- Laos, East Asia which was dated
(given all the uncertainties) to 46-63 Kya. This skull was claimed to be
the oldest skull with feature clearly suggestive of H.sapiens rather
than an archaic form. In contrast to this, around the same time, very
unusual skulls were described from the Longlin cave and Maludong both in
Southern China. These skulls exhibit several rather archaic features,
reminiscent in part of the Neanderthals, combined some features seen in
modern H.sapiens. They were tentatively dated to around 11-14 Kya,
suggesting that despite the apparently earlier entry of H.sapiens of
modern aspect into this region archaic forms lingered on for a long
time, probably even mating at a certain level with the former. Tentative
support for this also come from a curious fragmentary skull reported by
Coppens et al from Mongolia (the Salkhit specimen) with rather archaic
features that is believed to be approximately 20 Kya. There have also
been anecdotal reports of some unusual skulls on display in China which
might have several archaisms. Over all, given the Neanderthal-like
features of the Asian forms one wonders if these are after all the
remains of the Denisovans who should have been in Asia prior to reaching
the Pacific archipelagos. However, we find no evidence for Denisovan
admixture in East Asians muddying the picture further.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-tOJgwnPwYps/UTzaLI7PH8I/AAAAAAAACmk/NTBcEWCVH8U/s640/Humans.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/5lOYhvnDTtbJoguXenZREdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Thus, the neat image of the evolution of Homo which was commonplace in
our youth has been completely broken up. No longer is there any support
for the picture in which the archaic Homo gave way to AMHs in Africa,
who subsequently made the transition to behavioral modernity a long time
after the transition to anatomical modernity, and then this anatomically
and behaviorally modern H.sapiens radiated out of Africa to conquer the
world. Rather both in Africa and elsewhere the archaic lineages of Homo
lived beside AMHs for a long time and the they might have mated with
each other to different degrees – in any case enough to leave signatures
in our genomes. The puzzling age of the Katanda harpoons from Semliki
with which began this note is now turning out to be a more general
phenomenon in the African MSA. Evidence from South Africa suggests that
there might have been more than one early emergence of apparent
behavioral modernity which disappeared thereafter around 60 Kya only to
reappear in part around 42 Kya and then in a full-fledged form around 25
Kya. This suggests that emergence of behavioral modernity was not a
single transition and in any case currently does not coincide in anyway
with the timing of the genetic or morphological transitions. The best
studied in this regard is the basal-most clade of humanity, the bushmen.
The molecular evidence strongly suggests that the bushmen branched off
from the rest of humanity somewhere between 60-150 Kya. However, in the
Border Cave, South Africa, the archeological evidence suggests that the
first signs of cultural artifacts that can be identified as belonging to
bushmen appear only around 40 Kya and the full-fledged features of
bushman culture can be found only around 25 Kya. So even if we take the
latest molecular date for bushman divergence, we still have a window of
anywhere between 20-35 Ky between the divergence of bushmen and the
first appearance of cultural signs typical of them in the archaeological
record. Does this mean our archaeological record is woefully incomplete
or something else is going on here? In the least the early appearance of
apparent behavioral modernity at different sites in sub-Saharan Africa
followed by their loss suggests that the appearance behavioral modernity
was not coincident with it overrunning “archaic behavior”. Further, the
anatomical archaism associated with the Ishango site in DR of Congo,
which marked the reemergence of behavioral modernism, suggests that it
was not necessarily associated with strict anatomical modernity. This
suggests that there is a lot which is not clearly understood in terms of
the relationship between the anatomical transition and the emergence of
modern behavior.

This brings home with even greater force a question that was earlier
asked some uncertainty: Why is it that in every encounter between the
archaics and Homo sapiens, the latter won making the former extinct, the
mating exchange notwithstanding. If we were to extrapolate from recent
history of Homo sapiens we find one persistent trend – this species is
one of the most capable biological agents of extinction. Going backwards
in time we see the numerous genocides by the white Christians on
different aboriginal peoples – thus even members of Homo sapiens who had
not moved out of the stone age were largely exterminated by those which
had. Before that we see Homo sapiens as purveyors of mass extinction to
faunas and floras in Asia, Australia and the New world corresponding
with their entry into those regions. Hence, the simplest explanation
from these observations is that the archaics were probably exterminated
by the Homo sapiens as they expanded across Africa and the out of it.
The only wrinkle on this basic theme is that the whole process took a
while and included some admixture. This is not surprising when one looks
into the events accompanying the extermination of recent stone age
communities by their technological superior cousins. But this still does
not answer the question as to why Homo sapiens won the ancient
encounters with his cousins because it looks unlikely that the
technological gap was as serious as that between the stone age peoples
and their metal age destroyers. If not mere technology was it brain
power acting in via alternative modes, immunity or social factors such
as religion? Distinguishing between their roles still remains
unaccomplished.
