+++
title = "The affinities of the phorusrhacids and the second attempt of the dinosaurs"

+++
For about 150 million years, during the Mesozoic, archosaurs of the
ornithodiran (panaves) clade dominated terrestrial and aerial
ecosystems. Brushing aside several extinction events they not just
tenaciously held on but thrived; justifying the epithet of ruling
“reptiles”, at least four major clades of these animals, namely
pterosaurs, ornithischians, sauropodomorphs and theropods lasted through
much of this time interval. The catastrophic extraterrestrial impact
\~66 mya brought down the curtains on the reign of the archosaurs. The
pterosaurs, ornithischians and sauropodomorphs were entirely wiped out,
while a single line of theropods, the birds, made it past this K-Pg
event. Through the Cenozoic they retained their dominance of the skies
during the daytime but ceded the prime positions in most ecosystems to
the ascendent mammals, or so the narrative goes. What is often missed in
this narrative is that the one surviving lineage of theropods did well
during the Cenozoic radiating rapidly to become one of the most speciose
groups of vertebrates (there are over 10,000 species of birds still
alive today). Moreover these dinosaurian survivors launched one more
attempt made by to restore themselves to the apex positions in
ecological webs in the first part of the Cenozoic (the Paleogene). In
South America this attempt was a success and in the form of the
remarkable avian predators of the phorusrhacid clade they held sway
until as recently as 17,500 years ago (based on fragmentary, but quite
convincing fossils recently reported from Uruguay).

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-JhTkdeelXVs/Upw2rk9a0eI/AAAAAAAACyk/qJoEF3vwkQk/s800/seriema_combined_small.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/HDLLaGUSQZBRpcuMTUcCutMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

It is widely believed that the only representatives of the phorusrachid
lineage which are alive today are the two species of seriema, [wonderful
birds](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/07/05/the-experience-of-the-seriema/ "The experience of the seriema")
from south America (Cariama and Chunga). Hardly any paleontologist has
doubted the relationship between them and the phorusrhacids. They seem
to retain inferred features of the extinct phorusrhacids, especially in
terms of general predatory behavior: They are aggressive predators which
kill snakes by the up-down strikes, which Witmer/Wroe and their team
inferred for the extinct phorusrhacids. They might possibly deploy a
“sickle claw” to tear larger prey once they have immobilized them
perhaps in the manner of phorusrhacids, and also reminiscent of their
more ancient deinonychosaur relatives from the Mesozoic. Several recent
findings have emerged regarding these birds:

1\) Traditionally, the cariamids (including phorusrhacids) used to be
allied with the cranes by the morphological taxonomists. However,
[molecular studies strongly
suggest](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/07/05/a-molecular-phylogeny-of-birds/ "A molecular phylogeny of birds")
that they are unrelated to cranes. Rather they are nested deep within
the crown group of neoaves and appear to form a clade with falcons
(which do not group with eagles, hawks, secretary birds and New World
vultures), parrots and passerines.

2\) *Bona fide* members of the cariamid clade have been primarily found
in South America. Some fragmentary avian remains from Antarctica have
been described as phorusrhacids. Of these a premaxillary fragment
described by Case et al might indeed come from a phorusrhacid suggesting
that they had entered Antarctica from the southern tip of South America.
Recently there have been claims of phorusrhacids occurring in the Old
World. The first of these is Lavocatavis from Algeria from around 52-46
Ma. This bird is known only from a single robust femur which generally
resembles the phorusrhacid Patagornis from Argentina. If similarly
built, while standing with its neck held up it is likely to have been
comparable to a man in height. The similarly sized Eleutherornis from
France and Switzerland (41-43 Mya) was recently described an European
example of a phorusrhacid by Angst et al.

3\) Mayr in a comprehensive review of birds from the Paleogene points
out that the European fossil bird Idiornis (\~45 Mya) is likely to be a
member of the cariamid clade. Likewise another Eocene bird Elaphrocnemus
might also be related to the cariamids. The bathornithids from the North
American Eocene and the ameghinornithids like Strigogyps were also
described as cariamids. But currently the evidence for their specific
relationship to the cariamids is uncertain. In any case the idiornithids
and Elaphrocnemus offer reasonable evidence that cariamids might have
after all existed outside South America.

4\) The general view has been that formation of the isthmus of Panama
and the resulting faunal exchange resulted in the extinction of the
phorusrhacids due competition with the placental invaders, the cats,
bears and dogs. But recently the finds in Uruguay suggest that the
phorusrhacids lasted until at least 17,500 years, which is much after
the land bridge fomation. On the other hand Titanis another phorusrhacid
appears to have made it rather early to North America, even as it had
just neared South America (\~5 Mya), and lived there for at least over 3
Mya. These, observations suggest that they withstood the faunal exchange
quite successfully raising questions about the actual causes for their
ultimate extinction.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-Uwm65zpIsZs/Upw2rIzUOLI/AAAAAAAACyc/LpqBbqXsIOs/s640/phorusrhacids.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/6nolRAuEOmQWyctvVXgn1tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*South
American cariamids*

The above points from the recent studies raise puzzling questions
regarding the evolutionary history of these birds:

First, there is an apparent temporal discordance emerging from the
deeply nested position of the extant Cariamids in the molecular trees
and their early emergence in the fossil record relative to their sister
groups. While cariamids, in the form of the earliest phorusrhacids
appear around 59 Mya in the fossil record their sister groups like the
falcons, parrots and passerines appear only much later. This is not
consistent with the inferred molecular branch lengths as they would
suggest that these sister lineages should have emerged by around 53 Mya
(assuming relatively constant rates after bursts of cladogenesis). This
is also discordant with the timing of the major cladogenesis in birds
that apparently happened shortly after the K/Pg boundary that spawned
most of the clades within neoaves. Going by branch lengths it would seem
that the radiation of cariamids, falconids, parrots and passerines
within crown neoaves should have happened later than 59-53 Mya, some
time after original radiation of the major clades of neoaves that
occurred sometime after K/Pg. Thus, we are forced to accept that the
rates of nucleotide change were very uneven in course of the early
evolution of neoaves or that what have been termed stem cariamids from
the Paleocene are not really related to the extant cariamids.

Second, is the issue of avian biogeography and the degree of concordance
with the fossil record. Molecular evidence previously suggested that the
falconids evolved in the Southern Hemisphere, perhaps South America.
Similarly, the molecular and biogeographic evidence has suggested that
the parrots and passerines emerged in the southern hemisphere on
ex-Gondwanan continents (e.g. P Ericson’s work). In support of this the
supposedly earliest passerine fossils have been claimed to occur in the
Eocene of Australia (Work of WE Boles). This would imply that the origin
and initial radiation of the cariamid-falconid-parrot-passerine clade
happened in Southern Hemisphere. However, the case of the South American
tinamous show that simple biogeographical visions of the past might need
modification. Morphological phylogenies had suggested that the tinamous
form the basalmost branch of the paleognath birds, followed by a single
origin for flightlessness and subsequent dispersal by vicariance as the
Gondwana broke up. However, molecular phylogenies are unequivocal in
showing the tinamous to be nested deep within the paleognaths, with the
ostrich being the most primitive extant paleognath bird. Moreover, the
tinamous forms a clade with the now extinct moa of New Zealand to the
exclusion of the Kiwi, which on the other hand groups with the
(emu,cassowary) clade. This would mean that simple vicariance was not
the explanation for the biogeography of the paleognaths; rather there
was at least one active dispersal after the separation of Africa between
South American and the Australo-New Zealand fragments of Gondwana. Such
a dispersal could have involved flight. Then we have the superficially
tinamou like paleognaths (lithornithids) of North America and Europe
(late Paleocene-middle Eocene) and Palaeotis (middle Eocene of Europe).
The lithornithids appear to be well-adapted to flight while Palaeotis
appears to be flightless. These observations reinforce the multiple
origins of flightlessness and raise the possibility that even the origin
of the ostrich in African could have alternative explanations with
flighted ancestors such as the lithornithids. This necessarily makes any
definitive biogeographical conclusion about the place of origin of an
avian clade uncertain. A similar situation is possible for the
cariamids. The discovery of Itaboravis from the late Paleocene of Brazil
which is similar to Elaphrocnemus from Europe suggests that there was
indeed a direct or indirect avifaunal exchange in the Paleogene between
Europe and South America. Likewise, Idiornis is very similar in several
features to Cariama and might have been a limited flier but fast runner
like the former. This raises questions regarding their dispersal: The
most likely pathway is via island chains connecting South America and
Africa via the paleo-Atlantic which was narrower and similar land
connections between Africa and Europe probably during periods of low
sea-level. But this does not solve the question of the precise region of
origin of the ancestral cariamids. Given the older South American
fossils the best scenario is currently the movement from South America
to the Old World on one or more occasions. Indeed, it is possible that
idiornithids, Elaphrocnemus, and the larger ancestor of
Lavocatavis/Eleutherornis represent independent movements. Given the
presence of large cariamids in Antarctica, the puzzling question is why
did they not reach Australia like the [marsupials in the middle/late
Paleocene](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/09/28/the-mystery-of-marsupials/ "The mystery of marsupials").
A possible explanation is that the trans-Antarctic mountain range was
already presenting a barrier for these birds.

Finally, the cariamids (phorusrhacids in particular) and falconids share
several predatory adaptations in their beaks: the hooked tip, the narrow
mandible and strengthening for top-down attack. These could be
convergent but their phylogenetic relationship suggests that the
ancestor of the cariamid-falconid-parrot-passerine clade was probably a
strong flying carnivore. Several enigmatic Paleogene birds could be
basal members of this clade or stem members of the falconid or parrot
clades. One such is Salmila from the Middle Eocene of Germany. Mayr
reported features similar to the cariamids. However, it also has certain
features in common with the trumpeters of the crane clade suggesting
that we cannot be certain of its affinities. Then there is Masillaraptor
from the same deposit which might be a stem member of the falconid
clade. Interestingly, studies by Mayr also identified several possible
stem members of the parrot clade: 1) These include the quercypsittids
from the Eocene of Europe and Vastanavis from Gujarat, India. 2)
Halcyornithids and the related messelasturids (Messelastur and Tynskya).
These birds do not have any of the specialized features of crown
parrots. Rather they show different predatory adaptions of the feet and
beak. Thus, these birds might help close the gap between the parrots and
the two other carnivorous clades, falconids and cariamids (predatory
capabilities are seen in a more basal modern parrot, the [remarkable
kea](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/06/05/the-kea-the-foremost-of-the-dinosaurs/ "The kea – the foremost of the dinosaurs")
\[contra that earlier post we no longer think parrots might have emerged
in the Cretaceous itself. Nor are the phylogenetic views on parrots
higher order relationships correct in that post as they reflect a much
more primitive state of molecular analysis\]). Moreover, these might
also present a model for how the common ancestor of this clade might
have looked. In conclusion we cannot rule out the possibility that some
of these stem lineages repeatedly lost flight through the Paleogene and
gave rise to flightless predators that today we tend to artificially
group together.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-jpYJqfpZQmg/Upw2rYtbAWI/AAAAAAAACyg/CrMjkdRsJHI/s640/Pseudasturides.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/TVmhII2WiUSXEVz7JvEQHNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*A
halcyornithid Pseudasturides*

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-D4sUtwCr9Hc/Upw2rOW0ieI/AAAAAAAACyU/18njrchiqqo/s640/Masillaraptor.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/ae5dowGahjO7AY7f7h84f9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*Masillaraptor*
