+++
title = "Some discussion on the Siberian conquests of the Mongols and the Ainu in history"

+++
In 1207 CE, after Chingiz Khan had been proclaimed as the sole ruler of
all Mongolia, he decided to decisively settle outstanding military
issues. In 1204 CE he had sent an exploratory force to subdue the Turkic
Kirghiz of Siberia to the north. After initial successes of the Mongols
they were repulsed by the energetic Khan of the Kirghiz. Chingiz Khan
was hardly the one who would take such things lightly. Thus, in 1207 CE
he dispatched a force, which might have numbered up to 15,000, under the
leadership of his eldest son Jochi to conquer Siberia. He had the
following strategic objectives: 1) He correctly reasoned that to conquer
the Jin empire (i.e. the Jurchen, the ancestors of the Manchus) it would
be good to have strategic depth to their North and Northeast. 2) He
wished to bring the various Tungusic tribes under his banner and there
by prevent them from forming a truck with their Jin cousins. 3) He
wished to unify the Mongolic and Turkic people of those regions who
shared a common ethnicity with his peoples into the core of his empire.
4) Erase the Kirghiz Khanate. In 1207 Jochi’s army first defeated the
Turkic nations of the Uriankhai (and related Tuvans), Barga, Bashkir
(who in the old days had founded the Bulgar Khanate in the west) and
Khakas (a sister group of the Kirghiz) and incorporated them into the
Chingizid empire. In the following months the Mongolic nations of the
Buryat and the Oirat (Who were to later rise to greatness under the
Khans Esen Taiji and Amasanji Taiji) were annexed. With all these
peoples accepting Chingiz Khan as their overlord, they were recruited to
further strengthen Jochi’s ranks to launch an assault on the Kirghiz. To
the west the Khanty nation \[Footnote 1\] of Ugric people speaking a
language related to Hungarian accepted the rule of Chingiz Khan without
a conflict and joined Jochi. In 1208 CE Jochi launched a major operation
on the Kirghiz. Now with all the other tribes being incorporated into
the Mongol empire the Kirghiz were isolated and had little chance of
gaining any allies. But their Khan who saw himself as a descendant of
their great leaders like the legendary Manas and those who had destroyed
the then mighty Uighur Khanate centuries ago and believed he could over
come Chingiz. He fought 3 pitched battles in 1208 against Jochi’s now
enhanced invasionary force but was defeated on each occasion; with each
defeat he found the Mongols closing a circle around him. Finally, in
1209 Jochi launched a devastating attack on the Kirghiz in which their
Khan was killed and the Kirghiz Khanate was formally annihilated. The
Mongols let the Kirghiz stay in their original territory but
incorporated it under their direct rule.

In 1209 CE Chingiz Khan moved Southwest against the Tanguts (of Tibetan
ethnicity) after noting that they had failed conclude an alliance with
the Jin. Having taken many of their towns and cities he forced them
surrender. In 1211 CE he performed a major ritual to various Tengris and
set out to attack the Jin. The great Khan personally led a force of
60,000 men assisted by Yelü Tuhwa, a prince of the old Khitan clan,
while his three sons Jochi, Chagadai and Ögödei marched with 10,000 men
each to perform an outflanking operation. The four Mongol armies
eventually converged at the pass known as Badger Mouth in China where
they completed the encirclement of the gigantic Jin force of 450,000
men. In the battle which followed the Khan deployed a remarkable
combination of tactics: first opening with an unexpected rear attack,
followed by several rounds of unrelenting cavalry charges from mountain
slopes interleaved with showers of arrows and ballistas from heights
followed by a final frontal attack after a controlled retreat. It
resulted in one of the most dramatic victories scored by any army
against a vastly numerically superior force, with over 400,000 Chinese
and Jurchen lying dead on the battle ground. This was followed in 1213
by the battle of Dexing where Chingiz Khan inaugurated his youngest son
Tolui, who along with his wife (Sorghaghtani)’s brother captured the
highly fortified Jin defensive complex by scaling the walls at night
under heavy fire. With this the path to Beijing, the Jin capital, was
opened as the Mongol troops crushed the Jin forces to take the
Juyongguan pass. Thereafter Chingiz Khan initiated the siege of Beijing
and in spring of 1215 CE sacked the Jin capital after destroying the
elite Chinese-Jurchen force sent by the Jin emperor to relieve the city.
The Jin court fled south and installed itself in Kaifeng.

Chingiz Khan also wished to completely cut off access to Manchuria, the
ancestral homeland of the Jin. He noted that in the south the Jin were
in conflict with the other Chinese empire of the Song. Thus, he could
prevent them from having any link to the north and squeeze them between
him and the Song who had no love for the Jin either. Hence, even as he
launched the strike on Beijing, in 1214 CE he dispatched his greatest
general, the young Sübütäi, to conquer Manchuria and its surroundings
with a force of 20,000 men. Sübütäi fell upon Manchuria like a hurricane
and swept way the Jurchen forces. Moving in a semicircular arch he also
conquered the Southeastern Siberia adjacent to Japan and Sakhalin. It
was here that the extreme eastern Siberian tribes related to the Okhotsk
people were subjugated. Then moving south crossing the Yalu river
Sübütäi smashed his way through the Korean defenses to reach
Pyongyang. Fearing a devastating attack the Koreans submitted peacefully
and accepted a tributary relationship with the Mongols. Sübütäi
realizing he had few resources to conquer Korea, accepted the peace
offered by the Koryeo ruler and returned. As Sübütäi’s advance was
rapid, the strongly fortified defensive complexes, such as Ning-Jiang in
Manchuria, held by the recalcitrant Khitan Mongols and Jurchen, remained
resilient to his blitzkrieg. Hence, to complete the conquest of the land
the Khan sent his valiant brother Qasar and another of his best generals
Muqali respectively leading two armies to follow Sübütäi. Qasar besieged
Ning-Jiang and captured it in autumn of 1214 CE by using incendiary
weapons of which a confused account survives (called 10,000 burning
swallows). In 1216 CE, Qasar defeated the remaining recalcitrant Khitan
(who moved into Korea) and took the remaining forts smashing the
resistance from the Jurchen \[Footnote 2\]. He also consolidated the
conquest of Southeastern Siberia and brought it under direct Chingizid
rule. It was here that in the basin of the Argun river that Qasar
initiated a new experiment by Mongol standards – i.e. building a new
city. There are reports of an excavated mound marking the center of the
city founded by Qasar. Mongols periodically visit this site and offer
Qumis and tie blue cloth to posts. This is consistent with the recent
work on old tree rings by Pederson et al showing that around this period
there was a warm spell in the region with plentiful rains and high
grassland productivity. This could have directly aided the Mongol city
building experiments in the region. Indeed, similarly Chingiz Khan
founded a settled city with agricultural lands in the Yenisei region,
known as Kem-Kemchik using techniques acquired from the Chinese.

In 1218 CE Chingiz Khan received the intelligence that the remnants of
the recalcitrant Khitan who had refused to accept his rule had made a
common cause with the Koreans to rise against him. To conclusively
punish them he sent two armies under the leadership of the generals
Jalar and Khajin. With combined forces probably numbering around 40,000
men they swept into Manchuria and created a base for a bi-directional
offensive. First in the south they completed the subjugation of Korea by
destroying the recalcitrant Khitans and forcing the Koreans to pay a
large tribute for their breach of the original tributary relationship.
Then they moved to the Northeast of Manchuria into the region close to
the mouth of the Amur and established a fort at the place where the
Amgun river meets the Amur river. From this base they completed the
subjugation of the Okhotsk-like tribes, the paleo-Siberian Nivkhi
\[Footnote 3\] and Tungusic Uilta. Men from these tribes were then
incorporated into the Mongol forces and they were included as one of the
components of the Siberian trade network. Then crossing the frozen
ice-bridge in winter the they entered Sakhalin and claimed the island
for the Mongol empire.

Now we fast-forward to April 15, 1260, when Qubilai overruled his
brother Ariq Böke’s claim and declared himself the great Khan supported
by his younger brother Hülegü. In 1263 CE Qubilai had conflicts pile
upon him one after another: The Han warlord Li Tan whom he had trusted a
lot turned against the Mongols. Just as he crushed this rebellion and
executed Li Tan, the on going conflict with his brother Ariq Böke flared
up as the latter continued to contest Qubilai’s claim to the throne of
Chingiz Khan. In the midst of this he received intelligence that there
was trouble brewing near the mouth of the Amur. The Nivkhi and Uilta
reported an invasion by new people, who had come up from Sakhalin into
the mainland. Hard-pressed Qubilai could only send a small force to
secure the fortress of Tyr at the confluence of the Amgun and Amur. In
1264 CE Ariq Böke finally surrendered to Qubilai and he was accepted as
the grand Khan on the Mongols by most branches. Qubilai followed this up
quickly by a thrust into Sakhalin to punish the new invaders whom the
Mongols called the Kugi. Historian Kikuchi Toshihiko notes that the
Nivkhi called the Ainu people the Kughi; hence, these new invaders into
Sakhalin and the mainland Nivkhi lands were the Ainu. The Ainu were
defeated and driven back. But the Ainu were back the next year and
attacked the Nivkhi with much fury. The Mongols were impressed by their
valor and sent a peace delegation in 1265 CE to try to entice them to
join the Mongol empire. They were made generous offers of food and arms.
This seems to have worked and the Ainu accepted Mongol rule for six
years. Then for reason unknown they turned unruly again and declaring
their independence started their raids on Mongol outposts in 1272. That
year and the next Qubilai tried to relieve his outposts with new troops
but they were unable to enter Sakhalin due to severe winter weather.
However, other campaigns elsewhere, the Japanese disaster and the
depression he faced upon his wife Chäbi’s death occupied his attention
for the next several years and he could not attend to the Ainu problem.

Finally, in 1284 CE he launched an attack on Sakhalin to deal with the
Ainu. The Ainu appear to have pursued a hit and run war effectively.
They vanished before the Mongol force but returned once they left. This
was repeated the following year again though the Mongols appear to have
penetrated deeper into Sakhalin – we wonder if Qubilai had by now
thought of plan of reaching Japan via the North. It was clear that he
was unwilling to give up on its conquest and rued the lost of the Mongol
prestige in these invasions. This period also saw the attack on Korea by
the Japanese pirates. While Qubilai’s daughter sent troops to
successfully crush them, he appears to have reasoned that securing
Sakhalin could cut off any northern opportunities for them. Finally, in
1286 CE he also feared [Qaidu’s activities in
Manchuria](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/ "Some reflections on the Khans Qaidu and Du’a and the great Khan’s lost legacy")
so he was keen to secure Sakhalin for good and sent a 3rd invasionary
force. This one smashed the Ainu comprehensively and secured a good part
of the island. However, we do not know if they figured out that Japan
was separated from there by a further island and seas. The Ainu were
recalcitrant – despite the hammering they received they revolted 10
years later on hearing of Qubilai’s death and invaded the mainland to
attack Mongol garrisons in 1296 and 1297. But Qubilai’s grandson and
successor Temür was busy dealing with [Qaidu and
Du’a](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/ "Some reflections on the Khans Qaidu and Du’a and the great Khan’s lost legacy");
hence, he could only devote small forces that successfully repulsed the
Ainu attacks on each of these occasions but did not pursue them into
their heartland. In 1305 the Ainu launched another major, which prompted
Temür to settle the issue once and for all. He launched a massive
invasion of Sakhalin 1307 CE with cannons and trebuchets taken across to
the island. The Ainu were vigorously pursued and all their strongholds
were destroyed. All their leaders were captured and executed. Shortly
after the invasion, Temür Khan died (February 1307) at the age of 41
\[Footnote 4\]. Finally, Külüg Khan his successor completed the campaign
in 1308 CE destroying the Ainu power once and for all, and they had to
hand over annually a tribute of the furs of what ever animals they had
killed.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-SXfGa-bxHmk/U2aCdrVdoFI/AAAAAAAAC5M/GYtSeUgs5Ls/s800/Ainu_Mongol_war.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/r-KVF56EUHF9U-kTZlWHU9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)A
Japanese depiction of the Ainu-Mongol war

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-l9AvZPVIYD4/U2cuO3QpxqI/AAAAAAAAC5c/e_39WR7_s_E/s640/Asians.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/S0862FOaxUpMi1_FGqpL69MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Relationships of among East Asians and Siberians as per: Hammer et al, J
Hum Genet (2006) 51:47–58 and Japanese Archipelago Human Population
Genetics Consortium, J Hum Genet (2012) 57:787–795

This history of the Ainu is of interest because it provides a record of
the activities of these mysterious peoples, who in many ways epitomize
the questions needing to be answered with respect to the peopling of
Eurasia and the Americas. Several years ago when the Kennewick man
excitement was ranging in North America there was proposal that he was
related to the Ainu. This seemed a bit strange even if plausible at that
point. The Ainu possess the peculiar Y-chromosome haplogroup D, which is
otherwise found prominently in Ryukyuans, Tibetans, and some Andaman
tribesmen, and at low levels in Adi and Apatani tribesmen of
northeastern India and some tribes of Philippines. This haplogroup is
however not found in the Americas. The distribution of haplogroup D in
Japan is further interesting in that is high in both Ainu and Ryukyuans
but low in the “Mainland East Asian” type Japanese population. This link
between the Ainu and Ryukyuans is also strongly supported by autosomal
data. This suggests that they might in part represent an ancient relict
of a population that spread over Asia spanning from Tibet, Northeastern
India, Andamans, and all the way to East Asia and the Philippines. But
the remaining Ainu Y-chromosomes are marked by fairly high frequencies
of the haplogroup C. In particular Ainu share the modal Mongol Y
chromosome haplogroup C-M217 (the haplogroup of Chingiz Khan), that is
also found in the Nivkh, Manchu and other Siberian Tungusic peoples.
The latter also show the prominent presence of C-M77 and C-P53.1
subclades among them that they share with Uighurs. The haplogroup C is
additionally found in several tribes of native Americans (the C-P39
subclade). The Ainu also share mitochondrial haplogroups with the
peoples of the Okhotsk region including Nivkhs. These, observations
suggest that paleo-Siberian groups like the Nivkhs have merged with
older layer of the Ainu that is similar to the corresponding heritage of
the Ryukyuans. This older layer is believed to correspond to the
archaeological Jomon Culture of Japan. It is quite possible that the
northward movements of the Ainu in the Mongol records marked one of the
early movements leading to the admixture with the Siberian peoples. This
admixture might have brought in addition to genetic material cultural
features like the bear-rearing ritual to the proto-Ainu. Finally, recent
evidence from ancient DNA suggests that the native Americans had an
early admixture with a paleo-Siberian people related to the Caucasoids
rather than the Mongoloids (their main “heritage” is of course
Mongoloid). It is conceivable that remnants of the genetic contribution
of these paleo-Siberian Caucasoid people were also present in the Nivkh
and thereby entered the Ainu.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: The Khanty people remained heathen for long despite vigorous
attempts to impose the Christian delusion on them by the Rus. They were
finally subjugated by the 1800s and partly converted. In the 1900s they
were subject to ethnic cleansing by Stalin who systematically suppressed
their heathen religion and killed off all their shamans.

Footnote 2: Ironically, the descendants of Qasar were close to the
Manchu (the neo-Jurchen) and greatly assisted them during the rise of
the Ching dynasty. Multiple Manchu queens were Qasarid princesses. Their
military assistance was also critical for the victory of the Manchu,
like when they were hard-pressed by Koxinga, the brilliant Ming general,
and during the Russian invasions in the 1600s. Consequently they were
top governors throughout the Ching dynasty. Thus, the ancestor shrine of
Qasar came to be located in inner Mongolia, where his descendants built
a temple near what was considered a sacred hill of the Mongols. In that
shrine the bow, quiver, sword, armor and helmet of Qasar are still kept
along with his yak hair banner, despite attempts by the Chinese to root
out his veneration.

Footnote 3: These peoples speak a mysterious language that is unrelated
to any other and is believed to be a remnant of ancient languages spoken
in Siberia. Their form of shamanism is a unique one with elements
reminiscent of the Native Americans of the New World but they have the
distinguishing bear-rearing ritual. Like other heathens of Russia they
were massacred by the cossacks and forcibly converted to Christianity.

Footnote 4: Temür Khan was a good ruler; had he not died so young the
history of the Mongols might have been different.
