+++
title = "Some trivia on equilateral triangles and the like"

+++
One may ask why one needs to revisit elementary geometry that was
usually studied at secondary school. The simple answer is it is a good
recreation. But it is not like any recreation, because it also opens the
doors to glimpse something deeper about reality as the yavana-s of yore
might have said. It is interesting to see how unexpected connections
turn up all over the place. Hence, we shall re-experience some of the
trivia related to equilateral triangles.

A rather easily proved result is the following: Take a random point
inside an equilateral triangle and drop perpendiculars ![\[h\_{1},
h\_{2}, h\_{3}\]
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Bh_%7B1%7D%2C+h_%7B2%7D%2C+h_%7B3%7D%5D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"[h_{1}, h_{2}, h_{3}] ") from that point to the three sides of the
triangle, then:  
![h\_{1}+h\_{2}+h\_{3}=h
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=h_%7B1%7D%2Bh_%7B2%7D%2Bh_%7B3%7D%3Dh+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"h_{1}+h_{2}+h_{3}=h ")  
This becomes obvious if we take that random point to be P and then
consider the sum the areas of the areas of ![\\triangle ABP, \\triangle
ACP, \\triangle BCP
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABP%2C+%5Ctriangle+ACP%2C+%5Ctriangle+BCP+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABP, \\triangle ACP, \\triangle BCP ") which is equal to the
area of the parent equilateral triangle ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "). Since the heights of the three triangles are
![\[h\_{1}, h\_{2}, h\_{3}\]
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Bh_%7B1%7D%2C+h_%7B2%7D%2C+h_%7B3%7D%5D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"[h_{1}, h_{2}, h_{3}] ") and that of the equilateral triangle is h we
get the above relationship.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-02zBBtwzypU/VJ-ic1D4xQI/AAAAAAAADMo/JNxdjPf8hRc/s800/Equilateral_height.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/hJGW9bwUMtzq5tMqVcqVNdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

This result was apparently due an Italian scientist Viviani, a student
of Galileo in the 1600s, illustrating that after the destruction of
yavana tradition by the preta-mata there was still lot of simple
geometry waiting to be revisited more than a 1000 years later.

Could this simple mathematical reality have any bearing on real life,
given that so many geometric relationships show up in the real world. We
believe this relationship gives us an analogy to understand certain
optimization situations we often encounter in life. Consider three
entities power (as in strength), speed and precision. Imagine you have
fixed resource a fraction of which you can use to generate power, speed
and precision. Then you can imagine your position in this triadic space
of the fraction of the resource allocated power, speed and precision as
a point within the equilateral triangle (because your overall resource
is fixed) to be determined by the intersection of the perpendiculars
from a position on each of the sides. Since the sum of those
perpendicular segments ![\[h\_{1}, h\_{2}, h\_{3}\]
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Bh_%7B1%7D%2C+h_%7B2%7D%2C+h_%7B3%7D%5D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"[h_{1}, h_{2}, h_{3}] ") is a constant h, you are are going to be able
to increase one of the three, power, speed or precision only at the
expense of the other two. Thus, the above relationship appears to
represent the reality of tradeoffs such as this often encountered in the
real world.

Now we shall revisit a realm arising from the contributions of the
French mathematician Fermat and supposedly also the French conqueror
Napoleon. However, most people believe that the attributions to the
latter were merely apocryphal. We stumbled upon some of these for
ourselves while doodling in classrooms in the past and during talks
later in life.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-WDc7Suqo74g/VJ-idWAqEsI/AAAAAAAADMs/bt_AbjQWpnk/s800/Napoleanic2.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/xzGPqUm8JnSFcxv8HOiQWNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Consider a random triangle ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "). On each of its sides erect an equilateral triangle;
thus we have: ![\\triangle ABC', \\triangle AB'C, and \\triangle A'BC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC%27%2C+%5Ctriangle+AB%27C%2C+and+%5Ctriangle+A%27BC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC', \\triangle AB'C, and \\triangle A'BC "). Now an
interesting result is that if you join the centers of these three
equilateral triangles (remember that for any equilateral triangle the
circumcenter, incenter, centroid, and orthocenter coincide) you get
another equilateral triangle ![\\triangle PQR
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+PQR+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle PQR "). While fascinated by this figure early in life, we
learned later that this result and triangle bore the name of the famous
French conqueror himself. This configuration of triangles is a veritable
mother-lode of geometric results:

• The centroid G (i.e. the point of concurrency of the medians or the
point where the equivalent uniform density triangle cutout will be
balanced on a point) of the original ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") and the center of the Napoleon ![\\triangle PQR
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+PQR+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle PQR ") are the same.

• If we join the vertices A, B, and C of the original triangle
![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") to the respective opposite peaks A’, B’ and C’ of the
three equilateral triangles we had erected on the sides of ![\\triangle
ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") we find that:  
1\)![\\overline{AA'}\\cong \\overline{BB'}\\cong \\overline{CC'}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAA%27%7D%5Ccong+%5Coverline%7BBB%27%7D%5Ccong+%5Coverline%7BCC%27%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\overline{AA'}\\cong \\overline{BB'}\\cong \\overline{CC'} ")  
2\) The above segments are thrice the distance between the centroids of
the 3 equilateral triangles (P, Q, R) and the centroid G of the original
![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ")  
Thus we have: ![AA'=BB'=CC'=3.GP=3.GQ=3.GR
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=AA%27%3DBB%27%3DCC%27%3D3.GP%3D3.GQ%3D3.GR+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"AA'=BB'=CC'=3.GP=3.GQ=3.GR ")

• ![\\overline{AA'}, \\overline{BB'}, \\overline{CC'}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAA%27%7D%2C+%5Coverline%7BBB%27%7D%2C+%5Coverline%7BCC%27%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\overline{AA'}, \\overline{BB'}, \\overline{CC'} ") are concurrent at
a point termed the Fermat’s point F. This point has interesting
properties:  
1\) All three vertices of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") are at an equal angular separation (![=2 \\pi/3 rad
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%3D2+%5Cpi%2F3+rad+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"=2 \\pi/3 rad ")) from each other at this point F.  
2\) F is the minimum distance point, thus:  
![AF+BF+CF\< AX+BX+CX
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=AF%2BBF%2BCF%3C+AX%2BBX%2BCX+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"AF+BF+CF\< AX+BX+CX ") where X is a random point inside ![\\triangle
ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ")

• If we draw lines passing through the vertices of the Napoleon
![\\triangle PQR
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+PQR+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle PQR ") to the corresponding peaks of the three equilateral
triangles (A’, B’ and C’) then these lines are concurrent at a point O
which is the circumcenter of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ").

• Now, the Napoleon ![\\triangle PQR
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+PQR+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle PQR ") and ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") form hexagonal star. If we connect the opposite
vertices of this hexagonal star then the three lines
![\\overleftrightarrow {AP}, \\overleftrightarrow {BQ},
\\overleftrightarrow {CR}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BAP%7D%2C+%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BBQ%7D%2C+%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BCR%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\overleftrightarrow {AP}, \\overleftrightarrow {BQ}, \\overleftrightarrow {CR} ")
are concurrent at a point ![N\_{1}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=N_%7B1%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"N_{1} "), the Napoleon point 1 (N in the figure; there is a second
Napoleon point ![N\_{2}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=N_%7B2%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"N_{2} ") formed by the inner Napoleon triangle obtained by erecting the
equilateral triangles internally on ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ")). Now in addition to the Napoleon centers we may also
consider a few other centers of interest:  
1\) The orthocenter H, which is the point of concurrency of the 3
altitudes of the ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "), an ancient center known to the yavana-s.  
2\) The Spieker’s center (![S\_{p}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=S_%7Bp%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"S_{p} ")) is the incenter of the medial triangle of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "), i.e., the triangle formed by connecting the
midpoints of its three sides. If one draws the lines
![\\overleftrightarrow {AS\_{p}}, \\overleftrightarrow {BS\_{p}},
\\overleftrightarrow {CS\_{p}}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BAS_%7Bp%7D%7D%2C+%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BBS_%7Bp%7D%7D%2C+%5Coverleftrightarrow+%7BCS_%7Bp%7D%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\overleftrightarrow {AS_{p}}, \\overleftrightarrow {BS_{p}}, \\overleftrightarrow {CS_{p}} "),
known as the cleavers, then each of them cleaves the ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ")‘s perimeter into two equal halves. ![S\_{p}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=S_%7Bp%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"S_{p} ") was apparently discovered by the eponymous German
mathematician who wrote a textbook that apparently inspired the
scientist Einstein on his mathematical journey.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-0xDS_3bwNvA/VJ-ic07YhQI/AAAAAAAADMk/TwxapZSp_Sc/s800/Kiepert_hyperbola.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/4zqSyOKTDUWq72e28HsuAtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Now there is a rather interesting result concerning these points: the
three vertices of the ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "), along with the following centers of it, namely, the
orthocenter, the Fermat’s point, the Napoleon points, the centroid, and
the Spieker’s center all lie on the same rectangular hyperbola. What was
most striking to us was that a familiar conic emerged “out of the blue”
in an investigation of triangles. This represents the mysterious (to us)
tendency of one bit of mathematics to show up unexpectedly in another
bit of it – perhaps a reflection a deeper reality. Incidentally, this
hyperbola is named the Kiepert hyperbola after another German
mathematician.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-WZgSSNLEhBg/VJ-idIuDqdI/AAAAAAAADMw/FeWpsIwn7A4/s800/Hyperbola_circle_lines.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/FlovqpKNmUkGRQfn_9VvSdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

• Interestingly, the center of this rectangular hyperbola is situated on
one more conic that mysteriously emerges among triangles. This is the
circle discovered by the great Leonhard Euler, which passes through the
midpoints of the three sides of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "), and the feet of three altitudes of this triangle.
Additionally, it includes midpoints of the segments:  
![\\overline{AH}, \\overline{BH}, \\overline{CH}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAH%7D%2C+%5Coverline%7BBH%7D%2C+%5Coverline%7BCH%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\overline{AH}, \\overline{BH}, \\overline{CH} "), which connect the
orthocenter to the three vertices of the triangle. Thus, it is famed as
the nine-point circle.

• Yet another degenerate conic, namely a pair of straight lines, emerges
among the triangle centers in form of the Euler line and Nagel line
(named after von Nagel, yet another German mathematician). The Euler
line is the line on which the orthocenter H, the centroid G and the
circumcenter O of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") lie. Moreover, the center of the nine-point circle
also lies on this line. It gives rise to many interesting relationships;
for example:  
![GH=2.GO
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=GH%3D2.GO+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"GH=2.GO ");  
The slope of the Euler line ![m\_{E}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_%7BE%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"m_{E} ") is given in terms of the slopes of the 3 sides of ![\\triangle
ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC "), namely ![m\_{1}, m\_{2}, m\_{3}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_%7B1%7D%2C+m_%7B2%7D%2C+m_%7B3%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"m_{1}, m_{2}, m_{3} ") as:

![m\_{E}=
\\frac{m\_{1}.m\_{2}+m\_{1}.m\_{3}+m\_{2}.m\_{3}+3}{m\_{1}+m\_{2}+m\_{3}+3m\_{1}.m\_{2}.m\_{3}}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_%7BE%7D%3D+%5Cfrac%7Bm_%7B1%7D.m_%7B2%7D%2Bm_%7B1%7D.m_%7B3%7D%2Bm_%7B2%7D.m_%7B3%7D%2B3%7D%7Bm_%7B1%7D%2Bm_%7B2%7D%2Bm_%7B3%7D%2B3m_%7B1%7D.m_%7B2%7D.m_%7B3%7D%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=2
"m_{E}= \\frac{m_{1}.m_{2}+m_{1}.m_{3}+m_{2}.m_{3}+3}{m_{1}+m_{2}+m_{3}+3m_{1}.m_{2}.m_{3}}")

The Nagel line connects the incenter the centroid and the Nagel point
![N\_{a}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=N_%7Ba%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"N_{a} "), which is the point of concurrency of the segments joining the
vertices of ![\\triangle ABC
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle+ABC+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"\\triangle ABC ") to the points of contact of the same triangle’s
external tangent circles. Interestingly, the Spieker’s center ![S\_{p}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=S_%7Bp%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=9ACD32&s=1
"S_{p} ") also lies on this line.

One may see in these deeply connected relationships certain reflections
of a hidden underlying reality. For instance, the building block of 2D
space, the triangle, can be seen as a section by a plane through a 3D
structure made of three bi-cones. One of these is the bi-cones which
gives rise to the Euler and Nagel lines is cut by the plane through its
vertex perpendicular to its base. Another is a cone orthogonal to the
previous which is cut by the same plane parallel to its base giving rise
to the nine-point circle. The third cone is the on which the three
vertices of the triangle lie and its section is seen as the Kiepert
hyperbola. Indeed, mathematicians have defined some other hyperbolas
like the Kiepert’s hyperbola and these could be other cones in that 3D
structure.

Closer to real life, the fact that the centroid, the incenter,
circumcenter, and Fermat’s point do not coincide for a random scalene
triangle like one illustrated here suggests that there are different
optimalities in the non-equilateral triangular space which cannot be
achieved simultaneously at once. Thus while you can balance the triangle
at a point using the centroid, you need a different point F to have the
minimum distance to or equal angular separation between the vertices.

This world of triangles has many more complexities which mathematicians
explore, only going to show how even high school Euclidean geometry has
many more recreational avenues.
