+++
title = "A geopolitical segment"

+++
Nothing has really changed in the world as long as the
mlechCha-marUnmattAbhisaMdhi continues as usual. Yet, a large fraction
of the Hindus we have observed have a weak apprehension of this outside
a relatively small circle many of whom are part of some kind of densely
connected subgraph of the internet universe. Of course in these
discerning circles none of what is being said here is new or revelatory.
Yet, for our own records we present these geopolitical round-ups. There
are several points which we shall briefly review:

● In the Hindu world there has been a major change – the anti-national
UPA government, which was engineered by the mlechCha-s exploiting the
predilection for Gandhian blunders among the flotsam Hindus has been
finally thrown out. Now the lATAnarta-naresha, who is one of the few
Hindu politicians who had put the evil marUnmatta-s in place in his
state, has become the bhArata-naresha. Of course this happened despite
an avalanche of media and social media efforts of the mlechCha-s and
their marUnmatta friends to counter his rise. We documented this by
simply recording the headlines concerning him and the BJP party for two
weeks in the run up to the Indian elections earlier this year.  
[mlechCha-marUnmattAdi venom on the
lATAnarta-naresha](https://app.box.com/s/8dw3taux15v7g8uvb0ps).  
We may also add that the spying on the BJP by the NSA (one of the few
foreign political parties included for this honor) most likely gave the
mlechCha-s direct intelligence to deploy their assets within India more
accurately. With the naresha’s election the basic strategy of the
mlechCha-s to prevent him from rising to power was defeated despite the
above efforts. His foreign policy moves with respect to the
subcontinent, especially the assembly of the local chiefs of the
breakaway fragments of greater India, was a positive one. However, there
is hardly any doubt that the damage to bhArata by the UPA has been so
deep that the naresha will not be able to show much in the immediate
future. Moreover, the rest of the BJP has a large proportion of rather
substandard players who can drag the team down. On top of this the El
Niño effect this year will limit the Indian Southwest monsoons severely
and further hamper the recovery from the UPA rule, which has been no
different from the effects of Moslem or English misrule. The average
Hindus are prone to the “cricket effect” – when a player fails in a few
matches, no matter how good he is, he is dumped forthwith and there are
calls for his head. This effect will also translate to politics and will
result in a degree of disappointment. On one hand this disappointment
could be aggravated by some of the lightweight ministers’ expected
misperformance and on the other hand will be exploited by mlechCha
[first
responders](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/03/13/6384/ "The first responders and the paradox of Maoism").
Finally, a secular Indian state cannot deal with the nocuous presence of
marUnmatta-s and shavasAdhaka-s within it – one being a fast poison that
episodically disrupts the state and the other being a slow-acting poison
that undermines the very scaffold of the Hindu nation. Then there is
their secular cousin, the rudhira-dhvaja, upheld by the Marxist
terrorists. How the naresha deals with these fundamental problems is
going to be way more important than things that the Hindus normally
think about – encapsulated as roTI-kapDA-makhAn – for Hindus can bid
these good bye if residual bhArata descends into a Somalia- or
Nigeria-like cesspool in a scenario where the Abrahamistic dyad and
their secular offshoots prevail in this struggle.

● Not surprisingly, the Abrahamistic dyad realizes that if at all Hindus
have a chance it is going to be if the naresha pulls of a successful
edition of the Julian plan. They are clearly gearing to make it fail
much like that of [emperor
Julian’s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/27/emperor-julian/ "Emperor Julian").
Of course, since those times they have learned and perfected many new
methods. One of these which is very effective with Hindus is to cause
bheda as the old political thinkers of our land would say. For this,
their organs involved in demonizing Hindu nationalists has been put into
full swing in the hope they can exploit any stumbles on the part of the
BJP government. For example, one could look at a report just fabricated
by the South Asia Citizens Web (any organization or individual who uses
the term South Asia for the Indian subcontinent, great India or
jaMbudvIpa is de facto an enemy of the Hindus) on Hindu nationalists in
the US. It needs no special analysis beyond the fact that it is
announced with a graphic showing the svastika, a holy symbol of the
Hindus that is over 4500 years old, being crossed out. Anyone who
crosses out the Hindu svastika cannot be anything other than an enemy of
our peoples – not surprising for a collective of first responders backed
by the mlechCha-marUnmattAbhisaMdhi. What Hindu need to take home from
this is that the victory of the naresha does not mean the mlechCha-s
have accepted defeat, rather they are gearing up for a bigger battle.

The victory of the naresha has, to an extant, caused the first
responders in the Indian media to fold up (at least least temporarily).
With the native levies shying from confrontation, the mlechCha-s have
begun using their own propaganda department to continue their attack on
bhArata. To test this one may do the simple experiment of using Google
News US edition and change the settings so that India is on top and set
to “always”. Then one might observe the primary India-related headlines
in mlechCha propaganda organs. Below is a sampling of news items that
surfaced to the top in the above experiment:  
\*India’s rape epidemic: Will the US apply pressure for change to its
Asian ally? Fox News  
\*India’s sewer cleaners keep working despite ban on job. Los Angeles
Times  
\*India summons US diplomat over report of NSA spying. CNN  
\*India’s building collapse death toll reaches 60. Washington Post  
\*’Invisible’ in India: The story of the disabled boy tied to Mumbai bus
stop. CNN  
\*No quick fix for India’s rape crisis. CNN  
\*China Cultivates India Amid Tension With Neighbors. ABC News  
\*Tiger leaps onto boat, snatches man in swamp in India. Fox News  
\*Indian Forces Fire on Kashmir Protesters; 1 Killed. ABC News  
\*Christians face abuse around the globe. CNN – “In India, the world’s
largest democracy, Christians face harassment and violence, especially
in states with laws restricting religious conversion from Hinduism.” –
We wish truly conversion to Abrahamistic cults was banned in bhArata as
imagined by their propagandists.  
\*Sword Fight Breaks Out at Shrine in India, Causing Injuries. ABC
News  
\*Indian Bureaucrats Scramble for Hindi Dictionaries. ABC News

What does all this mean for the Hindus? It is clear that the mlechCha-s
want to create a deeply negative image of bhArata as a lawless land,
which needs to be brought in line for shavasadhaka-s to thrive at the
expense of Hindus. This is the message for their own people and the
philo-occidental Hindu elite in India. On the other hand the same
messages have a different utility from the angle of their effects on the
plebeian Hindu reader. One such angle, which would be very apparent any
discerning observer, is the attempt to create a strI-puruSha-bheda to
disrupt Hindu social and family structure. Another angle is demoralizing
visitors and investors to affect tourism and other revenues. Yet another
angle is planting stories so as to rake up old issues irrelevant to the
modern world, such as regionalistic linguistic chauvinism, to distract
Hindus from the core issues, namely removal of Abrahamistic predation on
their lands. Earlier, a whole party was set up to rake up the issue of
corruption, which while real, is hardly the biggest problem faced by
bhArata. In case people thought it did not exist in the land of the free
it is simply because they have not experienced those lands themselves
and the fact that those lands have enormous resource to population
ratios relative to bhArata.

● In course of the mlechCha war with the Qing empire they laid the
chIna-s low by using opium. However, the chIna-s did not go down without
a fight and these were the famous opium wars. This was a dramatic and
new technique, which while useful could still incite a reaction from the
enemy. But the mlechCha-s have now perfected it to the point that the
victims do not know that they are being intoxicated by a drug. Thus, the
primary drugs are not opium and other psychedelics but memetic ones. In
bhArata this takes the form of the movie industry, epitomized by
Bollywood. We have personally seen many a Hindu being utterly ruined and
also injuring others due to this “drug”. Analysis by our good friend
illustrates that Bollywood lacks originality to the core and routinely
plagiarizes themes from Hollywood. Thus, it serves as a conduit for
mlechCha memes to befuddle the Hindu masses by subtly reinforcing
vidharma constructs. Moreover it subtly legitimizes notions such as,
secularism, social acceptability of marUnmatta-s (thereby facilitating
their love-jihad), the natural leaders of Hindu society the brAhmaNa-s
as evil, and constructs that facilitate the break down Hindu society and
family. Similarly, the TV advertisements, which constantly bombard an
average Hindu in India as he savors cricket and other spectator sports
subtly promote the acceptability of the eka-rAkShasa-mata-s and their
constructs. The use of these intoxicants will be further exploited in
the coming days to render the Hindu immunity futile even as the
polydnavirus or nudivirus is deployed by a parasitoid wasp against its
prey. In particular this would be important because it would be
difficult for even a nationalist government to control as already a good
part of the masses have been addicted and it can help slip in
deleterious propaganda under the radar. In particular this could be
combined with events such as world cups and the IPL masAlA matches (e.g.
the IPL nights program which we saw some socially upscale but
undiscerning Hindus savoring over an unhealthy meal of greasy panIr
samosA-s and sweets).

● The Sunni Mohammedans have much to congratulate themselves over the
establishment of their Caliphate. Now it is important to observe the
actions of the mlechCha-s vis-a-vis the Sunnis an alliance which goes
back to their alliances with the Osman sultans continuing through the
great Crimean war, where the mlechCha alliance defeated the Rus to help
the Osmans. One may notice how the mlecCha-s only mumble when a
Caliphate or an Emirate destroys pagan structures. When the buddha-s
were destroyed at varNAyana the mlechCha-s who were entirely capable of
stopping it merely mumbled some protests but let the Emirate of mullah
Omar destroy it. Instead the propagate stuff like varNAyana was center
of “Greek, Turkish, Persian, Chinese and Indian influence (\!)”. Now
likewise they have stepped backed to mumble or deny even as the
Caliphate destroys the ancient heathen Assyrian images from the time of
Jahiliyyah. This is not surprising given the fact that the mlechCha-s
have covertly aided and abetted the ISIS as a front against Syria’s
Assad. Was ISIS or Saddam Hussein/Assad worse? The answer is clear even
to a slow-witted person. Hence, the mlechCha behavior vis-a-vis ISIS and
also the Mohammedans of Libya should make it clear as to what they
really support and why. Now again one may ask the question against this
back drop as to why Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are still around as
states, while most other West Asian and North African gutter-holes are
being stirred up vigorously? Those Hindus who fondly hope that TSP will
disintegrate by itself should pay close attention to this question. An
examination of the details “fine print” will reveal that irrespective of
the outward signs of conflict the mlechCha will never give up either TSP
or the barbarians of Saud – if 9/11 could not break these bonds then
what can? Importantly, for the Hindus the mlechCha will continue giving
the needful finance to support these nations militarily even as TSP
sports the fastest growing nuclear arsenal in the world – so much for
the talk of non-proliferation. Moreover, the mlechCha resources are so
large that it can literally endlessly prop up TSP. While we will be
happy to be proven wrong TSP is not going to disintegrate as many Hindus
imagine and will continue to receive high-tech military gear to play its
part in the “colonialism by distance” venture of the mlechCha-s. On
these matters not just mlechCha interests but also those of the Hans
align.

To add to this the leader of the mlechCha-world is aggressively pushing
for the Indian government to buy armament from them – this will create
the ultimate dependency from which India will never recover to regain
its standing as a major power (e.g. see recent drive for harpoon missile
sales and the strategic partnership push). The Caliphate in West Asia
has given a potential preview of what might happen when the mlechCha-s
depart from Afghanistan. When we combine their retreat with their
subcontracting of the Afghanistan to TSP, we can see everything set up
for the revival of an Emirate therein. The strategic partnership with
the mlechChendra duShTa-s, rosy as it might sound on paper, is
implicitly to keep bhArata in a box so that it is not allowed to break
the crypto-colonial stranglehold on the subcontinent. In view of these
developments, the coming days are certainly going to pose challenges of
the highest order for the bhArata-naresha. In conclusion, while many
scenarios are possible, but many of them could involve the marUnmatta-s
both from within and without, even as the kIlita-shavasAdhaka-s gnaw
away like a gigantic rodent at the undergirdings of bhArata. While we
might be like rAjArAm at Jinji, we can only hope that the Hindu leaders
do not lose sight of the ultimate geopolitical goal of completely
demolishing the Abrahamistic stranglehold on the entire Indian sphere of
influence.
