+++
title = "The erotic, the warlike and the imperial in the tantra age"

+++
The primary paurANika text of the shrI-kula tradition is the famed
lalitopAkhyAnam, which is tagged to the brahmANDa purANam. The text
describes the exploits of the central deity of the shrI-kula system,
tripurasundarI, who is simultaneously praised as simultaneously
erotic:  
kAmesha-j\~nAta-saubhAgya-mArdavoru-dvayAnvitA – she with a pair of
graceful, smooth thighs which are enjoyed by kAmesha (her bhairava
consort).

kAmeshvara-prema-ratna-maNi-pratipaNa-stanI – she who paid back the love
of kAmesha by giving her breasts which are like jewel \[pots\]

Warlike:  
bhaNDAsura-vadhodyukta-shaktisenA-samanvitA – she who is surrounded by
an army of goddesses ready to slay bhaNDAsura

bhaNDAsurendra-nirmukta-shastra-pratyastra-varShiNI – she who showers
missiles to counter the weapons hurled by bhaNDAsura

kAmeshvarAstra-nirdagdha-sabhaNDAsura-shUnyakA – she who annihilated
bhaNDAsura by burning him with the kAmeshvara missile

And imperial:  
shrImahArAj\~nI – the empress  
shrImat-siMhAsaneshvarI – the goddess seated on the imperial throne  
rAja-rAjeshvarI – the imperial goddess

This triad of metaphors, while reaching a literary culmination in the
lalitopAkhyAnam, is a theme which is present in some form in other kaula
traditions such as those of the pUrvAMnAya (the trika goddess and
bhairava-s), uttarAMnAya (kAlI), paschimAMnAya (kubjikA and navAtman).
The kaula tradition appears to have gained considerable prominence with
the teachings of fisherman-teacher matsyendra and his successors. He is
named as the primary teacher or nAtha of this yuga (mentioned by his
prAkR^itic name as macChanda vibhu (nAtha) by the great Kashmirian
tAntrika abhinavagupta) and is said to have authored the
kaula-j\~nAna-nirNaya, a definitive yoginI-kaula work. The kula
tradition also influenced the emerging gANapatya sect, giving rise to a
kaula version of it, whose founder is said to have been heramba-suta. A
version of this tradition transplanted to China and Japan acquired
considerable popularity there and survives in the latter country to
date, even if in a diluted form. Eventually, within the core Astika
tradition, we find streams of smArta-s attributing the origin of the
kula system, in a somewhat “domesticated” form, to the advaita teacher
shaMkarAcharya. Thus, a notable text of this tradition, the
saundaryalahari, which presents the kubjikA and tripurA kula systems, is
attributed to shaMkarAchArya. Reflexes of these expressions also
thoroughly permeate the bauddha yoga and yoginI tantra-s. Versions such
as the bauddha [sAdhanA of the
vilAsinI-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/05/25/upasana-of-the-1112-vilasini-s/ "upAsana of the 11/12 vilAsinI-s")
and padma-nR^ityeshvara closely imitate the shrIkula tradition. [The
bauddha tAntrika tradition ultimately culminated in their grand
synthesis, which again parallels the shaiva kaula tradition, in the form
of the
kAlachakra-tantra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/16/nastika-notes-2/ "nAstika notes-2"),
which teaches the system centered on deities, the 4-headed, 24-armed
kAlachakra and his 4-headed and 8-armed consort vishvamAtA. Such lateral
influences emanating from the core shaiva kula tradition are also seen
in the jaina bhairava tantra-s. Thus, it is clear that the kula
“movement” was a pervasive one, which impacted not only the source
religion but also it paratypes both in the sub-continent of jaMbudvIpa
and the greater Indosphere in Tibet and the east.

If we look closely, this triad of metaphors is also seen in the language
of royal discourse as what might be termed the [“tantra
age”](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/04/02/geopolitics-of-the-tantra-age-an-attempt-at-a-blunt-assessment/ "Geopolitics of the tantra age: an attempt at a blunt assessment")
unfolded in India. As an example let us consider the royal praise
supposed to have been composed by the noted lexicographer amara-siMha to
praise the great monarch vikramAditya chandragupta-II:

abhayam abhayaM deva brUmas tavaasi-latA-vadhUH kuvalaya-dala-shyAmA
shatror uraH sthala-shAyinI |  
samaya-sulabhAM kIrtiM bhavyAm asUta sutAm asAv api ramayituM
rAgaandheva bhramaty akhilaM jagat ||

abhayam= guarantee of protection (in this context); deva= lord; brUmaH=
we say; tava=your; asi= sword; lata=creeper, here a flammard’s blade
(i.e. like the kris which survives in the Malay archipelago); vadhuH=
bride; kuvalaya=blue water-lily; dala= petal; shyAmA= dark; shatroH=
enemy (genitive); uraH= chest; sthala= place; shAyinI= rested upon.

samaya= in due course; sulabhAM= effectively/easily; kIrtiM= fame;
bhavyAm= beautiful; asuta= conceived; sutAM= daughter; asau=who; api=
now; ramayitum= to cause pleasure; rAgAndhA= passionate woman; iva=
like; bhramati= wanders; akhilaM= entire; jagat= world.

Give us the guarantee our protection, O lord, when we say that your
flammard-blade-bride, dark as the petal of a blue water-lily \[Footnote
1\], has laid herself on your enemy’s chest; there, she in due course
easily conceived a beautiful daughter kIrti (fame) who now roams about
the entire world like a passionate woman to bring pleasure to all\!

This trend is also apparent in the royal inscriptions from the “tantra
age”. For example, we may consider the famous inscription of  the jaina
poet ravikIrti describing the exploits of the chAlukyan emperors:  
nAnA heti shatAbhighAta-patita-bhrAtaashva-patti-dvIpe nR^ityAd
bhIma-kabandha-khaDga-kiraNa-jvAlA-sahasre raNe |  
lakshmIr-bhAvita-chApalaapi cha kR^ita shauryeNa yen\[a\]AtmasAd
rAjA\[A\]sIj jayasiMha-vallabha iti khyAtash chAlukyAnvayaH ||

There was, of the chAlukya dynasty, the king named jayasiMha-vallabha,
who in battle – where horses, infantry and elephants, bewildered, fell
down under the strokes of many hundreds of weapons, and where thousands
of frightful headless trunks and of flashes of rays of swords were
leaping to and fro – by his valor made fortune his own \[woman\], even
though she is suspected of fickleness \[Translation adapted from
Epigraphia Indica Vol. 6\].

Or this verse with a simultaneous heroic and erotic cadence of
describing the conquest of the emperor ma\~Ngalesha:  
sphuran-mayUkhair-asi-dipikA-shatair vyudasya
mAta\~Nga-tamisra-sa\~nchayam |  
avAptavAnyo raNa-ra\~Nga-mandire kaTachchuri-shrI-lalanA parigraham ||

Who in that fortress, which was the drama-theater of the battle-field,
took in marriage the damsel,  
the fortune of the kaTachchuris \[form of the haihaya clan kalachuri-s
of later history\], having scattered the gathering gloom, i.e. the array
of elephants (of the adversary), with hundreds of bright-rayed lamps,
i.e. the swords (of his army) \[Translation adapted from Epigraphia
Indica Vol. 6\].

It is not as if the sexual element was not associated with the royal in
earlier Hindu tradition. Indeed, this is an inheritance from the
Indo-European past of the Hindus. It was expressed in their early
tradition within the grand culmination of all shrauta rites, the
ashvamedha, performed by the supreme monarch upon subjugation of all
rival kings. Here, [the sacrifice of the horse is followed by the
central sexual
ritual](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/11/21/the-sacrifice-of-the-horse-in-the-ashvamedha/ "The sacrifice of the Horse in the ashvamedha")
along with the [sexual banter between the brAhmaNa ritualists and the
royal
ladies](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/11/21/the-obscene-formulae-in-the-ashvamedha/ "The obscene formulae in the ashvamedha").
However, we see this as being primarily a fertility ritual – as
fecundity of the people and other animals directly translated into
armies and power of the rAShTra – a fact made clear in the yajus and
atharvan incantations used in the ashvamedha. This is paralleled in the
Roman and Celtic versions of the horse sacrifice \[the only account of
the Germanic one indicates a purely fertility ritual with no royal
dimension\], suggesting that the link goes pretty deep in the
Indo-European past. However, we believe that the expressions we see in
the “tantra age” are somewhat distinct – they embody what is termed the
shR^i\~NgAra rasa (eroticism) in saMskR^ita aesthetics rather than a
primarily fertility element (though shR^i\~NgAra could merely represent
an aesthetic metaphor for the latter).

[The explicit emphasis on rasa-s was first seen the Hindu theater as
described in its earliest surviving text, the nATyashAstra of
bharata](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/06/12/why-rasa-where-did-arya-and-yavana-nataka-diverge/ "Why rasa? where did Arya and yavana nATaka diverge?").
By contrast with the poetry of the itihAsa-s, we can see that this form
of poetic expression was probably originally exclusively used in the
theater as opposed to the royal courts. From here it appears to have
merged with and then taken over the conventions of court poetry, which
were originally represented by the itihAsa-s. Indeed the exalted
ashvamedha ritual involved the participation of two kinds of performers:
The sUta who composed and recited itihAsa – the recitation of which is
explicitly mentioned as being done on the pariplava nights in the
ashvamedha rite. The rite also involved sessions where shailUSha-s
(actors) and raibhin-s/nArAshaMsin-s (associated poets) put up their
performances. Thus, such old royal rituals themselves might have
provided the setting for the beginnings of the hybridization of
different poetic conventions that then crystallized as the classical
saMskR^ita kAvya. With the expression of rasa and the associated theory
of dhvani becoming the mainstay of kAvya, the old fertility element in
royal power might have been re-configured s the expression shR^i\~NgAra
rasa.

Given the parallel expression of these metaphors in both royal discourse
and kula tantra-s, we suggest that the two were intimately linked.
However, we posit that the above motifs in classical kAvya were not a
secondary consequence of this linkage, rather kAvya was itself the
initial catalyst for it. Under this scenario we posit that the emergence
of classical kAvya as the main mode of poetic expression in the royal
court \[Footnote 2\] brought with it the need to emphasize the rasa-s
even as in the theater. Simultaneously, the reworkings of the purANa-s
into neo-purANa-s allowed this form of expression to also enter what was
once the exclusive domain of the religious sUta poetry (originally
similar to the itihAsa poetry under the category itihAsa-purANa). Thus,
we see expressions in an extant shiva purANa (Venkateshvara Steam Press
edition) that are paralleled in the kumArasaMbhava of kAlidAsa. These
developments were also paralleled in space and time by the kaula
reconfiguration of the sexual ritual of the older shaiva tantra. In
those older tantra-s like the siddhayogeshvarI-mata and pichu-mata or
brahma-yAmala (which teaches the system of the deities kapAlIsha
bhairava and his consort raktachAmuNDA) the sexual ritual is primarily
for production of substance (kuNDagola), which also used as offering to
the deities. In the kaula reconfiguration the ritual was not just for
the old purpose but also for the act of pleasing the deities residing in
the various parts of the body via the highest pleasurable experience,
namely ratisukham. Indeed, it is accompanied by other pleasurable
experiences (bhoga) such as perfumes (gandha/lepa), food (bhojana) and
drinks (pAnaka), which similarly please the deities of the various
organs. Now the aesthetic theory of classical kAvya fitted well into
this kaula paradigm because kAvya also produces what was termed
originally in the theatrical theory as the
[sthAyibhAva](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/06/12/why-rasa-where-did-arya-and-yavana-nataka-diverge/ "Why rasa? where did Arya and yavana nATaka diverge?").
The experience of sthAyibhAva-s was an ultimately pleasurable experience
– the reason for enjoyment of poetry or theater. Thus, kAvya too could
be used to please the deities of the organs, with the shR^i\~NgAraM,
vIraM and adbhutaM being the most pleasurable and deeply moving (thus
most pleasing to the deities) of the rasa-s. Thus, it appears that the
aesthetics of kAvya was incorporated as a part of the kaula tradition.
We see this plainly manifested in the saundaryalahari or the
commentaries of abhinavagupta on the nATyashAstra and the lochana on
dhvanyAloka of Anandavardhana.

In the subsequent phase, [paralleling the rise of the saiddhantika
shaiva AchArya-s as major teachers of most major royal courts of bhArata
and the greater Indosphere there was also an epigraphically less visible
network of kaula and other bhairava-srotas teachers and their bauddha
imitators](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/02/15/the-greatest-temple-of-shiva/ "The greatest temple of shiva").
They were reinforced by charismatic siddha-s, successors of the original
kaula tradition of matsyendra. We posit that the increasing influence of
these in royal discourse resulted in a strong juxtaposition of the triad
of motifs, the erotic, the warlike and the imperial. Of course this was
also in part adopted by the other shaiva and vaiShNava tAntrika teachers
resulting in further amplification. For example, the polymath
saiddhAntika from the Tamil country, [aghorashiva
deshika](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/09/03/a-brief-hagiography-of-aghorashiva-deshika/ "A brief hagiography of aghorashiva deshika"),
was among other things also a noted exponent of kAvya and the theater.

We conclude with a praise by a forgotten poet of king bhojadeva paramAra
who lay towards the end of this period and was often compared to emperor
vikramAditya who lay closer to its beginnings:

svasti kShIrAbdhi-madhyAn nija-dayita-bhujAbhyantara-sthaabja-hastA
kShmAyAm-akShAma-kIrtiM kushalayati mahAbhU-bhujaM bhojadevam |  
kShemaM me .anyad yugAntAvadhi tapatu bhavAn yad yasho ghoShaNAbhir devo
nidrA-daridraH saphalayati harir yauvana-rddhiM mameti ||

svasti= blessing; kShIrAbdhi= milk ocean; madhyAn= midst; nija-dayita=
own husband; bhujAbhyantara-stha= enclosed within the embrace of the
arms; abja-hastA= lotus hands; kShmAyAm= on the earth; akShAma-kIrtiM=
undamaged fame; mahAbhU-bhujaM= emperor; bhojadevam.

kshemaM= conferring security; me= my; anyad= moreover; yugAntAvadhi=
period encompassed by the ends of yuga-s; tapatu= blaze (third person
imperative); bhavAn=you; yad= who; yashaH= glory; ghoShaNAbhir= by the
loud announcements; devaH= god; nidrA= sleep; daridraH= deprive;
saphalayati= fulfills; hariH= viShNu; yauvana= youthful; R^iddhiM=
endowments; mama= my ; iti= thus  
“Blessings\! by my conferring of security may you blaze forth for the
whole period between two yuga-endings”. Thus, in the midst of the ocean
of milk, enclosed in the embrace of her own husband’s arms the
lotus-handed \[lakShmI\] blesses emperor bhojadeva, whose fame is
undamaged on the earth; the god hari, deprived of his sleep by the loud
announcements of whose (bhojadeva’s) glory, fulfills the promise of my
\[lakShmI’s\] youthful endowments.

Thus, herein the erotic fulfillment of lakShmI’s endowments by viShNu is
linked to the glory of the king bhojadeva – the same metaphor now lie in
a vaiShNava context.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: The dark colored water-lily sword-blade appears to be
prevalent metaphor from the “tantra age” of India. For example we
encounter it in the Bhagalpur inscription of nArAyaNapAla, the king of
Bengal, in punning verse:  
bhayAd arAtibhir yasya raNa-mUrdhani visphuran  
asir indIvara-shyAmo dadR^ishe pIta-lohitaH ||  
From fear of it, while it was flashing on the battle-front, his dark
water-lily sword-blade looked as though it was yellow-red-hot \[pun: as
though it had drunk blood\] to his enemies.

Footnote 2: We may note that Tamil anthologies pura-nAnUru and
aka-nAnUru, most of whose poems were in place by the first 400 years of
the common era, celebrate the vIra and the shR^i\~NgAra rasa
respectively. These poems appear to have been mostly composed under the
patronage of the Tamil warlords and kings. Thus, by this period the
influence of kAvya was spreading beyond the Indo-Aryan languages and
inspiring parallel expressions even in Tamil. This suggests that it was
a pan-India phenomenon by that time.
