+++
title = "A visitation and ruminations"

+++
Most of our fellow travelers in school and college, with some exceptions
occasionally alluded to in some form on these pages, were boring people
to us. Their interests, political views or aspirations did not overlap
seriously with our own. However, they did provide an opportunity for
anthropological data collection, though beyond a certain point, as Jimmy
Watson would say, we had figure out how to avoid boring people. There
were a few unfortunate occasions in our life when we were saddled with
such individuals for fairly prolonged periods against our wishes. The
worst of those periods did feel like a passage through a hell of
vaivasvata, for the very entry into them was no different from death. We
found that most of our fellow travelers ran on a limited gauge: 1) They
would clap in delight, hum or prance about upon hearing certain tunes
from Hindi cinema; 2) They might spend hours discussing a rather sterile
issue in certain sports, whose arcane rules we were unacquainted with,
from the view point of a spectator; 3) They would be keen to master just
enough of their textbooks to procure the marks they desired in the
ever-impending exams. Beyond that nothing what so ever interested them
in the subject under consideration; 4) On an average they were low on
creativity and high on destructiveness. As they grew older, mock and
real pursuit of sexuality became a dominant theme of their existence,
and all of the above tendencies were staggered to fall within the
framework of that activity. This manifested rather plainly in males,
while in females it manifested as a faux prudishness while awaiting
attention from a high-ranked male. These individuals had a limited sense
of identity in both national and religious terms; they had but a modicum
of knowledge of the history of their own state leave alone the rest of
bhAratavarSha; their yearnings were primarily for a life of monetary
fulfillment and sexual pleasure with everything beyond these being
regarded as unnecessary at best and pathological worst. In particular
they were confounded, terrified or disgusted by the prospect that people
might want to pursue science, historical investigation, religion, or art
for their own sake.

Now these people were supposed to be the cream of our local society for
90% of them hailed from the upper middle-class or the upper class. They
also apparently belonged to fortunate tail of IQ bell-curve as when our
IQs were tested our class displayed a mean IQ of around 115 in school
and in the upper 120s in college. This got us wondering: If these are
people who in the coming years are going to become the Hindu elite then
what implications might it have for the future of the country? Among
them was Igul, the cow admidst the vaishya-s, whom we would not classify
right away with the rest. Her primary interests were not aligned with
ours but she had a certain mental celerity in mathematical matters and
ability to “crack” electronic devices, both of which were uncommon among
women. But she did not make these abilities her primary interests;
rather those were defined by the primal calling of her varNa. Her
understanding of life was limited as she could not tell apart a fungus
from an animal. However, above all she happened to be one of those rare
people who have an intrinsic goodness of nature combined with a certain
ocular pleasantness. More commonly people are good because they have few
other gifts; hence, they need to use goodness to get by in the rough
world of men. Those who are visually appealing learn about this asset
early in life and use it to their advantage till asset is consumed by
the march of kAla; hence, they have no need for goodness till that
point.

After a long time Igul paid us a visit and expressed the wish that we
take her to a local museum for somehow she always reminisced of an old
visit with us to a museum. She felt she had learned more of matters
outside her own proclivities in that one visit than all her other life
experiences. She claimed it was the only time in life she had glimpsed
glimmer of the possibility that there was interesting knowledge beyond
what her curriculum or calling of her varNa had taught her. We were not
too interested in visiting the museum she wanted to see; however,
because we had not seen it in a long time we agreed to accompany her.
Since, our dietary observances were identical we settled for a lunch
made primarily from two plants – a tuber whose vines are filled with the
toxic rotenone and a fruit which was once food of the great Xenarthrans
of the New World. All our life we have long been wonder-struck by all
manner of compounds; hence, we loudly expressed our wonder over the
structure of rotenone and the possible types of enzymes that might
participate in its biosynthesis. While it was largely talking aloud to
ourselves it did evoke a one-line response from Igul: “You have not
changed a bit in 25 years.” Then she pulled out an old notebook and a
piece of very old paper from it. Igul: “This was a note from kalashajA
that I was supposed to give you but could not for you would not talk to
me in those days.” We took the paper and examined it. It was indeed a
message in the highest saMdhyA-bhAShA which was sort of frightful due to
its almost prophetic sense – something which hit us as soon as we saw
it:  
*“kha – desert – strangulation – autumn – watching chirping birds – fish
– watching chirping birds – lakShmaNa’s abode – big physicist’s abode –
pole – slipping cat – misunderstanding veda – fight for Hindus – sponge
ball hit twice – cutting the bamboo – great battle – shukla dvitIya –
heron flies in at dusk and kills the fish – that is the way life is –
purANa-s are always prophetic.”*

Igul perhaps sensing our change in mood upon our reading the above tried
to get us hurrying and leave for the museum. We heard many stories
between then and her ultimate departure that night:  
“I still have the notebook where I had asked you to write answers for
several questions. I never thought the explanation of the Kashmir issue
was as simple as what you had written until the Kargil war\!”

“We were at home in our old city enjoying a quiet evening with the rest
of the family playing some games. Suddenly we had strangers visit us.
They were mlechCha-s from the madhyama-mlechCha-varSha. They very
politely said that they wanted to talk to us and wondered if we would
give them an appointment to sit down and talk inside our home. We were
stunned – imagine if one of us had asked for the same in his mlechCha
country – they might have pulled a gun and shot us. But we were polite
and tried to dismiss them. But they kept being persistent and before we
finally drove them away they gave us a sheaf of pamphlets. The pamphlets
in essence called upon us to give up the immoral Hindu religion with
caste, suttee, cow dung and follow the path ordained by the upaniShad
that was to be fulfilled by the kIlita-prathamonmatta. Some months
latter we had a similar house visit by a nun from South India who wanted
to talk to us about our shAstra-s and their final message being the same
as that of the shava.”

“We went to procure clothes for kandukanetrI’s marriage. We found she
had ordered peculiar clothes which we never ever wore at a marriage –
they looked like something shavasAdhaka-s wore for their marriage. We
asked what the hell they were. kandukanetri said that they were for the
post-marriage reception which would follow a ‘western dress code’. She
shocked us further by adding that the actual ceremonies will feature
‘oaths’ in Angalika bhAShA. We wondered why people whose ancestors
belong the first varNa would do such things. Our other acquaintance of
the second varNa said that they were going to get ‘blessings’ at a
marUnmatta’s Mazhar after their marriage. This was the same marUnmatta
on account of whom we had to flee our ancestral town.”

“A strange thing is happening in bhArata. It appears that the educated
Hindu strI-s are getting more and more interested in having a
non-existent type of mate who literally leaps out of an imaginary world
often informed by cinema. The average Hindu puruSha-s naturally does not
assume such rUpa-s but for some strange reason marUnmatta-s seems to
attract these strI-s intensely thus furthering their love-jihad.”

“The rich people desire lots of cheap labor for their needs – house
cleaners, cooks, guards, gardeners, car-washers, errand-runners,
tea-boys, garbage-disposers etc. But the demand for cheap labor means
unfamiliar people are brought in from distant places and settled in the
vicinity of urban sprawls. Low efficiency in law-enforcement, lack of
private weaponry, huge asset-gulfs between the laborers and their
employers has created conditions ideal for predators who come along with
genuine laborers to the settlements rising like mushrooms in the
vicinity of the urban sprawls. They engage in all manner of crimes
especially on certain roads and highways, as also by breaking into
houses. In particular marUnmatta-s from across the border and certain
northern states are the forefront of crime. The line between their daily
lives and crime is a thin one. In some areas it is quite possible
preta-sAdhaka-s from south India join in.”

“Public services need all of society to have some common stakes. Large
transient populations of uncultured youth means few have shared stakes
in investing common civic services – they simply want to use them but do
not want to put anything into them. Some use the road as a public toilet
while others brush their teeth in the balconies of their apartments and
spit right out of it. Yet others paint the town red with their
betel-leaf cud splattering every tabula rasa with tAMbUla rasa. They
clog drains and sewerage with phallic sheaths discarded after
indiscriminate fornication and after rains such might burst forth from
the gutters and strew the streets. Among these are those who call
themselves engineers – on paper they might have the same degree as what
I had earned but cannot tell π from e or cosine from sine. If this is
their attitude towards learning which is supposed to be their door to
earning then how can they learn civic sense. Ultimately being transients
they would merely quip “what goes of our father” and move on to a new
locale. Even here the marUnmatta-s are up to no good stealing water and
electricity. After all if you want to get the electricity and water
bills from nayA Pakistan would you not have go in with the army?”

“You had long back written that there is nothing superior about our
lives than that of another ape or for that matter an ant or some amoeba.
I do not exactly remember what kind of animal (\!) an amoeba is but what
ever the case I am still having a hard time understanding that. But I
must say I am more careful in dismissing it as I had done in my youth.”

“How are you so sure there is no Ishvar? Why are there all these
beautiful relationships we see:  
e^(i\*π) + 1=0  
Is it not so beautiful and soothing to see that. Do we not feel it is a
window to a perfect world when we see that. I cannot wait for my
children to grow old enough that I can teach them that relationship. See
the binomial theorem – how we get such a nice triangle with the numbers
in it having such a regular relationship. Or look at the Pythagoras
theorem does it not give you such a nice feeling as though we are in
heaven. All this must be because Ishvar is talking to us via that
language and showing us what is really beautiful.”

“I have not forgotten your statement that I might have had Mongol
ancestors somewhere in my line. I would like to know more of vaishya-s
journeying to central Asia and getting their wives from there. I never
understood this biology stuff but can we figure it out with what ever
they are doing with DNA these days?”

“Why are brAhmaN-s not doing their duty these days. Are they not
supposed to teach the rest of Hindu society. Why are they drinking
alcohol, eating beef and not helping other Hindus to learn their
religion. Why are they not telling people our dharm is not same as that
of the marUnmatta-s and shavAradhaka-s.”

“We are really of the older generation and do not understand the
youngsters in the desh today. With attitudes such as what we see do you
think India can survive? Do you think it was our generation which
actually took the wrong turn – got two rounds of UPA and fantasized
about unhinged nuts like Kejriwal. He is a blot on the vaNij. I fear for
the world my children will go into.”

● We have paraphrased but not distorted any of Igul’s narrations.
