+++
title = "The first farmers"

+++
nIchaiH khananty asurA arusrANam idaM mahat |  
tad AsrAvasya bheShajaM tad u rogam anInashat ||  
Deep down the Asura-s bury this great healer of wounds: that is the drug
for diarrhea, which verily destroyed the disease.

upajIkA ud bharanti samudrAd adhi bheShajam |  
tad AsrAvasya bheShajaM tad u rogam ashIshamat ||  
**Termites** bring the remedy from the \[underground\] water body: that
is the drug for diarrhea, which verily silenced the disease.

arusrANam idaM mahat pR^ithivyA adhy udbhR^itam |  
tad AsrAvasya bheShajaM tad u rogam anInashat || (AV-vulgate 2.3.3-5)  
This great healer of wounds has been brought out of the earth: that is
the drug for diarrhea, which verily destroyed the disease.

Such were the words of the ancient a\~Ngira R^iShi-s who composed the
atharvaveda. It has generally been taken to be some mumbo-jumbo; was it
really so?

This article is being offered in the memory of the somewhat forgotten
biologist and linguist of Hindu origin, Lekh Raj Batra. He is said to
have begun his first exploration of the mycological world to find edible
fungi to feed his family after they had to flee the marUnmatta violence
during the partition of akhaNDa-bhArata. His extensive research on fungi
and insects is central to the topic under consideration here. Our
attention was drawn to this subject many years ago in our youth when we
read a beautifully illustrated article by Batra and his wife on fungal
agriculture by ambrosia beetles – a topic in which they were pioneers.
This led us to explore Xyleborus beetles with much interest in the then
undevastated ecosystem of the karNATa country. When we were probably
aged 11 or so we wrote an account of our dissection of such a beetle,
which revealed its anatomy, and a microscopic examination of the fungus
in the bark it inhabited with our newly acquired microscope.

Humans often pride themselves over their agriculture, animal husbandry
and medicine. Indeed, this has been a key to their departure from their
closest cousins like the bonobo and the chimpanzee. However, they are
certainly not the first develop these industries. Rather they are among
the latest and probably not even the best adapted in these processes.
Hence, there might be somethings to learn from the earlier organisms
that have taken this path. Per say agriculture and animal husbandry are
rare in the biological world. In large part it is because it entails a
large investment of energy at the cost of self-reproduction while being
exposed to exploitation by others who do not invest any effort but are
the table to dine off the farmer’s efforts. These may be slackers from
the same species who contribute nothing to the farmer’s efforts. In
addition to slackers from their own species, the potential farmer is
also confronted by thieves or parasites who might feed off his crop
nullifying his effort. Moreover, the farming ground is susceptible to
what has been termed by the American ecologist Hardin as the “tragedy of
the commons”: here if there is a free-for-all access to the basic
resource used in agriculture it could result in destruction of the
resource itself thereby limiting any long-term gain from the
agricultural strategy. Thus, agriculture or animal husbandry can be
successfully established in an organism only if this investment of
effort pays off down the line as a net gain in fitness. Thus, to date we
are aware of the evolution of agriculture only in the following
organisms:  
1\) The dictyosteliid slime molds: They farm bacteria like Klebsiella or
Escherichia; perhaps this trait is more widely spread and awaits
discovery in other slime molds including the related plasmodial slime
molds (e.g. Physarum) and the more distant heterolobsean slime molds.
Here, the amoebae stop eating their preferred food bacterium just before
the bacterial supply gets completely exhausted and carry the surviving
bacteria into their fruiting bodies. These are then sowed along with the
spores and grow to provide the newly germinated amoebae and their
descendants with a supply of food bacteria. These amoebozoans have been
showing their sophistication other ways: Physarum was shown to solve
mazes and anticipate events displaying a certain intelligence inherent
in their social aggregates – having studied their G-protein signaling
systems at some depth we are not surprised at this sophistication.

2\) Marine snails like Littoraria irrorata: These farm fungi; these
snails damage marsh grass plants to facilitate fungal growth on them and
then graze on the growing fungi.

3\) Termites of the clade Macrotermitinae ( e.g. Macrotermes
natalensis): These farm fungi of the mushroom clade, like Termitomyces;
these are cultivated within chambers in their complex mounds with
elaborate internal structures. These termites need water, both for
themselves and for the cultivation of their fungus especially in the
drying summers and winters of the Indian subcontinent. They modify the
soil below their mounds and form something called the “perched water
table” that collects water percolating during rains. This provides a
large “saucer” of liquid water which the termites can use for
irrigation.

4\) Ambrosia beetles: These farm fungi like Fusarium solani and
Raffaelea. Some of their farms also interestingly contain the fungus
Cephalosporium (see below for more on this); these are cultivated in
galleries carved into the wood of dead or live trees by the beetles. At
least 11 clades of such beetles with more than 3,500 species possess
different levels of agriculture. Many of them bear their fungal crop in
special membranous pockets, mycangia, within which the fungi exist in a
yeast-like form that serves as the inoculum for a new crop. The mycangia
have evolved in the prothoracic segment (e.g. Dendroctonus frontalis) or
the mesonotal segment (e.g. Xylosandrus germanus) or the mandibular
region (e.g. Xyleborus affinis).

5\) Attine ants: Fungi; these are the leaf-cutter ants that cut up plant
material and transport them to their underground chamber to use as
compost for their fungi. The newly mated queen leaves the mother’s nest
carrying an inoculum of fungus to start a new crop. One of the fungal
crops of the attine ants is the mushroom Leucoagaricus gongylophorus
which has specialized hyphae called gongylidia which are rich in fats
and sugars.

6\) Damsel fish: rhodophyte algae (e.g. Polysiphonia or Womersleyella
cultivated by Stegastes nigricans); They might cut the surface of coral
to encourage their crop to take hold.

In terms of animal husbandry we have farmer ants which herd “flocks” of
aphids and leaf-hoppers and Homo sapiens who has many domestic animals.
The relative rareness of these suggests that it takes a lot for
agriculture or animal husbandry to be an evolutionarily stable strategy.
Studying the non-human agriculturalists reveals some striking parallels
and lessons.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-Kxt5yr_DlN8/U1QbV9BUg8I/AAAAAAAAC44/JpTVcQGuHwA/s400/farmers.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/odtcEmNT-GqF_RL7ZsE8a9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Most non-human agriculturists, which are relatively well studied, share
certain key traits that appears to be critical for overcoming the
problems relating to investment in agriculture. This is the use of
biological warfare to protect their crops:

● The slime mold Dictyostelium, in addition to packing their food
bacteria into the fruiting body, pack certain other bacteria (5-10% of
bacterial mass) that are not food (In the studied example this bacterium
is Burkholderia xenovorans). These non-food bacteria secrete molecules
that harm the non-farmer amoebae that might try to free-load off the
bacterial crop of the farmers. Thus, the non-farmers are excluded from
utilizing the crop of the farmers or finishing up all food bacteria
before they can be packed into the fruiting body. Some years ago we
discovered an RNA-cleaving toxin in Dictyostelium, Tox-EDA39C, which has
evolved from bacterial toxins. This is likely to have been acquired from
symbiotic bacteria, such as those it farms, and might be also deployed
as an additional line of defense against the freeloaders or even “weed
bacteria” that might compete with the crop.

● The termite Macrotermes natalensis cultivates Bacillus subtilis as its
bio-warfare agent. This bacterium produces the antibiotic bacillaene
which is a polyene with 2 amide linkages. This antibiotic prevents the
growth of antagonistic fungi that harm of the termite’s chosen mushroom
Termitomyces while not inhibiting the latter. Thus it could keep the
chambers free of competing fungi.

● The ambrosia beetle Dendroctonus frontalis which farms the fungus
Entomocorticium (one of LR Batra’s fungi) also keeps a strain of
Streptomyces thermosacchari in its mycangia. This actinobacterium
produces an interesting antibiotic mycangimycin which contains a
seven-conjugated double bond chain and a five-membered endoperoxide ring
linked to acetic acid. Another beetle farmer Xyleborinus saxesenii
houses the bacterium Streptomyces griseus strain XylebKG-1 that produces
a cocktail of antibiotics. These antibiotics kill the rival fungi which
harm the crop of the beetle. In this context the fungus Cephalosporium,
typically farmed as a secondary fungal crop, might also produce
antibiotics that are antagonists of competitors. In addition to fungal
“weeds”, these beetles are victims of mycokleptic beetles that drill
holes parallel to the farmer beetles and invade their galleries to raid
their crops. We wonder if some of the other bacteria found in the
mycangia, such as the Mycoplasmas and Rickettsias might be used against
such mycokleptic raiders (see below for similar use of bacteria in
inter-insect conflicts).

● The attine ants similarly deploy actinobacterial species of
Pseudonocardia, Streptomyces and Amycolatopsis against the antagonists
of their fungal crops. The ant Acromyrmex octospinosus deploys a
Streptomyces strain that produces a wide range of antibiotics, including
the polyene candicidin and antimycin that might kill some antagonistic
fungi. It appears that the attine ants might pick up new
antibiotic-producing actinobacterial strains, even as antagonistic fungi
evolve resistance to older antibiotics. Thus, ants appear to have
preceded humans in an antibiotic search program among actinobacteria. In
addition to antibiotics it is conceivable that proteinaceous toxins from
the bacteria are also deployed in these battles.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-q2blqAyzOOs/U1QbP2vocEI/AAAAAAAAC4w/NO93jqCX_DU/s400/antibiotics.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/fi741fSuJ7Xj9BnPi1ZZytMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

In conclusion, most studied non-human farmers have a strong third
party-dependent defensive strategy against parasites.

This strategy belongs to the wider set of strategies involving use of
bacteria as defensive partners that is not limited to farmers. The
digger wasps grow Streptomyces on specialized antennal glands to use
their production of antibiotics like the piericidins and streptochlorin
for prophylactic treatment of their larvae against infections during
their parasitoid cycle. The aphids use the protein toxins (including
some we characterized sometime ago) made by gammproteobacteria like
Hamitonella and Serratia symbiotica against parasitoid wasps which
attack them, while they deploy another gammproteobacterium Regiella
against pathogenic fungi which infect them. Another hemipteran the
silverleaf whitefly (Bemisia) deploys a Rickettsia against parasitoid
wasps that attack it. We recently showed that the spider latrotoxin was
derived from a bacterium like Wolbachia or Rickettsia and a subset of
the several protein toxins they produce are likely to be used as
biological weapons in inter-arthropod or arthopod-pathogen conflicts.
Indeed, such protein toxins from the alphaproteobacterium Wolbachia are
likely to be the defensive agents that aid the fruitfly Drosophila
against infection by the Drosophila C virus. The blood-sucker bugs
Rhodnius prolixus and Triatoma infestans and the sap-sucking bug
Pyrrhocoris apterus have symbiotic actinobacteria like Rhodococcus,
Corynebacterium and Coriobacterium – most researchers assume they have a
nutritional role like producing the vitamin B complex (in Rhodnius);
however, we suspect they have some additional role in defensive
strategies that are as yet unknown. [We have earlier narrated how
certain beetles use bacteria to produce deadly toxins like
pederin](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/03/17/beetles-and-men-some-glimpses-of-history-through-the-contemporary-lens/ "Beetles and men: some glimpses of history through the contemporary lens").
Outside insects, the nematode worm Heterorhabditis deploys the
bioluminescent gammaproteobacterium Photorhabdus. As the worm pierces
prey insect larvae it releases this bacterium, which then uses its
remarkable cocktail of protein toxins to kill the larvae. The larvae are
then eaten by the worm; in course of this process Photorhabdus releases
the antibiotic 3,5-dihydroxy-4-isopropyl-trans-stilbene to kill rival
bacteria which might rot the larval carcass.

Thus, the origins of medicine, bio-warfare, and crop-defense are facets
of the same same underlying strategy in these realms. Importantly, these
appear to be fairly stable strategies: the use of antibiotics by ants is
likely to back to at least tens of Myrs, while that by digger wasps is
spread across all continents and might even go back to the Mesozoic.
Hence, we have much to learn in terms of how these organisms have
managed to stay in the arms race arising from developing resistance.

Finally, a point of note is that farming and animal husbandry is
strongly linked to sociality, in particular eusociality or at least a
tendency towards it: Dictyostelium, termites, ambrosia beetles, ants,
and Homo sapiens. It is clear in the case of the slime mold, termites,
ants and Homo that the origin of (eu)sociality preceded the origin of
farming or animal husbandry. Thus, one might say that (eu)sociality
predisposes organisms for activities like farming because: 1) an
increase in relative fitness (inclusive fitness included) with respect
to non-farmers due to benefits to long-lived groups of kin that assemble
together as proposed by JE Strassmann et al.; 2) the preadaptation
arising from division of labor in (eu)social groups. 3) Once
established, farming might be stabilized in such (eu)social organisms
due to a much-maligned proposal more recently championed by EO Wilson –
group selection.

Though, (eu)sociality might have preceded farming in these organisms it
probably had a strong feedback on the social structure of the organism:
attine ants and the termites that farm are among the most highly
stratified societies, both in terms of number and morphology of the
castes. Interestingly, the attine ants have four castes (chatur-varNa\!)
in addition to the queen: minims (grow fungi and clean larvae), minors
(guards and rank-and-file soldiers), mediae (cut and transport leaves
for composting) and majors (the elite attack force and big movers).

However, in the case of ambrosia beetles, such feedback on social
structure from farming might have played a major role in the emergence
of (eu)sociality itself. This is suggested by the fact that while there
is haplo-diploidy in ambrosia beetles, the other predisposing factor for
(eu)sociality, not all haplo-diploid species are (eu)social; the farming
ones however are. This again suggests that, as championed by Wilson, it
is possible that incipient farming reinforced (eu)sociality via
group-selection-like mechanisms. Interestingly, in the ambrosia beetles
like Xyleborinus saxesenii the emergence of eusociality with farming
appears to have resulted in caste formation along developmental lines,
i.e. division of labor between larvae and adults. Here, the larvae serve
as workers that compact sawdust in balls and help the adults in digging
and extending the galleries into the wood. In contrast only adults
perform fungus cropping and only females perform the task of plugging
entrance tunnels.

In human society the emergence of farming and animal husbandry has
resulted in both a stratified society and strategies for guarding
farm/pasture land. This lead to the emergence of defense castes that
aided such human societies to dominate or overrun hunter-forager
societies. The Indo-Europeans who mastered both farming and diversified
animal husbandry proved more than an match for the pure farmers, pure
animal husbandsmen or those with less diversified animal stocks. In no
small part was this due to the emergence of a specific caste structure
in these peoples.
