+++
title = "Subhas Chandra Bose: An autobiographical reminiscence"

+++
By the time we were between the seven and eight years of age we had
acquired some elements of the history our people from our parents: We
knew of the coming of the ārya-s and the relationship of Indo-Aryan
languages to other Indo-European languages. We had some idea of the
central role this event played in the establishment of our identity as a
people and as a nation, and that the historical events behind the two
epics, which had been narrated to us by our father, happened after the
conquest of northern India by the ārya-s. We had also learned of the
existence of the mysterious IVC. In the telescoped historical narratives
received from our parents, we were also made aware of certain great
Hindu figures like candragupta the mauryan and his mentor kauṭilya,
yajña śātakarṇi, chandragupta-II vikramAditya and bhojadeva paramāra.
Then we had also been given an outline of the murder and destruction
brought upon us by Mahmud Ghaznavi, Alla-ad-Khalji, Mohammad bin
Tughlaq, Baboor, and Awrangzeb. Finally, we were told of the Hindu fight
back featuring kṛṣṇadevarāya and śivājī as the chief heroes. A timely
visit to the monuments of indraprastha and some forts in the marāṭhā
country had impressed upon us the reality of this narrative. From a
tourist guide purchased on the former occasion we embellished our
knowledge beyond the above rudiments our parents had supplied. While
allusions were made to our humiliating defeat at the hands of the
English in 1857 CE and the eventual release from them in 1947 CE, we
were not much informed about those events. The tourist guide had already
led us to realize that 1857 was a landmark event that needed to be
understood in greater detail. That indeed was the sum total of our
historical knowledge as we faced our first formal history lessons at
school via the medium of a slim textbook and an awfully boring teacher.

The said textbook comprised in its entirety, with neither an
introduction nor a conclusion, of a series of biographies of leaders
from the post-1857 CE period. It started with a brief account of the
Iranian leader Dadabhai Naoroji and ended with interminably long chapter
on cācājī, whom we learned was the collective uncle of the nation. In
the middle of the book was an equally long chapter on the “father of the
nation” interspersed between these were others like Tilak, Patel, Lala,
Aurobindo, Mewlana, and the like. For most of our school days we were in
a division of the class that primarily comprised of weak students who
had been set aside after their dismal kindergarten performance. We were
pretty happy with that for, barring a few jealous rivals, we were like
the one-eyed man in the city of the blind. The history teacher soon
realized that most of our division did not know why the English had
taken control of bhārata in the first place for these leaders to be
doing their stuff like Indian National Congress, satyāgraha, and all
that. So she decided it was not worth covering all the biographies in
the textbook for our division and skipped several arbitrarily. On the
whole we were not unhappy about this because the ways of the father and
uncle, who had been foisted upon us, were troubling to say the least.
We, being a descendant of the vengeful brāhmaṇa clan of the bhṛgu-s, who
went to great lengths to slaughter their enemies and fill up five lakes
with their blood, found this satyāgraha business very strange. After all
these barbarous Christian invaders are even denying us salt and all we
do is some daṇḍāvālā march, cloth-burning, and wheel-turning – pretty
deflating, we thought to ourselves. However, among those skipped
biographies was a character whom I learned of for the first time named
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. While it was not required for the exam, I
read his biography with some interest and felt: “Hey, this man seems
much better than those satyāgrahin-s, who get their skulls cracked open
but draw not even a drop of enemy blood in return.” We asked our parents
more about this man and they supplied us an amara-citra-kathā comic,
which only got us more excited about the man. Then we saw a Hindi
documentary on television titled āzādī kī kahānī, which while extremely
primitively made, was a surprising one in those secular years for it
began with vīra-hammīra and harihara-deva-rāya and went all the way down
to Subhas Chandra Bose. We thus learned of his saying: *“The enemy has
already drawn the sword. He must, therefore, be fought with the sword.”*
This seemed to make a lot of sense and was a refreshing contrast to the
Gandhi-Nehru stuff as it resonated so well with the ātatāyin rule which
lies in core of the sanātana dharma \[Footnote 1\]

This increased our interest in knowing more of the man and we saw more
documentaries or perhaps even a film on TV and read what ever other
information we could gather from occasional articles in newspapers.
Thus, we learned that Dadabhai Naoroji’s granddaughter, a close
confidant of Gandhi had said right within his āśrama to a mleccha
journalist:  
*“If Bose entered India at the head of an Indian army he could rally the
whole country… He is more popular than Nehru, and in certain
circumstances had a stronger appeal than Gandhi.”*  
As we kept winding our way through our educational travails, we saw our
classmates resonate with the above statement, even as many of them
hummed an Urdu marching tune: In general the sentiment was pretty
unanimous that Bose was the real man, not the father or the uncle. The
plus side of this was that unlike the previous generation we were not be
fooled by the charms of the two being thrust upon us. However, we
noticed that strangely the farther we advanced in school our textbooks
had lesser and lesser of SCB while intolerably bulking up on the stuti-s
of the faux mahātman, the cācājī and their cohorts. In the last year of
school and the last year of formal history, SCB was reduced to no more
than three to four sentences, while Herr Hitler, comrade Stalin and the
evil butcher Churchill got to fill up a whole chapter. In the
final tally Indira Gandhi probably had more more space than Mr. Bose.
In contrast, almost every year our Hindi textbook had a chapter on Bose
(though none on Gandhi or Nehru), which was nothing short of laudatory
and presented him as great hero. Similarly, we noticed that whereas the
film on Gandhi made by an Englishman was repeatedly broadcast on
television (our school even sponsored us to see it the theater due to a
local Kangress politician’s largess), and the birth/death anniversaries
of the cācājī and the mahātman were national affairs, that of SCB
generally passed in silence, or, at best, received a one line mention in
the vernacular news broadcast. This dissonance did not escape our eyes.

In addition, we had the chance to speak to our grandfather who had
overlapped in time with SCB. We heard with great interest as he narrated
how he clandestinely heard the speeches of Bose on the Japanese
broadcast using his old radio. He agreed that the speeches had an
rousing effect and that they felt for the first time that release from
the clutches of the barbarous mleccha-s was a possibility. On being
pressed further he remarked that SCB’s role in independence was
important but it was perhaps being purposely undermined by the
Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. However, on being asked if SCB should have been
our prime minister he was surprisingly unenthusiastic. To us his
objections did not seem to directly address the issue of Bose’s standing
with respect to prime-ministership. In a nutshell his three objections
were: 1) He felt the coming of Bose into India would have sparked a
civil war that would have damaged the nation worse than the partition of
1947. 2) Bose trusted the prācya-s too much. He remarked \[strangely to
us at that point\] that after the bindudhvaja-s were defeated SCB would
made a deal with the cīna-s and facilitated an invasion or a land grab
even bigger that of 1962. 3) He declared that SCB would have certainly
set up a dictatorship and he felt that would be worse than the state set
up by our bungling politicians, especially once Bose died or grew
senile. We must state that by that time we were squarely on the side of
the SCB admirers; so his objections did not bother us, and came across
as lame to us.

Some years later we were having a long conversation with ekanetra on
WW2, especially the geopolitical aspects of it. In course of that he
remarked that if a fiery vaṅga had to lead the armed movement during WW2
it should have been “bāghā” Jatin. We countered as to what was wrong
with SCB? After all we said that the Japanese warriors had declared that
if there was a man who embodied the Samurai spirit in the true sense it
was SCB. We further added that the Germans had said that they felt that
SCB had planned everything about how to run India with the same
organizational genius shown by the Germans. We concluded by stating that
SCB was after all the natural culmination of the the process initiated
by bāghā Jatin via Rash Behari Bose. This did not seem to have any
effect on ekanetra – we knew he is one who can easily hold his position
if he displayed the kind of certainty he showed on his face. So we
waited for him to offer his point. He brought to our notice several
statements of SCB \[For a more chronological discourse on SCB’s
proclivities that will be discussed below see the extensive work by śrī
[Sarvesh
Tiwari](http://bharatendu.com/2011/04/19/subhas-chandra-bose-5/)\]. One
such was his remark when the INA was to set forth to combat the
English.  
“*So long as ghāzīs are filled with the zeal of the Dīn, the sword of
Hindustan will reach the takht of London.*” (apparently a verse by the
last Mogol emperor during the war of 1857)  
Then ekanetra turned to us and asked: “Do you want someone like that to
be at the head of the country?”  
Suddenly, it seemed that this showed a statement by SCB in new light:  
“*It was misnomer to talk of Muslim rule when describing the political
order in India prior to the advent of the British … as the
administration was run by Hindus and Muslims together.*” He was
apparently referring to his kāyastha ancestors who faithfully served
Mohammedan tyrants in vaṅga.

However, despite that glimmer of doubt we were not to change our opinion
easily. We shot back to ekanetra pointing out that even Savarkar had
said similar things in his work on 1857, and so had svamin Vivekananda,
the inspiration behind bāghā Jatin. We added that after all SCB had said
referring to Tilak that “*Mandalay is a place of pilgrimage sanctified
by one of India’s greatest men by continuous residence for a period of
six years.*” Thus, we should see him as a successor to the great Tilak,
which certainly the wheel-turning mahātman and cācā were not? ekanetra
responded by stating that irrespective of the various statements
Savarkar or svamin Vivekananda might have made, their ultimate
commitment to the Hindu cause was never in doubt. But he felt the same
can never be said of the vaṅga-s Chittaranjan Das or SCB and suggested
that we should go through the “Gandhi papers” and certain older
newspaper articles with statements by Subbier Appadurai Ayer, the
propaganda minister of the Azad Hind government. SAA had alluded to an
incident, which ekanetra later pointed to us: The rich vaiśya-s from the
dramiḻa country were major helpers of the Azad Hind government and army.
When the Japanese took SCB to Singapore many of them came forward to
make huge donations of personal wealth for the liberation of bhārata.
These vaṇij-s had installed a spear of kumāra in Singapore on the way to
their business centers in Malaysia and subsequently built a substantial
temple at that site known as the daṇḍāyudhapāṇi temple (the rod-wielding
kumāra). As big donors to SCB’s venture the dramiḻa śreṣṭin-s wanted him
to visit the temple and receive the blessings from a rite specially
performed for him. However, they apparently refused to allow his
Mohammedan acolytes into the temple; so SCB refused to go to the temple.
It is claimed that they finally acceded and allowed them to join SCB to
the temple. When he reached the temple he was greeted by a large throng
of INA volunteers. SCB did not want to enter the garbhāgṛha but the
arcaka pushed him and his Mohammedan friends in and put tilaka-s on
their foreheads. As soon as they came out of the temple premises SCB
made it a point to rub off the tilaka \[Footnote 2\].

Thereafter ekanetra opened our eyes for the first time regarding the
role of SCB in suppressing “vande mātaram” of fellow vaṅga Vankimchandra
for Iqbal’s “sāre jahān se accha hindustān hamārā”. Finally, he turned
to what he called the Gandhi papers i.e., the writings of MKG. The
vyuptakeśa wheel-turner had said: “*Though the INA failed in their
immediate objective, they have a lot to their credit of which they might
well be proud. The greatest among these was to gather together, under
one banner, men from all religions and races of India, and infuse into
them the spirit of solidarity and oneness to the utter exclusion of all
communal and parochial sentiment.*”

It then hit us that the Gandhian fantasies and those of SCB were not
very different after all. This combined with his yearning for Germanic
Führer-hood could have made him a dictator \[today we would say an even
more monstrous manifestation of Mamata Banerjee\] who could have
facilitated an Islamic takeover of the whole of bhārata. From then on
our fascination about SCB waned and we no longer actively sought to know
more about him or his venture. More recently śrī Sarvesh Tiwari wrote a
detailed analysis on this topic (see above for link): this drove the
proverbial nail into the coffin for us – it only got worse from where
ekanetra had led us to – SCB was a rather irredeemable case. Or as ST
put it more recently in response to ekanetra: “From what you guys are
saying his racy Urdu tune was perhaps the only good thing about him”.
All of this said, we cannot still deny his contribution to the freedom
movement, however “misguided a patriot” he might have ironically been.
Thus, he becomes yet another exhibit in the showcase of history
illustrating the Hindu fuzziness in response to the Mohammedan’s
single-minded pursuit.

So should the pendulum swing all the way to the other extreme ? More
precisely where should we place SCB in the whole scheme of things that
matter to the Hindus?  
To get a better understanding of this we should go back some time in
history. The Indians, like their Iranian and Greek cousins had a
tradition of mercenary warriors or bhṛtaka senya-s or āyudha-jīvin-s.
That this was an ancient tradition is suggested the legend of the loan
of such mercenaries by the yadu chief kṛṣṇa devakīputra to the king
duryodhana. Similarly we know of Greek mercenaries fighting on the side
of the Iranians against their brethren in the Greco-Iranian showdown.
Indeed, contrary to certain modern Western characterizations of the
Greco-Iranian conflict as a west versus east or democracy versus
barbarism conflict, there were numerous Greeks fighting till the end on
the Iranian side against the Greek alliance. Likewise Iranian
mercenaries fought on the side of the Greeks and Macedonians until at
least until the “national holy war” organized by the Spitamenes, the
descendant of Zaratushtra against the Macedonians. Similarly, Indians
served as mercenaries in Iranian and Greek armies – something believed
to have gone all the way back to the Illiadic war. We also have good
evidence for both Greek and Iranian mercenaries in India all the way to
the Tamil country where the kadaṃba-s had Iranian mercenaries assisting
them against the pallava-s. Thus, this feature could have well been an
old Indo-European trait. This feature of Hindu military organization
proved deleterious to them when they clashed with the Abrahamisms: The
Mogols first and the Western Europeans thereafter learned quickly to tap
into this resource to detriment of the Hindus. Among the latter, the
French leaders Marquis Dupleix and Monsieur Debussy managed to mobilize
it first but came against the Hindu nationalist force of the marāṭhā-s,
which successfully neutralized this attempt and also managed to divert
part of the mercenary force to their own side. However, the failure of
their zero-sum game with the English and the disastrous defeat at
Panipat, which destroyed many of the regular marāṭhā divisions, allowed
this resource to be exploited by the English. This was indeed the
biggest asset which made England a superpower. It was this Indian
mercenary force by which they conquered India in the first place. It was
with this force that they managed to break the mighty Ch’ing empire of
the Manchus. Most importantly it was this force that helped the English
decisively settle the sibling rivalry with their German cousins by
precipitating the two world wars to bring the latter down. Even today
the English army has an elite force of Gorkha mercenaries from Nepal.

But this was not entirely without glitches of the English: In 1857 CE
the marāṭhā leadership had made one last attempt to create a national
confederation including not just themselves but various Hindu groups
from the rājpūt-s to the Assamese, and as a sore thumb, the Mohammedan
Jihadists. This lured back a significant fraction of the mercenaries to
the nationalist cause. However, its eventual failure meant that by
definition the mercenaries would return to the English fold. The INA of
SCB was in large part a comparable attempt, although his personal
charisma perhaps played nearly as big a role as the pure nationalist
instinct of the fighters. In general both the English and the Indians
saw this attempt as a parallel of 1857 CE. In fact, Savarkar’s larger
plan can be interpreted similarly. He suggested that Hindus enlist in
large numbers on the side of the English for WW2. Many Indians saw this
contra-national unlike SCB’s attempt – indeed leading to Savarkar’s
standing being damaged to an extent. However, his thinking was that by
this act Indians, in particular Hindus, would be sufficiently armed and
militarily trained to break the English stranglehold after WW2, now
fighting or threatening to do so for a purely nationalist cause. He also
correctly reasoned that this would give them sufficient military
training and man-power to return to the unfinished issue of their older
enemy, the Jaish al-Islam. 1857 was a failure but it was not all in
vain. At an enormous human cost the Indians managed to slow down the
direct imposition of Christianity upon them. Likewise, the attempt of
Bose while a failure was not all wasted – it was indeed the trigger of
the long needed event of the Indian mercenary force turning its loyalty
away from the purchaser (the English) to the national cause. Until this
event happened the Indian nation could never hope to free itself from
the mleccha clutches, regardless of the wheels they turned or the
satyāgraha-s they staged. Thus, we see SCB not as the liberator but as
a catalyst that triggered a shift in the loyalties of the most important
English asset. This, combined with the battering the English had taken
at the hands of the Germans and Japanese, along with the lack of
forthcoming help for their colonial battles from their American cousins
finally forced them to leave.

Sadly, what we learned later in our life about SCB showed that his
venture had the same deep-rooted ideological flaws as 1857 CE.This
becomes important in distinguishing between SCB as the person and SCB as
the player in a larger movement. First, a lot of individuals were
clearly attracted towards his personal charisma because it was
repeatedly mentioned by many of his admirers. Thus, SCB is illustrative
of the widespread Indian tendency to fall for a charismatic figure
without bothering much about what they really have to offer. Today the
most common manifestation of this is the pernicious problem of bābāism.
Second a lot of Indians were clearly frustrated with the peace-mongering
of MKG. They wanted to hit back at the English for the genocide being
committed against them \[Footnote 3\]. SCB presented the only major hope
in this regard drawing many Indians towards him. But when one looks at
what he has to offer, at a deeper ideological level it is not very
different from what MKG wanted. Both, like a whole lineage of leaders
starting from 1857, thought that the Hindus and the Musalmans could bury
the old hatchets and team up to fight with the English. By clinging to
this canard, they utterly missed the fundamental consequences regarding
the principle of the Abrahamistic Distinction (vide Jan Assmann). On
account of this, like modern Hindus, despite the Mohammedan clearly
making the point, they continued to insist that Hindu-Moslem unity was
not just a possibility but the real way forward for India as a nation.
Among the early generation of leaders, we would say that the great
Lal-Bal-Pal trio was among the few who had clarity on this issue.
Others, like Savarkar and Aurobindo learned after a few experiences that
their earlier hopes for a Hindu-Moslem alliance were unlikely to ever
bear any fruit. SCB like his mentor Chittaranjan Das went to the other
extreme. They believed that Hindus should not just conciliate the
Moslems but make major concessions for them. This was indeed done in the
political career of CRD providing fertilizer for the seeds of Moslem
belligerence in the modern vaṅga country, which today threatens to
culminate in a second partition under the auspices of TMC politicians
including Bose’s clansmen. SCB sincerely felt that India can only
survive as a Hindu-Moslem joint venture: “*India has first to save
herself and she can save herself only if the Hindus and Muslims put
forward a joint demand for a provisional national government to whom all
powers should be immediately transferred.*” Thus, what he was voicing
was exactly what today goes under the garb of secularism in India. But
secularism is not what our true heroes like chatrapati śivājī wanted:
they were clear that the two Abrahamisms had to be swept out of
jaṃbudvīpa.

In conclusion a SCB might have been charismatic and also perhaps a man
of great plans as the Germans report. However, a charismatic leader can
ultimately make the difference only if he also is able to produce or
align with a robust ideology compatible with his nation, as it happened,
most dramatically, in the case of Chingiz Khan or earlier in time in our
history in the case of janamejaya pārikṣita or to a extant in the case
of the Germans with Otto von Bismarck. Thus, while SCB, unlike the
wheel-turner or the uncle, might have played an important role in the
movement towards independence he cannot serve as a role model for
national leadership on grounds of his flaky ideology. As for his
organizational skills, there might be a lesson or two there, but others
might question if much credit should go to SCB. In particular, in the
final phase of his activities the yeoman services of Rashbehari Bose and
Ayyapan Nayyar in leveraging their Japanese networks should not be
denied. Moreover, his military command of the INA does not reveal any
signs of great brilliance, especially when compared to the gold
standards of Ho Chi Minh or Vo Nguyen Giap.

Finally, this brings us to an issue that greatly fascinated our
classmates and acquaintances and still stirs the Hindus even today – the
end of SCB. Did he really die from burns following the plane crash as
the official version goes, or was he captured by the Soviets and
imprisoned/killed by them or did something else happen? We do not
profess to have any special understanding of this matter. Given what we
learned first from our grandfather, it was not at all surprising that
the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty chose to keep the information regarding his
fate under the wraps. Indeed, it almost looked like a cover up with
willful misinformation on their part. The Nehru-Gandhi rulers, starting
with the uncle lacked the charisma of Bose and he was certainly a grave
threat to them if alive. So one can see a motive there. But even the
current BJP government chose to keep key SCB papers under the wraps.
Some pointed to the impending trip by the Russian ruler Putin,
suggesting that the Indian government did not wish to sour the
relationship with the Rus on whom we depend heavily for military
hardware. We wondered if after all the reason might be different: There
was something really unpalatable about SCB that the papers might have
revealed, something which would cast him in particularly bad light.
Simultaneously, this information might have also cast the 1st king of
the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty in bad light. Sounds outlandish, but then…

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1  
ātatāyinam āyāntaṃ hanyād evāvicārayan ।  
hananād eva nistāro narakāt tasya duṣkṛte ॥

When an assailant approaches one should kill him without a second
thought;  
it is by this act of killing one gets release from hell for an evil
deed.

Footnote 2: This incident is also given in detail by Sugata Bose, the
Trinamool Congress partisan in his biography of SCB, his great uncle.
His political position can be summed up by his recent aphorism
“*Communalism is a bigger threat than Marxism.*” He further elaborated
that: “*It is the duty of the incumbent government to address historical
injustices and make sure Muslims get a fair shot at jobs and bank loans.
It’s true that the TMC has also provided honorariums to Imams and
muezzins, but these measures are far less important than the need to
create a level playing field. When I was the chair of the Presidency
mentor Group I found that out of 143 teachers only 2 were Muslims*.”

Footnote 3: The genocide of Hindus by the English is a topic that hardly
receives any attention as the Anglosphere controls the discourse. Hence,
while we routinely hear of the genocide by the Germans or occasionally
even those by the Stalinist Soviets, we are usually never informed of
the genocides by the Anglosphere.
