+++
title = "Some vignettes on the provenance of the Mogolxa0tyrants"

+++
Published first in a slightly modified form at
[IndiaFacts](http://www.indiafacts.co.in/origins-moghul-tyrants-india/#.VEcZzfnF_bw)

In the autumn of 1404 CE Timur-i lenk, after having spread the terror of
Islam all over Asia for more than three decades, was poised to launch
the final campaign of his life – the invasion of the Ming empire of
China. He felt the subjugation of the infidels of China would be
crowning act for his deeds of conquest, which had already turned many of
the historical cities of the Asia – Delhi, Ispahan, Baghdad, Damascus,
and Sivas among others – into charnel houses. Wherever he went, he kept
true to the dictum of Islam being “bloody within and without” \[to
paraphrase Samuel Huntington\]. But the Kaffirs in particular bore the
brunt of his brutality, from Delhi, where nearly one lakh Hindus were
slain, to Sivas, where thousands of Armenians were at once buried alive.
In preparation for the grand march on Ming China, to regale his troops
at Samarqand, he relaxed the strictures of society and let his men lapse
into two months of unbridled hedonism – as a commentator put it they
“brandished not the lances of war but plied the lances of love which
were bent by embraces”. Keeping with this, Timur himself, despite having
reached the age of 70, made the young Jawhar Agha the latest addition to
his harem. The exploits, fueled by women captured from much of Asia,
were accompanied by intemperate eating and binge drinking. Not
surprisingly, Timur saw his hitherto vigorous frame being greatly
weakened by the excesses around the time the celebrations were winding
down. Yet, resolute on the conquest of China, which he saw as the last
eastern frontier remaining to be brought under Islam, he pressed on with
the campaign after calling the festivities to a close.

However, his astrologers gave dire predictions: They pointed out that
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were set to move into Aquarius and that it
prognosticated something disastrous. His veterans knew that when they
stood near Delhi, the astrologers had similarly said that a disaster
awaited him. But then he had merely opened the Qoran and found a verse
that he interpreted as prophesying his victory. He had thundered then:
“*Neither good nor bad luck depends on the stars. I trust Allah, who
has never yet abandoned me. What does it matter if the planets are in
this or that constellation?*” Now again, Timur in his characteristic
fashion brushed the astrologers aside. He was confident that the
preparations he had made would not let him down on his march to Beijing
– for every soldier he had provided two cows and ten goats that were
to provide milk for the march and meat if the need arose. He had also
assembled vast herds of female camels to supply the army with additional
milk through the march. Thus, braving a winter more severe than any in
the memory of his men, he pressed on. They had only reached as far as
Otrar (modern Farab in Kazakhstan) when heavy snowfall prevented their
advance. As they were waiting, the rigors of the winter, the unresolved
illness, and age finally caught up with the tyrant. Drinking and poor
diet aggravated his condition. He summoned Mewlana Fadl, whom his
entourage thought to be the greatest doctor in the world, to treat him.
However, with his drugs failing, Fadl claimed that putting ice on his
patient’s chest would help him out. Rather, this made Timur get worse
and soon he declared that he was seeing the promised houris calling him
and that angel Israel was coming to take him to Allah. Thus, on 18
February 1405 CE Timur died.

Before his invasion of India Timur was vacillating between targeting
India and China. At the urging of his son, grandson and Amirs he decided
to go first against India for they felt this would bring him both
greater glory as a Ghazi by slaying infidels and also greater riches.
His death put an end to all Timurid ambitions in China, but only spurred
greater interest in India in his successors. The geopolitical
consequence of this turn of events on the ancient continental Asian
civilizational powers, is not to be ignored. The capital of India was
devastated by Timur’s invasion. At that point the Delhi Sultanate was on
the decline and it was only a matter of time before the resurgent Hindu
forces took back most of the territory they had lost to the former.
However, Timur’s invasion savaged the already beleaguered Hindu
population so greatly that it nearly took a century for it to recover.
Moreover,the heavy losses inflicted by Timur (e.g. in the battle for the
defense of the holy sites on the Ganga) paved the way for his
successors, like Baboor, to establish a regime that reinforced horrors
of Islam on India even more disastrously than the Sultanate. In
contrast, China having escaped Timur’s invasion was able to prosper
unhindered for a while under the Han nationalist Ming empire. The
effects are seen even today: India is plagued by the existential threat
arising from the civilizational clash with Islam within and without its
current boundaries. India has lost much of its territory to the Islamic
states that surround it and hardly any vestiges of Hindu civilization
remain in these regions. China in contrast escaped any major imposition
of Islam on its population and has only expanded its territorial reach
\[Footnote 1\].

**◊◊◊◊◊◊◊**

Timur had appointed his grandson Pir Mohammed, who was keeping a watch
on his Indian conquests, as his successor, and instructed his family and
followers to be faithful to him. Before Pir Mohammed could reach
Samarqand, his other grandson Khalil Sultan, who was relatively close by
in Tashkent, seized power. Timur’s men had quickly embalmed his body
with oils and perfumes and Khalil Sultan had it brought to Samarqand
(modern Uzbekistan) where it was interred in a new iron coffin he had
prepared for the purpose. There he was buried at the feet of Shaikh
Baraka, an Arab from Mecca or Medina, who claimed descent from the
founder of Mohammedanism. This Shaikh had been a long-standing supporter
of Timur inspiring his men to Jihad by reciting Qoranic verses before
battle and supposedly performing magic on Timur’s behalf. He believed
that the Shaikh would also aid him at the time of the Qayamat; hence, he
desired to be buried at this feet. Subsequently, yet another grandson of
Timur, Ulugh Beg, who for long was the governor of Samarqand, obtained a
gigantic slab of nephrite (green jade) from Mongolia and embellished
Timur’s coffin. Ulugh Beg had inscriptions carved on it, one of which
states that the huge nephrite stone had been originally found by Du’a
Soqor the legendary one-eyed ancestor of the Chingizid Mongols and used
by him as his throne. Thus, Timur’s corpse remained interred, barring
the irruption of yet another Mohammedan tyrant Nadir Shah, who in an
attempt to appropriate the huge nephrite slab for himself only ended up
breaking it. This was until 1941 CE, when a team led by the famous
Soviet anthropologist Mikhail Gerasimov was sanctioned by Stalin to go
to Samarqand and dig up the graves of the Timurids. They did so in the
following order:  
1\) Ulugh Beg’s sons; 2) the Timur’s favorite grandson Mohammed Sultan;
3) the two sons of Timur – Miran Shah and Shahrukh; 4) Ulugh Beg,
Timur’s grandson via Shahrukh; 5) Finally Timur himself.

A combination of rumors spread by the local Mewlanas opposing the
exhuming of the skeletons, and Soviet misinformation and sensationalism
led to an oft repeated false claim that Gerasimov found an inscription
on the inner casing of the coffin that read: “*Whoever disturbs my tomb,
shall unleash an invader more terrible than I*”. This appears to have
been inspired by the fact that within the next two days the Russians
learned that they were facing the German Blitzkrieg ordered by Adolf
Hitler. Stalin eventually had the remains of Timur and some of his
clansmen returned to Samarqand and buried as per Islamic injunctions.
But this was not before Gerasimov had made detailed reconstructions of
their physique and appearance. Interestingly, within a month of the
re-interring of the skeletons the Russians crushed the Germans at the
battle of Stalingrad.

Other than Timur some of his successors who were exhumed by Gerasimov’s
team were major players in Timurid empire both during and after Timur’s
life:

His son Miran Shah was the direct ancestor of the Mogol tyrants of
India, with Baboor being the 4th in line of descent from him. He
suffered from bouts of insanity after breaking his skull on falling from
his horse. As a consequence he would pull down palaces and other
buildings at a whim and stabbed his wife, a descendant of Chingiz Khan.

Timur’s other son, Shahrukh also buried in this complex, was his
youngest. He eventually defeated his nephew Khalil Sultan to seize power
as the supreme ruler of Timurid empire. He placed his own son Ulugh Beg
at Samarqand and moved the capital to Herat, where he ruled for the rest
of his of reign of nearly 38 years. As Hafiz-i Abru mentions he strictly
upheld the Sharia’t like his father and offered subsidies and support to
various Shaikhs.

Timur’s grandson, Ulugh Beg, unlike his father, is described by the
Islamic chroniclers as not being a proper observer of Islamic ways and
prone to heretical tendencies. He was an extraordinarily intelligent man
and a noted scientist who is well known for his astronomical treatise,
the zīj-i jadīd-i güregen. As an illustration of his intelligence we are
told this incident by a court astronomer: While he was taking a ride on
his horse he was asked as to where the Sun was at a certain time on a
certain day several years ago. Continuing to ride he quickly produced
the solar position correct to minutes of an arc via mental calculation.
Whereas under Timur, as Hafiz-i Abru said “none dared to study heretical
philosophy or logic”, Ulugh Beg became deeply interested in Plato and
held the view that science and geometrical reasoning transcended
theology. Moreover, in his court he reverted to the old Mongol ways,
letting men and women to sit together and sing. He also broke other
strictures by having paintings made of human subjects, installing images
of animals as decorative motifs for his constructions and completely
disregarding Islamic finance.

The Shaikhs of the Naqshbandi Sufi silsilā filled with the indignation
of Islamic zeal severely condemned these ways of Ulugh Beg. Shaikh
‘Ashiq, who is described by Islamic authorities as a second Moses, is
said to have to burst into Ulugh Beg’s court on the steppe of Kāni-gil
even as men and women were seated together and consuming alcoholic
beverages. He then directly reprimanded Ulugh Beg: “You have destroyed
the faith of Muhammad and have introduced the customs of the \[Mongol\]
infidels”. Ulugh Beg was least bothered by this out burst and responded:
“*You have won fame through your descent from Sayyids and your knowledge
of Islamic theology, and have attained old age. Apparently you also wish
become a shahīd and therefore utter rude words, but I shall not grant
you your wish.*” Thus, driving the Sufi away he continued with his
assembly. The work on Sufi activity in central Asia, the Rashaḥatu
‘ayni-ḥayat has many incidents of Shaikhs clashing with Ulugh Beg for
his violations of Islamic precepts. As though in retaliation he is even
said to have once sent a Mongol to give the Arab Shaikhs a thrashing
with a stick. However, Ulugh Beg was popular with his people because he
lowered the taxes considerably, gave the poor complete exemptions, and
improved finances by setting up compound interest schemes to raise
revenue by investing his own assets contrary to Islamic-banking (i.e.
following the old Tamgha system of Chingiz Khan). However, the
opposition from the Sufis and Ulema came to bite him eventually when his
own son in a plot to seize power had him sentenced to death by the
Sharia court and promptly beheaded. After his death his astronomical
observatory was demolished along with his heretical art and his
intellectual endeavors based on Greek ideas were condemned severely by
the Sufi Khwājah Ahrār \[Footnote 2\] as being contrary to the right
path. Thus, Ulugh Beg’s case illustrates that the Sufis were actually a
potent force in central Asia in reinforcing Islam.

Mohammed Sultan the other grandson of Timur via his son of Jehangir was
his favorite. He, like his grandfather was a vigorous in his pursuit of
the Jihad. In particular, he is recorded as pointing the importance of a
Jihad on India to his grandfather as they were deliberating on whether
to invade China or India first. He is recorded as saying: “*Now, since
the inhabitants \[of India\] are chiefly polytheists and infidels, also
worshipers of idols and the Sun, it is apposite, according to the
mandate of Allah and his prophet Mohammed for us to conquer them*
(Tuzk-i-Timuri )”. Timur initially wanted Mohammed Sultan to succeed
him; however, he died from an infection of his wounds acquired during
the campaign against the Ottomans in Anatolia in 1403 CE.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

In terms of their identity, the Mogol tyrants of India made it a point
to root their provenance to their Mongol past. The biographers closer to
Timur’s age gave his line of descent thus:  
Amir Tīmūr ibn Taraghāi Bahādur ibn Erkul Bahādur ibn Angīz Bahādur ibn
Alhīl Noyān ibn Qārāchār Noyān.  
This lineage is confirmed by the inscription in the Bibi Khanum jāmi
masjid built by Timur to celebrate his invasion of India, which reads:  
“*The great sultan, pillar of the state and Islam, Amir Tīmūr güregen
ibn Taraghāi ibn Burgul ibn Aylangīr ibn Ichīl ibn al-Amir Qārāchār
Noyān, may Allah preserve his reign, was helped (by heavenly favor) to
complete this jāmi masjid in the year 806 \[1403–4CE\]*”  
Thus, his origins are traced to Qārāchār Noyān, a high-ranked Mongol
general in the army of Chingiz Khan who belonged to the Barlas clan of
Mongols. The origin of the Mogol tyrants from this clan still leaves its
footprints in Greater India in the form of the clan name Barlas being
considered a respectable one in the Islamic hellhole of Pakistan.
However, the Timurids derived their real prestige from their link to the
illustrious Chingiz Khan via marriage. From the apologia and chronicles
closer to the life of Timur we know that he saw a tremendous rise in his
status when he added a Chingizid princess of the Chagadaid lineage to
his harem. Hence, his primary title is güregen meaning son-in-law in
Mongolian, i.e. son-in-law of Chingiz Khan’s clan. Keeping with this the
Mogol tyrants of India themselves referred to their dynasty as silsilā-i
güregen or the dynasty of the son-in-laws of the Chingizid lineage of
the Chagadaids. The link to the Chagadaids was prominently advertised by
the Mogols; we even have the Hindi poet bhūṣaṇa tripāṭhī describe the
Hindu hero śivājī as destroying the house of Chagadai while referring to
his defeat of the Mogols.

As zealous Mohammedans, the Timurids faced a deep contradiction in this
link because Chingiz Khan was a heathen Mongol, whose exploits along
with those of his successors had come closest to eradicating
Mohammedanism. Thus, they generally avoided the word Mogol itself as it
was taken as referring to the still heathen Mongols who had not accepted
Mohammedanism. But in central Asia the hold of Chingiz Khan could not be
easily shaken. So Timur and his successors sought to create a more
“Islamic” link to the Chingizid clan. The origin-legend of the heathen
Chingizids has the narrative of their famed ancestress Alan-qoa bearing
sons without a visible father. This is explained in the Secret History
of the Mongols by invoking the heathen Turco-Mongol totemic figure
coming via the beams of light into the tent and impregnating Alan-qoa.
Timur and his successors invented the legend that the light was not the
heathen Turco-Mongol figure but in reality the grandson of Mohammed via
his son-in-law Ali. This way Mohammed’s grandson is portrayed as siring
the Mongol Khan Tumananay, whom they saw as the common ancestor of both
Timur and Chingiz Khan. Thus, they tried to create a Mohammedan
genealogy going back to Mohammed and at the same time claimed the
ancestry of the Chingizid lineage for themselves. This was the
self-image the Timurids perpetuated: the tyrant Akbar even commissioned
an illustrated volume of the epic of Chingiz Khan, wherein he reinforced
this genealogy and had the figure of the great Khan depicted after his
own image \[Footnote 3\].

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

The deracinated first prime minister of the Indian republic, Jawaharlal
Nehru saw the invasion of the Mogols as a net positive for India: He
wrote: “*A foreign conquest, with all its evils, has one advantage: it
widens the mental horizon of the people and compels them to look out of
their shells. They realize that the world is a much bigger and more
variegated place than they had imagined… The Mughals, who were far more
cultured and advanced in ways of living than the Afghans, brought
changes to India… Babar is an attractive person, a typical Renaissance
prince, bold and adventurous, fond of art and literature and good
living.*” Following his footsteps the secularist eminent historians
\[vide Arun Shourie\] insisted on portraying the Mogols as an integral,
or even defining, element of the Indian historical consciousness.

This image created by the secularist historians ran contrary to the
clear anchoring of the Timurid identity in their Islamic and Central
Asian legacy. Moreover, the Timurids themselves held a very different
but consistent views in regard to India going back to Timur’s times. The
Tuzk-i-Timuri records the Amirs in Timur’s entourage as stating: “*By
the favor of Allah we may conquer India, but if we establish ourselves
permanently therein, our race will degenerate, and our children will
become like the natives of those regions, and in a few generations their
strength and valor will diminish.*” Thus, it would seem that they
despised the idea of settling in India as they feared losing the martial
ardor of the steppe warrior. However, Timur pointed out the real
objective behind their need to invade India: “*My object in the invasion
of Hindustan is to lead an expedition against the infidels that,
according to the law of Mohammed (upon whom and his family be the
blessing and peace of Allah\!), we may convert the people of that
country to the true faith and purify the land itself from infidelity and
polytheism, and that we may overthrow their temples and idols and become
conquerors and crusaders before Allah.*” Hence, the Timurids from the
inception did not see themselves as part of the Indian system but as
explicitly as an expeditionary power whose mission was to forcibly
impose Mohammedanism on the Hindus of India \[Footnote 4\]. Indeed, the
Timurid writers repeatedly used the terms India and Indians as a
metaphor for dark, black, or the night \[Footnote 5\]. These attitudes
are again exemplified by Timur’s descendant Baboor, the founder of the
Mogol state in India; he writes in his memoir:  
“*Hindustan is a place of little elegance. The people of Hindustan have
no beauty; they have no convivial society, no social intercourse, no
character or genius, no urbanity, no nobility or chivalry. In the
skilled arts and crafts there is no regularity, proportionality,
straightness or rectangularity. There are no good horses, there are no
good dogs, no grapes, muskmelons or first-rate fruits, no ice or cold
water, no good bread or cooked food in the bāzārs, no hammāms, no
madrasahs, no candles, no torches, or candlesticks.*” Baboor was not
alone in expression of such attitudes towards India. His senior Beg
Khwājah Kalān wrote that everything in Hindustan is contrary to sense.
However, Baboor betrays his real intentions for invading India by
adding: “*That which is appealing about Hindustan is that it is a large
vilāyat \[land/country\] with a huge amount of gold and silver.*” He
also indicates his intentions are not far from Timur’s original
intentions for the invasion of India as he poetically remarks:  
“*For Islam’s sake I became a wanderer;  
I battled Kāffars and Hindus.  
I determined to become shahīd;  
Thank Allah I became a Ghāzi\!*”

Notably, in these attitudes of the Timurids are rather similar to those
of the British conquerors of India – many of them expressed the same
hate (e.g. succinctly conveyed by the British prime minister Winston
Churchill ) while at the same time desiring the wealth of India. This
commonality in expression with respect to the attitudes towards Hindus
and India, spanning a whole millennium, by observers professing both the
second and third Abrahamistic cults, might contrasted with those of
other heathens from Greece, China, Tibet, and Mongolia. This ultimately
points to the Abrahamistic foundation for Mohammedan and European
attitudes towards India.

The translations of the the original sources used in this article might
be found in Footnote 6.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Though the Moslem populations in China were much smaller
compared to the situation in India they did revolt and wage Jihad on
several occasions. However, their numerical inferiority to the Han,
combined with the great aggression of the Han and their Manchu overlords
during the Qing period prevented them from ever damaging Chinese
civilization. Consequently, China has not just retained the Han
character of its civilization but has also expanded its territories.

Footnote 2: Khwājah Ahrār was a figure greatly respected by Baboor and
the Mogol tyrants of India. Baboor invokes the Mohammedan piety of this
Sufi for inspiration as he felt nervous about the upcoming encounter
with mahārāṇā saṃgā

Footnote 3: In a sense, this is not very different from his desire to
depict rāmacandra āikṣvākava after his own image in the illustrated
version of the Hindu epic that he had prepared for him).

Footnote 4: One may compare this with the parallel parallel attitudes of
modern expeditionary powers, namely the USA and the post-colonial UK
whose primary objective for an expedition is often presented as
“bringing democracy” even as Timur sought to bring Mohammedanism.

Footnote 5: One may look up Annemarie Schimmel’s article written from a
largely pro-Islamic perspective, “Turk and Hindu: A Poetical Image and
its Application to Historical Fact,” in “Islam and Cultural Change in
the Middle Ages” pg 107-26.

Footnote 6: The direct citations are provided from the following
sources; in certain cases the form of the word in Arabic, Persian or
Chagadai Turki is retained for better effect.  
Chronicles pertaining to Timur:  
● Tamerlane: Sword of Islam, Conqueror of the World by Justin Marozzi  
● The Bibi Khanum mosque in Samarqand: Its Mongol and Timurid
architecture by Elena Paskaleva; The Silk Road 10 (2012): 81–98  
● Epigrafika Vostoka, A critical review by Oleg Grabar in Islamic Visual
Culture, 1100-1800, Volume 2 (Translations of Timurid tomb
inscriptions).  
● The rise and the rule of Tamerlane by B.F. Manz  
● Timur the great Amir by Ahmed Ibn Arabshah translated from the Arabic
by J. H. Sanders  
● Tuzk-i Timuri translated from Persian version by H. M. Elliot, edited
by J. Dowson  
● The Legendary Biographies of Tamerlane by Ron Sela

Pertaining to Ulugh Beg:  
● Four studies on the History of Central Asia; Volume II Ulugh-beg by
V.V. Barthold, translated from the Russian by V. and T. Minorsky

Pertaining to Baboor:  
● Eight paradises: Bābur and the Culture of Empire in Central Asia,
Afghanistan and India (1483-1530) by Stephen F. Dale (Translations from
Baboornama from Chagadai Turki)  
● The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor translated by W.M.
Thackston, Jr. from Chagadai Turki

Others:  
● I would like to thank śrī sarveśa tivārī for providing the verse of
poet bhūṣaṇa tripāṭhī  
● The Discovery of India by Jawaharlal Nehru
