+++
title = "The alien seeks toxa0belong"

+++
barbarin was born in an indigent brAhmaNa household. They lived just
beyond a sprawling slum in an area where the Mogols had formerly camped
during their final struggle with the mahArATTa-s for that city. In his
youth he had been struck by a gaja, as though the wrath of the awful
vinAyaka had come upon him. He was taken by some onlookers and placed in
the local government hospital, where people used to say that the
destitute normally went there to contribute to the supply chain of
corpses for the aspiring physicians in their student years. Perhaps,
vinAyaka-s were not so ill-disposed to him – he somehow survived on the
care given to him by a neophyte who had just begun her medical
internship. The damage to his skull notwithstanding, barbarin exhibited
an atavistic manifestation of his brahminical past – as he grew up
became a master of both secular lore and the shruti – the star of his
otherwise unremarkable family, which at best produced methane dwarfs
among a multitude of non-luminous planets. As time went by he used his
skills to depart from the shores of bhAratavarSha and reach those of
krau\~nchadvIpa. Later he remarked that when he gained entry into the
madhyama-mlechCha-varSha he felt like free man in a free country for the
first time. In those alien lands his skills were widely sought after and
he was solicited by many a mlechCha professor seeking to build even
larger pyramids than their rivals had ever done. He noted that one such
professor carried the weighty qualifier of being a Nobel laureate. While
the professor was not in his own field of study, barbarin noted that the
artillery of his mathematical and numerical skills could be brought to
decisively bear on any academic fortress the said laureate might wish to
storm. He also reasoned that with such pedigree his own future success
would be assured. Accordingly, barbarin apprenticed with that professor
and ere long he had landed himself a plush job using his mathematics as
a facade for his pecuniary manipulations.

Having accumulated some assets, barbarin decided that he needed a woman
to complete his life. With that objective he returned to the shores of
bhArata and displayed his wares but no woman was caught in his snares.
Disappointed he returned to his job in the mlechCha-land and rethought
his strategy. He realized that barring gold-diggers, women of the type
he wanted mostly sought something more biological and heritable – the
signals of an alpha male or at least a facade thereof – what else is
interesting to a woman in a man? Hence, he went again the next year,
this time playing a different game – he did not emphasize his wealth but
his physical prowess and verbal celerity. As result he snagged a
reasonably endowed woman, phalgu, from a respectable brAhmaNa clan of
higher standing than his own, and returned to the mlechCha country with
her as his wife. For sometime barbarin felt his life had reached its
pinnacle, but soon he felt a lack. He long wanted to “belong” with the
mlechCha-s: He had tried everything – he acquired the mlechCha accent,
he dressed like them, he watched their films, talked about their bizarre
sports, and above all he hoped his wealth would make them see him as
their equal. Somewhere deep within he realized that none of these were
taking him where he wished to be. Now that he had a wife he decided to
adopt a new strategy – he believed that if he called the mlechCha-s home
and threw parties they might finally accept him into their inner fold.
He accordingly played out this script and thought that it worked. He
felt more and more mlechCha and apparently so did phalgu. They spoke
admiringly of their dear mlechCha friends and condemned the ineptitude,
disorderliness and lackadaisical ways of their friends and relatives
from bhArata.

Around this time barbarin acquired a fascination for the productions of
white indology – he procured a vast collection of such books and read
extensively. He flaunted the knowledge acquired from these to his
bhAratIya and mlechCha contacts alike. One day he would talk of the
bhagabhakShakI from Chicago another day of her guru, the ex-spy from
Harvard. This was his way of showing his connections to his roots. Those
in bhArata took his knowledge to be profound and believed him to be a
genuine arbitrator on the matters of the shAstra. One day some of
phalgu’s clansmen felt called upon us to discuss these matters with
him for they felt it might be of mutual interest. In course of this
encounter barbarin went on about: 1) how nobody could say if the bhArata
or the rAmAyaNa came first, adding that the itihasa-purANa were full of
baloney that should not be mistaken for reality; 2) How the ritual of
chaula-karman was of primitive, tribal, Dravidian origin – a substitute
for offering the head itself as a sacrifice; 3) How murukan was a
Dravidian deity who had been Aryanized and that the Dravidian word kanda
was the precursor of skanda. We attacked these terrible misapprehensions
of Hindu historical tradition but he waved us aside stating that we were
yet to read solid literature on these matters.

With the passage of time barbarin lost both his interest in the shruti
and these indological fancies. He gave up his daily veda recitations,
which is the duty of a brAhmaNa, claiming that he had a lot of important
work to do that left him with no time for these. Yet, his partying with
the mlechCha-s continued with much elan. By now his kids were grown up
and themselves carousing with the dizzying ferments of white occidental
liberalism they were imbibing at high school and college. They enjoyed
talking about diversity, anti-racism, egalitarianism, democracy, and
above all saving the world. By now their whole clan felt no different
from the mlechCha-s – they had finally attained that coveted padavI,
much as the early vedAntins of the yajurveda held that after a series of
ascents the supremely endowed young man attains the highest state known
as brahmAnanda. Now they spoke of the great land of the free and
endearingly referred to the mlechCha-rAjan (i.e., the president) of the
country as the dynamic and farsighted leader of the free-world. When
they got the chance of having a photo snapped with them beside the
mlechCha-rAjan’s patnI they felt like mANikkavachakar and his band felt
in the company of rudra and his shakti. They told their relatives in
bhArata how all was free and fair in the glorious land of the mlechCha-s
and expressed sympathetic condolences regarding their putrid lives.
“There is nothing which is impossible here if you have the ability to
do it. Merit is what counts” were the words of advice barbarin doled out
to them, not bothering for a moment to tell them how they could cross
the immense samudra-s to reach the shores of the mlechCha paradise.

In midst of all of this vicissitudes of existence served up a surprise
that barbarin had never seen coming. While barbarin thought he was
displaying virtuoso financial agility for his firm, he found that his
mlechCha colleagues suddenly ganged up on him much like the crow, the
jackal and the tiger on the camel in the teachings of bhIShma-pitAmaha
and viShNusharman. As result he was out of his job and back home. A
similar fate struck phalgu shortly thereafter. Suddenly, they were left
without a means of sustaining their lifestyle. Not long after that they
had to call off their parties with the mlechCha-s hoping the shore up
some money for seeing through this harsh period. The mlechCha-s no
longer came home and his kids went their own ways. Then barbarin was
struck by a painful affliction that came upon him like an arrow of
rudra. But he could not get anything beyond the most meager temporary
medical assistance rendered by a third-rate physician – he could no
longer afford any thing, leave alone even obtain a basic diagnosis of
his condition. Bound by the disease, barbarin had to grit his way
through it hoping that his body’s repair mechanisms would some how take
him across this vaitaraNI of existence. He had visions of the time when
he was struck by the gaja. Suddenly faces of his indigent former
countrymen, who lay beside him in the hospital, and had gone the way of
vivasvAn’s dreadful son crowded his vision. barbarin had yet another
vision where he found himself shivering before chitragupta who was
taking his own sweet time to sum up the account-book as barbarin stood
before him. He wondered if a blow from the mace of the buffalo-rider
might fall on him soon. He had a vision of the intern who had saved him
then and thought she was indrANI and hoped someone may come to save him
thus. The only saving grace was that phalgu being a woman of the former
times took care of him in these dire straits. He realized things could
have been worse: he had long been envious of his friend tailakesha who
had snagged a hiraNyakeshinI mlechChikA as a wife. Like him, tailakesha
too was out of employment. But the news had just reached him that to add
salt to the wounds his friend’s mlechChikA had decamped with all his
earnings to enjoy maithuna with a pratikAmin. Even worse tailakesha
learned his children were jAragarbha-s and not his own. Thus, getting
comfort from the fate of tailakesha, barbarin and phalgu spent their now
long days talking about why fate had been so adverse to them. Suddenly,
it dawned on phalgu that despite all their sense of belonging they never
belonged here. With some trepidation she tried to explain her gnosis to
the ailing barbarin: She told him the tale of the blue jackal chaNDarava
and his grim end. It hit barbarin that perhaps he was chaNDarava. He
realized that the life of a jackal might be rough but that of the blue
jackal was tragic. However, like the once great rAjarShi of the
ikShvaku-s all he could do was to remain suspended in the incomplete
universe of the son of gAthin.
