+++
title = "A geopolitical segment: thexa0news-traders"

+++
We have earlier proposed on these pages the postulates of the [first
responders](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/03/13/6384/ "The first responders and the paradox of Maoism")
and the
[preta-rākṣasābhisaṃdhi](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/ "Some more ramblings on the mlechCha-marUnmatta abhisaMdhAnaM").
These, together with the peculiar consequence of much of our elites’
vyavahāra happening in the āṅglika bhāṣā, has allowed our mleccha-, and
to an extent our marūnmatta- foes to invest in the Indian media to use
it as a potent weapon in propaganda warfare. The Indian mindset is
particularly susceptible to it as the flotsam deśī is strongly prone to
forming opinions based on 3rd persons evaluations, especially if the 3rd
person is seen as some kind of authority. In the 10 years of disastrous
UPA rule things became so bad that practically all the media in the
country was purchased by these foreign powers to use as weapons against
the Hindus. The lāṭa-siṃha on his way to becoming the bhārata-nṛpati
repeatedly termed these purchased propagandists as “news-traders”.
However, it remains to be seen how the lāṭendra deals with them as time
goes by. There is little evidence that they are holding back. As
examples we could cite: 1) the case of the Mohammedan who was forced to
eat while keeping a religious fast by a member of the Shiv Sena party
which was then allied to the BJP. On this occasion the propagandists
made an enormous amount of noise regarding how the rākṣasa-vādin’s
rights were violated. Many people with affinities to Hindu nationalism
also came out to defend the said rākṣasa-vādin and condemn their own
people. In stark contrast, recently, when a knot of marūnmatta ruffians,
true to character, slew a Shiv Sena member, when he was trying to
intervene with regard to their roguish behavior on the street , the
propagandists chose to down-play the whole thing and at best report it
as an ordinary crime. This incident is merely one among the many in
which the evils perpetrated by pretāradhaka-s and marūnmatta-s are
routinely downplayed or suppressed, be it the “bomb in Bengal”, the
predatory activities of śava-bhāṇaka-s, the holdouts of the Nizam’s
merry Razakars gaining new ground, or seizure of Hindu strī-s by
both sādharaṇa and pracchanna dāḍhīka-s. 2) Another notable case was
the willful incitement of people, including a street-fight with a person
supporting the lāṭānarta-siṃha in navyarkapura by a ruffianly
propagandist. Despite his actions having been caught on video, the
propagandists spun it as he being the one assaulted by the votaries of
the bhārata-nṛpati.

Given this background we thought it useful to revisit our ongoing
“Google News” experiment. To repeat ourselves, this experiment
involves using Google News US edition and changing the settings so that
India is on top and set to “always”. Then one might observe the primary
India-related headlines coming to the fore on the news page. Below is
based on the media items with negative coverage of India that surfaced
to the top in this experiment starting June to October 25th (caveat: we
usually check news three times a day; so this may not cover all of it
but is still representative):

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-Is_eS-MSZvQ/VEtLjtn9NWI/AAAAAAAADJ4/h6t7rUzIqbc/s800/anti-India2.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Sm0WTrZOUCGFabC1UWmWJtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The first figure is unsurprising: Being the US edition it is dominated
by US mainstream media outlets. However, it is notable that despite this
we have a strong participation in the project from the UK. This
illustrates that at its core it is a joint project of the Abrahamistic
Anglosphere with echoes reverberating back and forth across the
Atlantic. More importantly, we note a significant participation from
Indian media outlets in amplifying the message ultimately generated in
Anglosphere. These are first responders and the drohin propagandists. In
the other category we have some from the smaller stations of the
Anglosphere like Australia and the Mohammedans of West Asia, the latter
representing the śava-rākṣasa-saṃmelana.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-RBFZJ23kFFQ/VEtLjlMLHMI/AAAAAAAADJ8/F_ZkoF3MbZU/s800/anti-India1.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/0KbUGqcBNfW5vuWk4E1txNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The second figure is the breakdown by the top media outlets involved in
this activity. This is more informative. The clear winner is the New
York Times, a liberal outfit. This brings home a point that we have made
on these pages that the Western liberals are not friends, but venomous
enemies, of Hindus. The NYT is commonly read by Hindus for articles on
science, culture and technology, but as far as Hindus/India goes it is
patently toxic. This pattern is a replica of the US academia, in which
there is active Hindu participation, and is likewise enriched in
individuals with views similar to the NYT. Next come CNN, ABC and BBC.
The first of these is a propaganda organ of the mleccha rulers of USA;
thus, its concerted attack reflects in a sense the unofficial view of
the Department of State and also the office of the mlecchādhipati, who
has a special dislike for the lāṭendra. The BBC, together with Reuters
(which comes next) headquartered in UK, is the echo from across the
Atlantic showing the unity of Anglospheric thought we saw in the above
picture. The Economic Times and The Hindu represent the deśī purchased
agents, though in part the latter is also an organ for the cīna-s. The
Gulf News represent the rākṣasavādin contribution to the action.

On the whole, we might note that while the entire political spectrum of
the Anglosphere is involved in the attack on Hindu India, it is the
liberal side of the spectrum which packs the biggest punch. Why is this
so? To understand this we might note that even though the
prathamonmatta-s are part of this matrix of media outlets, their deśa
has complained of bias against it from the same NYT. This suggests that
all these relate in large part to the underpinnings of western
liberalism. The people who constitute this category are to a notable
extent genetically predisposed to yearn for internal sensations
characterized by the attitudes of “holier than thou” and moral
superiority. We note that they feel a tremendous uptick in these
feelings when they read and write such articles especially pertaining to
a heathen nation, which the Abrahamistic preconditioning makes them see
as deeply revolting. The same Abrahamistic conditioning can be seen in
how the same outlets, which root for various marūnmatta-s, do not even
let out the merest whimper for the heathen Yazidis who are being
exterminated by the Mohammedans in West Asia .

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Supplementary Material: [Articles gathered in this
experiment](https://app.box.com/s/rvlvb4aqjmcxxa4t5vhw)
