+++
title = "The fourth story"

+++
Some stories are written for the readers, some are written for the
writers, some due to imagination running wild, some due to perverse
inspiration, or some combination of some or all of these.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

From early that morning on 15th August the battle for the outpost at the
Rai Gap was raging fiercely and both sides had taken several casualties.
The Indian prime minister had been blind-sided by a move right from the
ancient scroll of Sun-Tzu. In response to the “incidents” in Arunachal,
chairman Ming Ming Zhou, the lord of all Hans, had said that they had
already accepted Sikkim as an integral part of India and that the
question of South Tibet could be negotiated during the further talks in
sidelines of a multinational summit that was scheduled to occur later
that year. The next day a serious PLA attack was already underway in
Sikkim. By afternoon, on the Indian side only Lt. Vikram Singh and Naib
Subedar Bhairav Prasad Gurkha were still standing at the forward
outpost, while on the Han side at least five seemed to be alive. Just
then a Type-91 was fired at the Indian defensive position from the Han
ranks and a shard from the grenade’s explosion struck Lt. Vikram Singh
near his temple and he collapsed. Bhairav Prasad survived the strike
intact and hid himself behind a damaged shaft. The Han cautiously
advanced to take the post when they heard the delirious blabbering of
Vikram Singh. Sighting Singh, a chIna soldier took aim with his QSW-08
pistol to take him out, when Bhairav Prasad who was hiding behind him
broke the chIna’s neck with a blow from his kukri. Thereafter, in total
silence maneuvering himself through the ruins of the outpost Bhairav
Prasad single-handed killed the four remaining chIna intruders. He then
cut off the heads of three chIna-s and offered them to the raNachaNDI,
the wife of the great bhairava, as the highest of offerings, the
narabali. Thus, he had managed to score a slim Indian victory by the
margin of just a man. Not just that he managed to evacuate Lt. Singh
back to the nearest Indian outpost and summon further assistance to cork
the Han adventurism. Lt. Singh survived the encounter but was left with
a serious deficiency in neurological functions.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

It was a dark rainy evening. Vidrum parked his bike and knocked on the
door of the little garage beside Somakhya’s house. That garage doubled
for Somakhya’s lab. Somakhya put his illegal revolver into his pocket
and carefully looking though the peephole opened the door upon realizing
that it was Vidrum. S: “How have things been with you?”  
V: “Really exciting times. By the way you will be delighted to hear
about what happened today. Prof. Samgram Dev, the great physician from
that high university in mlechCha-land acknowledged your discovery
today.”  
S: “Which one?”  
V: “That metallopeptidase toxin you discovered from the actinobacterium
cultivated by the Madras digger wasp while in secondary school.”  
S: “Ah that is a cash cow – it has been giving us some money to continue
our research independently to an extant while completing these useless
university degrees. What about Samgram Dev – did his trials work?”  
V: “Yes. The results of the first trial were announced today. The
metallopeptidase toxin had great value in the new experimental treatment
that was developed by Prof. Samgram Dev to restore neural tissue and
function in patients with extensive brain damage. This approach is
exciting and I hope to take it up further in my own studies. Prof.
Samgram Dev has expressed great interest in having me over at his group
once I finish the degree – sadly that’s some years in the future – just
can’t wait.”  
S: “Here the credit goes to Lootika; after all, she was the one who
showed that the toxin promotes neurite growth. Something quite
unexpected.”  
V: “Yes. I wanted to tell her too, but I felt it was too late and it
might be bit awkward if I dropped in at her place with her parents and
family around. Anyhow I am sure her sister will tell her about all this
in detail.”  
S: “By the way we are planning an expedition to the lagoon of rAmo
bhArgava for a study in natural history when we have a few days off
after the dIpotsava. Would you like to accompany us?”  
V: “I would have loved to come, but Meghana would not like it. She has
laid out a plan complete with days full of shopping and movies, dinners
and lunches at some really great eateries, a night at the disco, a visit
to saint Nasir-ad-din Ghazi’s Mazhar, and an evening at the cricket
league’s final. Much as I would have liked to be in the wild with you
guys, I am afraid I will have to be with her.”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Somakhya and Lootika had spent the day collecting several specimens from
the lagoon of rAmo bhArgava. Among other things, they had finally
succeeded in collecting live specimens of the algae *Acetabularia* and
*Neomeris*. They planned to grow them and elucidate the biosynthetic
pathways for the halogenated organic compounds made by these
chlorophytes and understand the diversity of enzymes involved in
biological halogenation. That night they pitched their tent on shore of
the lagoon and after dinner were observing the clear autumnal skies.
They were trying to see the Little Dumbbell Nebula in Perseus when the
sky seemed to be rent open with an immense flash. A gigantic fireball
blinded them completely – first they heard a hiss, then a roar and
finally a boom: not just their eyes but even their ears seemed all gone.
The blaze and the noise played over and over again for several minutes.
They wondered what it was – had the chIna-s, the mlechCha-s or the
marUnmatta-s launched a sudden missile attack on bhArata? Then as the
deafening silence returned they realized that it was a gigantic
meteorite that had dropped in the hills to their east. They made a
careful note of the position from the still visible meteor track and
decided that the next day they should explore the locality to see if
they could get any meteoritic fragments. The next morning they set out
to explore the region they had inferred to be the crash site of the
meteorite and scoured the region till noon. Just before they almost gave
up, they found a shallow excavation with shattered vegetation in an
unmistakable pattern. Excitedly they ran to its center but could not
find anything but for some small pieces of meteoric glass. Actually they
saw signs that someone had gotten there before them from a near by
village and could have taken away the big fragments or larger tektites.
Since, they had to catch the train back to their city and feared
desiccation of their algal specimens they halted their exploration and
headed back.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

About couple of years had passed by Meghana and Vidrum wanted to buy
hard to get second-hand tickets for a music concert. Their seller was
Roy Russell, who had agreed to meet them outside the church at St.
Vincent’s circle. As they stopped beside the pretAlaya Vidrum was
shocked to see how big it had become. He rarely visited this part of the
city, and the last time he was there it was a small, nondescript
structure. Now it was a peculiar structure with a giant gopura featuring
images from the new testament and an imposing dhvajastaMbha – it looked
almost like a Hindu temple but for the giant pretA\~Nka on the top of he
gopura and the staMbha. Written on the gateway arch in ornate nAgarI
script were the words: “*kristudevaH paramo devaH | kristudharmaH paramo
dharamaH | Arogya-svAmine vai namo namaH ||*”  
Vidrum was shocked. He blurted out aloud: “What the \#%\*@\! When did
they make the pretAlAya like this?”  
Meghana: “So what is wrong? See they are using our architecture and even
Sanskrit\!”  
V: “Nonsense\! This is a ploy to entice and entrap foolish Hindus.”  
M: “Don’t get worked up. I am sure all those extremist websites Somakhya
and Sharvamanyu keep feeding you with are having their effects. Come on,
they were being so conscious of adopting Indian traditions and you are
seeing just the opposite. Are they not being so respectful…”

Just then they saw Roy Russell who sold them the tickets. Then he
offered them a sandwich as special “ravivAr prasAd” from the church.
Vidrum was furious but keeping outward politeness refused it by saying
he was observing a fast that day in the honor of chaNdikA. Meghana
expressed her unhappiness with Vidrum by her facial gestures and took
the sandwich. Roy then handed them a pamphlet saying that they should
attend the forthcoming lectures on ‘advaita’ by
shrI-108-vasudhaiva-kuTuMbakaM-bAbA-jI at the nayA-makkah (the new
Mecca). As they left Meghana was intently reading the pamphlet of
S108VKBji over and over, when Vidrum angrily snatched it from her hand
and tore it to pieces. Meghana created a huge spectacle, screaming and
abusing Vidrum in the choicest language from the depths of the
pa\~nchanada in the middle of the road, with the passers-by stopping to
stare with a tinge of Schadenfreude. She quickly scanned the QR code
from the torn pamphlet into her phone and abruptly split up from Vidrum
going her own way.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

About a fortnight later Vidrum came to see Somakhya. He was looking
crestfallen.  
S: “Hey, how is it going. On course to join Samgram Dev’s group upon
graduation? Have you sent in the wretched applications? I have barely
started anything and have been getting endless music from my parents.”  
Vidrum in a sad voice: “Hey man, facing music from your parents must be
better than putting up with public lashings from a bAbA-addled
virago.”  
S: “What happened?”  
V: “You must hear this. Recently Meghana has been magnetically attracted
towards this godman called shrI-108-vasudhaiva-kuTuMbakaM-bAbA-jI, whom
she refers to as ‘shrI-108-vAsudev-kuTuMbak-bAbAjI’.”  
S: “Who \#%\*@ is that ?”  
V: “Listen. She came to know of him from a pamphlet handed over to her
by a pretasAdhaka at that monstrous pretAlaya situated at the St.
Vincent’s circle. I have been trying to get her off this delusion but it
has become the source of terrible strife between us. Finally, I gave in
today and agreed to accompany her to the evening ‘advaita’ lecture by
S108VKBji. He has started this “sarva-dharmAshrama” at a place he calls
the nayA-makkah. Just about a couple of years ago he started having
visions that he was latest prophet sent by ‘God’. Shortly thereafter,
S108VKBji saw a divine rock fall from heaven in the mountains close to
the rAma beach. He installed that baetyl in a golden vulval girdle and
embedded it in a cubical structure precisely imitating the one worshiped
by the marUnmatta-s in the middle of the maru in West Asia. He has been
calling that the nayA-al-Kaʿbah (the new al-Kaʿbah). There was a large
gathering at his lecture-hall. He began by chanting pieces from various
religious texts and stated that lineage of prophets has not ended and he
is the latest who would reveal the sole truth, which he termed
‘advaita’, which will bring together the teachings of the
upaniShat-s, Zoroaster, Moshe, Jesus Christ, and Mohammad. He added that
all rituals were futile and only the truth he was going to make known
was the basis of ultimate liberation. His secretary, Daniel Cooper from
Australia added that S108VKBji’s message was no different from the
sermon of Jesus on the mount. Thus, it went on for more than an hour
like a monstrous teratoma of religion replete with narrations of the
world-unifying visions of S108VKBji and blatantly staged miracles such
as regurgitations of metal ellipsoids, which were called
shiva-li\~Nga-s, as also of crucifixes, Bibles and Korans from the maw
of S108VKBji.”  
S: “Ghastly\!”  
V: “Then he paused saying ‘sherbet’ and ‘bhog’ would served followed by
saMgIt. I could take it no longer and told Meghana that I was not going
to suffer such lunacy lightly. She went nuclear, and I left her and came
away to keep my sanity.”  
S: “Well, the last thing we needed was this latest bAbA on the block and
this orgy of bAbAistic frenzy.”  
V: “I just feel a dark sense of foreboding about all this. May be
because this S108VKBji’ s face seemed vaguely familiar to me – looks
like I have seen him or his picture somewhere before.”  
S: “Perhaps then you should try to distract yourself by joining me in
this examination of the wonders of *Acetabularia*. It is all just one
cell while it looks like a little, complete plant. From its cap-like
fronds come out reproductive cysts. These cysts eventually open to
release gametes that look like little Chlamydomonas. I often wonder if
the Chlamydomonas-like form is the ancestral state for the greater
plant-lineage or is it the plant-like form or both…”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

The next day Somakhya was checking the news as he was having breakfast.
The headline read:  
Godman among 55 killed in attack on Ashram: Communal tensions high in
city  
…Earlier in the day followers of shrI-108-vAsudev-kuTuMbak-bAbAjI were
seen distributing pamphlets outside the Mohammad Jan Masjid. The member
of parliament Dr. Faqr-uz-Zaman took objection to it. Around 7.00 PM his
son Jihad al Kabir gathered 300 volunteers of the black t-shirt movement
also known as the Jaish al-Mujahideen. Mr. al Kabir is said to have just
returned from a activism tour to Egypt and Lebanon as part of the aid
and volunteering activities of the black t-shirt movement. It is
suspected he might have been radicalized on course of this tour. He and
his volunteers were armed with guns, fire-bombs and other weapons. They
led a procession to S108VKBji’s Ashram even as he was leading his
devotees in an circumambulation of a disputed structure termed the
nayA-al-Kaʿbah with religious music playing in the background. Mr. al
Kabir and his men challenged S108VKBji’s religious interpretation and
said that he had insulted the Adyunmatta (shAntirastu) and the
rAkShasa-mata.

When S108VKBji tried to argue with them, Mr. al Kabir showed them a
fatwa by respected jurist Kazi Omar Abdullah that declared S108VKBji to
be an apostate. He had visited the Mohammad Jan Masjid and is said to
have worn a skullcap while praying with the mevlanas before an Iftar
dinner party earlier in the year. Since then he is rumored to have
declared himself the prophet of a new religion. As the argument grew
heated Mr. al Kabir and his men are supposed to have attacked S108VKBji
and his followers and committed arson on his Ashram. The nayA-al-Kaʿbah
structure was apparently completely demolished by the black t-shirt
activists. In the clash that ensued S108VKBji was beheaded and his
headless corpse was hoisted on to a lamp post outside the Ashram. In the
assault and stampede that followed 55 people are supposed to have been
killed….

Other headlines included:  
Communal rioting reported in some parts of the city.  
Prime minister calls for peace and amity between the communities.  
Center has sent para-military forces to control the violence.  
Home minister suspects involvement of cross-border elements.

Somakhya immediately called Vidrum but received no reply. He tried few
more times during the day with the same effect; he decided to go and
visit Vidrum at his place. Right then he saw in the news that there was
some rioting reported near Vidrum’s house and decided to be safe rather
than sorry.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

A few days later Somakhya received a message from Lootika:  
prIya somAkhya\! sarvaM saukhyaM vA? indra-trAtaM bhava\!  
My sister was part of the autopsy team of S108VKBji. His story is an
interesting one. He was apparently an officer in the Indian Army who had
sustained a grievous head injury during the Han attack on Sikkim in the
old days. He was one of the recipients of the experimental treatment for
neural regeneration devised by Samgram Dev, which used our
metallopeptidase toxin for inducing neurite regrowth. Vrishchika, who
performed the micro-anatomical examination of his temporal lobe, found
that he had a significantly higher procedure-induced neurite outgrowth
in parts of his temporal cortex compared to normal controls. He also
showed a small lesion in the claustrum below the insula that remained
from his original injury. So, apparently, something in this is what
transformed a once unimaginative soldier Lt. Vikram Singh into the
S108VKBji. Moreover, a discussion my sis had with a police officer
investigating the case suggests that he was the one who reached the
meteorite before us, after that memorable night on the shores of rAma’s
lagoon. In any case going back to the records, Vrishchika says that more
than half the patients receiving this experimental treatment report
unusual neurological sequelae, raising questions about whether this
approach might be the best thing to go forward with. More when I see you
in person  
bahu modasva\!  
lUtikA |

Somakhya responded:  
prIye lUtike\!  
avashyam asya pAShaNDasya nigUDhaM rahasyam uchChinatsi \!  
tava UrNa-jAle aryamaMstrAtaM bhava,  
somAkhya |
