+++
title = "Battle of thexa0agents"

+++
[As PDF](https://app.box.com/s/fp6rted0e4c9qb27gqqa)  
It was the last day of school and the exams were to begin at the start
of the next week. Following their parents stern instructions, Jhilleeka
and Varoli decided not hangout after school and were returning home on
their bikes. However, they decided to take a small detour – they first
crossed a shrine of a 19th century pāṣaṇḍa and reached the shrine of
pātāla-rudra. They had plucked some Datura flowers and turkey berries
from a fallow plot of land adjacent to their school. On reaching the
shrine they placed these on the ancient liṅga, which had been installed
by the mahāvratin candrabhūṣaṇa-paṇdita in the days of yore. Then they
worshiped rudra by mentally reciting the secret mantra-s known as
vāma-vardhana-tryaṃbaka and pratiṣṭhāpana-tryaṃbaka. Thereafter, they
hopped back onto their bikes and took the homeward path after crossing a
strange, large, flat boss of Deccan basalt that grotesquely jutted out
off the ground. Then they rode past the government building of the
water-works department with a well-maintained garden around it. They
noticed an old gardener with an unkindly mien, wearing a white cap
similar to that worn by a past prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, with the
insignia of an open palm printed upon it. Just as they passed the
gardener he darted at them and started chasing them snapping his large
pair of scissors. The girls were terrified and pressed hard on their
pedals but strength seemed to desert their legs. Soon they almost felt
the scissors snapping at their pony tails. Screaming aloud, with one
last effort they leaned forward on their handle bars and stood on their
pedals. All of a sudden there was a calm. Their legs seemed to regain
strength and they gained some distance. They cautiously looked back and
they saw no gardener. Instead they saw a few pedestrians on the footpath
beside the opposite side of the road look at them strangely. They put
their hands on their head and felt their hair and heaved a sigh of
relief when they found it to be intact. They looked at each other, and
each could tell from the other’s face that it was a profoundly shocking
and bizarre experience. On reaching home they were in two-minds whether
to inform their mother about the incident or not. They let it pass and
soon found themselves busy with their books as they needed to cram for
the impending tests.

The recklessness of youth combined with the self-realization of their
considerably above-average IQs had made Vrishchika and Lootika uncaring
of their parents instructions. Despite the fact that their exams were of
much greater significance, respectively in terms of their getting a seat
in the college and the university, they hung out near school knowing
fully well they could catch up with their cramming over the weekend.
After fooling around for sometime with her friends Vrishchika realized
that, despite her IQ edge, the hard-disk in her upper story was
insufficiently stocked up. From the discussions of her friends, she
learned to her horror that she had not even opened the pages pertaining
to South America in her geography textbook. She realized that she was
unsure of the very location of Brazil on the continent, leave alone the
climatic zones it harbored or its exports. It hit her rather hard when
one of her friends noted that, contrary to her perception, Brazil was
bigger than India. Her friend rubbed in the salt by quipping: “Even the
akhaṇḍa bhārata you keep talking about is not going to get you there”.
Vrishchika realizing the Brazil-sized enormity of the lacunae in her
learning quickly returned home to apply herself to the books. Lootika
and Somakhya were having a whale of a time beside a fast-food joint
talking about and planning all the fun things they were to do after the
exams. It seemed to them as though the exams were already over, when
Somakhya glanced at his watch and realized how late it was. It struck
them they could not get any meaningful study done that day – this was no
trifling matter given that neither of them had opened their organic
chemistry textbook or even attended a single lecture of conics and
vectors. All this they had boldly planned to finish over the
weekend,which included the several hours of the Friday which they had
just whiled away. On top of that Somakhya was supposed to instruct
Vidrum on certain matters, who insistently reminded him about that.
Vidrum made matters worse by telling him: “Bro, remember there have been
times we have lost to Bangladesh, Zimbabwe and Kenya\! And even a good
batsman can snick the ball to the slips.”

They decided to head straight home and fall asleep and make up for the
hours by rising early the next morning. Somakhya knew that his parents
would not wake him up given that they were major critics of his
tradition of discovering and cramming stuff on the day before the exam.
Hence, he asked Lootika to give him a call as soon as she woke up so
that he could hit the books early. When Lootika went home she was
confronted by Jhilleeka who was cross that she did not come in time to
help her with the Sanskrit verbs. Lootika having her own ship to salvage
callously remarked: “Jhilleeka, Shrinivasa Ramanujan knew all the
possible forms verbs could take across the dhātupāṭha when he was four.
I know you are no Ramanujan but you are not that young any more and
could get at least fraction of that into your head by yourself.” Thus,
brushing her sister aside she hit the bed. Hours later Lootika was
savoring the climax of a sweet dream, when it was rudely interrupted by
the sound of a rattling drum. Startled she woke up, looked out of her
window, and saw a tall wandering ascetic pass by her home holding a
trident and beating his ḍamaru. He started saying something in a loud
voice. She paid attention to that closely as such ascetics were said to
have prognostic abilities after their rituals at the cremation ground.
She heard him say: “suṭa suṭa khaṭa khaṭa khiṭi khiṭi khuṭu khuṭu ।
druhiṇasya patnyo haṃsā jalpanti । nadati nadati kumārasya kukkuṭaḥ ।
vetālasya protsāhena vadiṣyami ।”

Then he uttered some gibberish twice. After the first repeat Lootika
became alert and wrote it down on a piece of paper:
“ti-ya-drakṣ-maṃ-grā-saṅ-vraṃ-tī-se-ma-min-as-yam-ca-niś-ti-sa-va-min-as-he-gṛ-sā-kā-tri-pu-ṣṭa-jye|”

She then quickly called Somakhya to wake him up and proceeded to have
her bath. Before getting started with the books, she spent a several
minutes meditating on various deities with their respective mantra-s and
upon conclusion smeared a tilaka on her forehead. At that moment it hit
her that the ascetic had conveyed a viparīta saṃdeśa. She went back to
the slip of paper and checked it out and to her horror realized that it
was a rather ominous prognosis for her, especially given the impending
exams. She was scared; nearly in tears and walked out to the terrace of
her home wanting to call Somakhya and tell him about this. Looking out
on to the road she saw Meghana racing along with Vidrum to make it in
time for the pre-exam tutorials. She also saw the young sun lighting up
the horizon and felt charged by that sight and felt that the power of
the great kṣatriya and the wise asura was with her. Now she felt less
intimidated by the message and decided in light of it she would be
better of cutting her way through her books without further delay.

◊◊◊◊

The exams finally got over. Lootika felt relieved – they had gone much
better than she had expected, despite her last minute preparations. She
could concur with some of the guys in the group with whom she was
hanging out that it felt like sending the ball to and over the fence,
though she cared little for cricket. Silently, she told herself that
after all the ascetic might have gotten it all wrong. The guys said that
they were going to be playing a trio of twenty-twenty matches in the
coming days and asked Lootika and the other girls to be spectators
cheering their exploits on the field. She laughed them off saying she
had better things to do than waste her time at a game of cricket played
by amateurs. Thus, she returned home leaving the guys to their game.
There she spent some time pacifying Jhilleeka who was still cross with
her for her brusqueness and tried to regale her by teaching her how to
write some code for generating interesting graphics. Most of the next
day was spent cleaning up their room. Later that evening all four
sisters decided to go biking to get some fresh air. After racing away on
a long ride at top speed they went to the flat basaltic boss. Sitting
down upon it to get some rest, they gazed towards the western sky in the
competition of who would see Venus and Mercury first, even as the sun
went down. Just then, Lootika noticed that her classmate Vidrum had
appeared with Maurvi, a girl from a different college whom she knew in
passing. They waved at Lootika and went and seated themselves at a bench
beside the basaltic upheaval. Shortly thereafter she saw another
classmate Meghana suddenly emerge from behind the crag rush at Vidrum
and Maurvi uttering profanities in the language of the extant
pāñcanada-s. Vidrum swiftly slipped away leaving the two girls behind
and the two began fighting loudly, such that the others could hear them.
Lootika and her sisters realized that it was an ugly situation and
hopped on to their bikes to make an exit.

As they had sat on the basaltic escarpment the two younger sisters had
narrated to the older ones their strange experience beside the
water-works department building. So Lootika and Vrishchika decided to
lead them home via an alternate route, a road on which lay a small
masjid, which had been built atop an ancient shrine of the goddess
padmāvatī during the invasion of Mohammed bin Tughlaq. As they were
cycling past the masjid they heard the crier announce the evening call.
Hearing it, Jhilleeka wondered what language it was in. Her sisters
explained to her that it was a language spoken in the arid deserts of
West Asia. In course of that conversation Vrishchika wryly remarked:
“Normally when we have diseases of pandemic proportions caused by
pathogens with genes people go to great lengths to eradicate it. That
was the case with variola and polio. But when it comes to diseases
caused by pathogens with memes, like marūnmāda and pretonmāda we have
whole sections of the nation celebrate them and invite their infection,
even though these memetic pathogens will exterminate our people in the
long run\!” The two younger sisters were fascinated by the idea of the
meme that they had just learned about from the elder ones. They had many
questions and spent the rest of their waking hours that evening talking
about both genetics and memetics, till they lay on their cots and fell
asleep.

Over the next few days the girls had a lot to do. Jhilleeka was
fascinated by magnets and played with the circuits which Somakhya had
made as a young kid and had gifted her via Lootika. Thus, she taught
herself more about electromagnetism. For her most recent birthday her
parents had gifted her a powerful horseshoe magnet which she took along
wherever she went. While they were sitting on the escarpment she had run
the magnet on its surface and picked up several globules of iron
embedded in the basaltic rock. This piqued Varoli’s attention who
wondered how those iron globules got there. She first decided to do some
comparative qualitative analysis; so they collected a large number of
the globules and also broke some pieces of basalt. This kept Varoli busy
in their home-lab doing chemical analysis to determine the elemental
composition of the globules and the basalt. Vrishchika had found a dead
rhinoceros beetle in the garden and was dissecting it carefully to learn
more of its anatomy. Lootika spent her time studying a Sanskrit text
termed the bhīmasena-vinoda in which Somakhya had noted the therapeutic
use of the insect-killing fungi of the Ophiocordyceps complex. Hence,
she alternated her time between the text and investigating the
proteinaceous toxins produced by *Ophiocordyceps* and also the predatory
mushroom *Laccaria*. In addition to checking on each other periodically,
at lunch and dinner the sisters would discuss each other’s progress. In
the evenings they usually went bike racing on long rounds. But on that
day Lootika decided not to go biking by rather took their family scooter
and decided to rendezvous with Somakhya.

◊◊◊◊

On meeting Somakhya, Lootika showed the chomma of the snake; he
responded with the chomma of the sparrow. She asked: So how did the
cricket go? Somakhya: “Not bad I scored a 42 in one of the matches
albeit with some streaky shots through slips but it was all in vain\!”
L: “Why? you lost?” S: “No, a physical fight broke out when the opposing
team saw us gain the upper hand. As it grew more violent and the weapons
came out I fled the ground knowing that discretion is the better part of
valor.”

Lootika then presented the sequences of the genes that corresponded to
the protein toxins and introduced the strange problem, which confronted
her with respect to the lack of a signal peptide in the protein coded by
the second gene. Somakhya stared at those sequences for some time and
then did some analysis of them on his computer with Lootika seated
beside him. The result indicated what kind of toxin they were dealing
and suddenly he realized what was going in Lootika’s experiments. He
proposed to her a way of zeroing in on the toxin’s catalytic activity.
Lootika high-fived Somakhya and was almost wanting to go back and
initiate the requisite experiments. But the proteins were not the only
reason she wanted to meet Somakhya. Other than endless talking about
mysterious protein and nucleic acid molecules, they shared other
fascinations, which hardly any others in the country cared for, namely
reptiles and stem mammals. Hence, they spent some time in silence
drawing fossil reptiles and there after talking about them. That day
they drew Euchambersia, Aelurosaurus, Njalila, and Inostrancevia. They
felt a strange sense awe after drawing them, a sense of coming
face-to-face with their long-lost ancestors. They saw themselves in
those long-gone synapsids, they marveled at their canines, and the
dentary bone expanding to take over the lower jaw. Thus, they would have
gone on endlessly, but Lootika suddenly realized it was getting dark and
it was better she got back home. However, before parting she had
something else to say.

Lootika: “Could you O son of a vipra finally initiate me into the
aṣṭākṣara-kaumāra-manu that secret manu of the ancient
bhārgava-s.”  
Somakhya: “O daughter of a vipra, Lootika, there are some mantra-s I
have taught you without much ado. But this should be given by a teacher
who has no special feeling towards the student beyond an accurate
evaluation of his competence. If you were a guy I would have strictly
gone only by your competence. But I must confess that your charms have a
hold on me and I might be inclined to impart you this mantra without
bothering to objectively evaluate you. But tradition has to be
transmitted without any attachments of special feelings even as brahmā
conferred powers on hiraṇyākṣa or hiraṇyakaśipu despite their being
diti-jana-s.”  
L: “However, a true mantra should be reproducible by a competent sādhakā
even as the activity of an enzyme by a good biochemist, and that should
be test enough of whether I am fit or not. Moreover, I have seen enough
of a yogin in you that you will not merely give something due to your
feelings to me. I also do believe I make the basic cut; hence, this
should not badly backfire as you will not be conferring the mantra on a
ḍimbhikā”.  
S: “I know you are no ḍimbhikā but in your own interests I suggest that
you take a different route for I do not see enough perfection in my yoga
to be above your womanly charms. This mantra could sink both you and me
in a seizure, much like what the old drāviḍa-s would call the
murukan-veri.”  
L: “But I doubt an alternative teacher exists.”  
S: “Not so fast\! There is the brāhmaṇa’s daughter Shilpika who had
taught us the devabhāṣā when we were kids. She now teaches at the
college beyond the hill of śiva and the cremation ground. She belongs to
the same larger lineage of ātharvaṇa-s as I, descending from the very
muni who first received the conglomerated lore of the bhṛgu-s. Her clan
had lost the kumāra-śāsana but she has re-obtained it from a teacher
among the kaliṅga-s. I shall inform her that you desire to receive the
manu. She will then evaluate your situation.”

Lootika always game for challenge declared that she was eager to face
the test from the brāhmaṇa’s daughter. Then they rode their vehicles to
a corner near the road that Lootika had to take to get back home. They
stopped to chat briefly at that place regarding certain mysteries of the
transmission of the kaumāra-śāsana that were known only to a few
brāhmaṇa-s. They then exchanged chomma-s of the sun and the demilune
and went their ways.

◊◊◊◊

It was a Friday and the four sisters went to the museum near their
house, which characteristic of such establishments in bhārata, was open
only for 4 hours from 11.00 AM to 3.00 PM. The sisters visited the
museum every month on the last Friday, never tiring of the many
activities they had there. Some days they sketched the fossils,
skeletons, preserved and stuffed animals, plants, and organs, as
photography was strictly prohibited. Other days Lootika, and sometimes
Vrishchika, accessed the paleontological, microbiological and zoological
journals in the museum’s library. Outside the museum was a garden with a
few benches. Lootika used to collect pulmonate snails that were found in
a perpetually wet part of the garden as part of their snail project.
Somakhya had narrated to Lootika the tale of William Benson. After the
last of the marāṭhā resistance had been pulverized by the English, they
sent Mr. Benson as an administrator to lord over the newly conquered
possessions. Benson trained a band of gūrkhā-s to help in collecting
molluscs and had generated the first comprehensive survey of the land
snails of bhāratavarṣa. Somakhya pointed out that the Hindus had failed
to do something like that in their own land, following on the footsteps
of their own naturalists like the great ātharvaṇa lādyāyana, lay at the
root of their demise at the hands of the mleccha-s. There was much
biology left to be discovered despite the Zoological Survey of India
re-doing much of what Benson and his English successors had done.
Somakhya, even before reaching the age of 10, had already made some
progress in his studies on the biology of *Cecilioides bensoni* with his
parents’ help. When he made acquaintance with Lootika, he realized he
could take advantage of her virtuoso molecular biology and biochemistry
skills to take it to the next level. Thus emerged their snail project,
but it never got to where they wanted it to go. Finally, that summer
they found a sufficiently long stretch of free time to take it up. They
had planned to study the most remarkable snail *Indrella ampulla*. Since
Lootika’s hands were already tied with her fungal explorations, she had
deputed Vrishchika to take the lead in helping Somakhya with the snail
project. In the museum they checked out the Mesozoic fossils of land
snails to test the hypothesis Somakhya had developed that a large group
of snails in Western India descended from a single Mesozoic snail
related to *Corilla*. Jhilleeka was also getting interested in the snail
project as she had written a program to model the morphogenesis of
unusual shells like *Tortulosa* and *Ophisthostoma*. As a result she
discovered a relationship between the scale factor and the shape of the
helical spiral, and was consequently able to combine them into a single
equation. She was gathering material in the museum library to write a
paper on this with Lootika and Somakhya.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-mN_NxZYOl74/VHQYmk0l-hI/AAAAAAAADMI/rS6FY-9Gi9o/s800/Lootika_snails.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/48X-DVkzijUQYmugr8-Q1NMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*Snails
studied by Somakhya and the caturbhaginī*

Vrishchika had gone out to the wet garden patch to collect some snails.
As Vrishchika went out, she saw her senior Vidrum sitting on one of the
benches beside Maurvi in the museum garden and chatting. Some time
later, Jhilleeka who was writing the draft of her paper in the library
got stuck and decided to wander outside to open up her mind. So she
headed to the garden to join Vrishchika. Just then she saw a slick
looking guy sidle up towards the benches. He held a couple of bottles
his hand and was headed towards Vidrum and Maurvi, when he intersected
Jhilleeka on her way to the garden. He raised his clenched fist and
struck out at her, but Jhilleeka being small evaded his blow by ducking
swiftly. All four sisters were natural siddhā-s of five mantra-s, one of
which was that of the terrible bear-yoginī ṛkṣakarṇī, and the four
others they shared with the long gone Khmer king and his purohita.
Realizing the guy’s hostile intention, Jhilleeka instantaneously brought
to mind the ṛkṣakarṇī manu as a whole with the abhicārika saṃkalpa. The
attacker saw a great black bear rush at him and in great fear ran away
at top speed dropping the two bottles. The manu was not to be used
casually, and if one of the sisters deployed it the others knew of its
deployment nearly instantaneously. So they all sought each other and
were soon in a huddle outside the museum. Jhilleeka narrated to the rest
what had happened. Varoli in the mean time placed a marble pebble on the
contents of one of the bottles that she had carefully tipped over. It
fizzed vigorously. What could the bottles of acid mean? Lootika quickly
understood what was happening and realized that it was probably an agent
sent by Meghana to throw acid on Maurvi and/or Vidrum. She went up to
them and informed them of the potential danger. They quickly got up and
ran away. Lootika then herded her sisters and they all biked back home.

◊◊◊◊

Lootika woke up early that amāvāsya and performed some purificatory
rituals. She then invoked the deva bṛhaspati and concluded his ritual by
placing an oblation of ghee in the center of the ritual fire. She then
hopped on to her bike and headed to her former teacher Shilpika’s house.

There Shilpika was also thinking of this matter and said to her husband:
“Somakhya asks me to evaluate this girl Lootika for a powerful and
secret mantra. Young men are often caught by the charms of women and are
over-eager to share such things that should not be shared. After all the
great raikva of the mahāvṛṣa-s parted with the secret vidyā of the great
deva vāyu swindled by the face of jānaśruti’s daughter.”  
Shilpika’s husband: “After all the kaliṅga conferred to you that mantra,
which even your father the ātharvaṇa did not know. So may be she is
genuine but we must rigorously check her.”  
Shilpika:”Could you please join me in testing her; I do not want to give
this mantra for the undeserving.”

Soon Lootika reached their place. After some exchange of pleasantries
Shilpika’s husband spoke to her: “Should we not suspect your mantra
credentials. After all it seems you have learned much of your stuff from
that young brāhmaṇa Somakhya. But he is certainly of suspect standing
himself. Shilpika and I have seen him singing a Vedic song while lying
down in the pitṛvana. Which respectable brāhmaṇa would do that?”  
Lootika: “I have learned much from my parents when young but indeed most
rahasya-s I have learned from Somakhya. Sir, why would you call him
suspect? In fact only one versed in the high rahasya-s would known what
Vedic practice he might be carrying out in the cremation ground.”  
Shilpika’s husband: “Whoever does a Vedic practice in the cremation
ground?”  
Lootika: “Why sir? That is the practice of the mysterious videha-sāman
by which the ancient bhārgava-s achieved parakāya-praveśa and the one
which was practiced in the pitṛvana by the great ritualist prātṛda
bhālla in the realm of the kuru and the pañcāla.”  
Shilpika’s husband: “Alright. But you are yourself rather impure to
receive high mantra-s”  
Lootika: “Sir, why is that so?”  
Shilpika’s husband: “My dear wife tells me that in the saṃskṛta class
you used sit drawing kapāla-s of various animals. Rather than using the
term bhagala you would say kapāla. We also know from our friends that
you spend you time with kyākuja-s, kīṭaka-s, and even worse
gāṇḍulapada-s and jalauka-s. You grow such impure animals and fungi
in your house. How could a pure brāhmaṇa girl do such things?”  
Lootika: “I am the daughter of an aṅgira and my ancestor the great
vāmadeva had said in the chant that is deployed in manifold ways in the
ritual action known as the dūrohaṇam or the great ascent of the
yajamāna. It is by that action the somayājin attains perfection; it is
by that action the temples of Hindus attain completion:  
haṃsaḥ śuciṣad vasur antarikṣasad dhotā vediṣad atithir duroṇasat ।  
nṛṣad varasad ṛtasad vyomasad abjā gojā ṛtajā adrijā ṛtam ॥ indro
viśvasya rājato3m  
The goose seated in rays, the vasu seated in the sky;  
the hotṛ seated at the altar, the guest seated in the house;  
seated in men, seated in the wide earth,  
seated in the natural law, seated in space;  
born from water, born from cows,  
born from the natural law, born from rocks,  
such is the great natural law.  
That is indra the ruler of the universe OM\!

Now, what indeed is ajbā?  
The great god bhagavān kumāra, whose mantra I seek, taught the aṅgiras
known as nārada thus:  
āpa evemā mūrtā yeyaṃ pṛthivī yad antarikṣaṃ yad dyaur yat parvatā yad
deva manuṣyā yat paśavaś ca vayāṃsi ca tṛṇa-vanaspatayaḥ śvāpadāny
ākīṭa-pataṅga-pipīlakam ।  
āpa evemā mūrtāḥ । apa upāsva ॥  
All these are particular forms of water: earth, atmosphere, sky, rocks,
deva-s, humans, mammals, birds, herbs, trees, and all animals down to
the worms, moths and ants. They are all particular forms of water. So
worship water.

Thus, one knows the supreme ṛta only if one completely understands the
abjā and those I study are indeed in the domain of water and the domains
of all the other fundamentals elucidated by the great bhagavān skanda in
his great teaching.”

Shilpika’s husband: “Young lady, you are firm in your siddhānta, fit to
receive the mantra. But now we shall see what your practical abilities
are.”

He continued: “Three blocks from our home is a house which a gentleman
has bought and is trying to occupy. However, he is unable to do so
because of a valaga which has been placed in it. Whenever the gentleman
enters the house his fresh clothes are dumped in the latrine the next
morning. Would you be able to locate the valaga and figure out the
prayoga by which it has been activated? We know this is something very
dangerous for a young lady; we will come along with you if you wish to
look at the house.”  
Lootika: “Let us go and check out the house. But keep a fistful of
barley grains ready for me.”  
They soon stood before the house. Lootika adjusted her spectacles and
took a careful look at it and went around a few times looking at it,
peering through all the windows and taking some notes of the dimensions
on her tablet. Then she told Shilpika and her husband that she was ready
to return and solve the matter. They returned home and Shilpika handed
over the fistful of barley to Lootika along with a bronze plate.
Shilpika and her husband watched wide-eyed what Lootika did next. She
performed an ācamana and sprinkled water on herself after touching
various parts of her body. She then threw a few grains in certain
directions muttering certain incantations. Thereafter, she heaped the
barley on the plate and muttered the incantation known as
aindrāvaiṣṇavī. Then she spread those grains into the outline of
the targeted house and sat in meditation of a secret vetāla-bhairava
mantra for some time. She seemed to be in a trance for a while, as
though she was the daughter of pataṅjala kāpya possessed by kabandha
ātharvaṇa. Thereafter, she dropped a barley seed in one of the outlines
of the rooms and pointing to it said: “In that room, in that position
lies the valaga. It was installed by a prayoga known as the
turuṣkarāja-bhairavaṃ. That suggests that the abhicārin is perhaps
one who has or whose ancestors had contracted the vile memetic disease
known as marūnmāda. If you wish, I could come back tomorrow and break
the valaga, once I have suitably protected myself with appropriate
prayoga-s.”

Shilpika’s and her husband’s jaws almost dropped. They could hardly
believe what they were seeing. After some time Shilpika spoke: “You are
entirely fit for the aṣṭākṣarī vidyā and more. I suggest that you get it
from Somakhya directly because he knows its siddhānta more perfectly and
when mantra-s are transmitted it is best the siddhānta-s are suitably
transmitted too. I will convey this to him. As for the valaga we do not
want you to incur harm in anyway; so do not worry about extracting it.
After all it is not your business nor were you called to intercede.”

◊◊◊◊

Lootika had phoned Somakhya to set up the appropriate aṣṭaka day for him
to give her the due dīkṣa in the mantra. While her mother had sent her
on an errand to by a few spices, she ran into Maurvi and Vidrum eating
greasy samosā-s by the grocer’s shop. They offered to get her a samosā,
perhaps as a gesture in return for her sister blocking the intended
attack on them. Lootika refused saying that she was observing a vrata
and was avoiding abhojya and abhakṣya food. Then Maurvi asked: “Hey
spider-girl, do you know of someone called kuṭṭi Shareef? Meghana
threatened that she would take his help to punish us.”  
Lootika: “His name sounds like a South Indian marūnmatta but I have
never heard of one such.”  
Maurvi: “Anyhow, I have found out a peddler who sells some great
fabrics, garments and footwear for really inexpensive prices. Would you
like to accompany me later today to check them out?”  
Lootika: “That sounds great. I will certainly come along.” Then
remembering that she had promised to help her mother with cooking that
day she hurried back with the spices.

Normally, Lootika’s mother never let her daughters to step into the
kitchen. This was despite having long watched the skills of at least the
older three at their home lab with even a sense of some pride at her
children’s experimental abilities. However, when it came to the kitchen
she feared that they might contaminate the food with their contact with
all manner of biological samples. She also hated Lootika’s approach to
cooking which involved using pipettes, burettes, centrifuges and
measuring cylinders. She always chided Lootika saying that such precise
measurements were not the real secret of good cooking; rather it needed
a natural feel even as Lootika had in molecular biology. Her mother
remarked: “When you do your cloning or protein purification how often do
you go strictly by the published protocol? Do you not do things based on
the intuition you have? Then why do you want to have so many
measurements for something so much less precise.” Lootika had been
pestering her to try out a new recipe she had divined for a turkey-berry
curry. So finally her mother had acceded. As they were in the kitchen
mother and daughter were chatting about various things, when Lootika
told her about the prognosis of the ascetic who passed by their house.
Her mother looked into her eyes and said: “Really dear Lootika? I did
not hear the guy that day but few days ago I heard him say something
which I decoded as: tava snuṣā dahiṣyati. I panicked at first. But since
I really have no son I felt it was for someone else.” When the cooking
was over Lootika refrigerated some of her curry to take to Somakhya.
After lunch she heard Maurvi call from outside: “Hey cobweb-girl\!
come\! let’s be going\!” Lootika jumped onto her family scooter and left
with Maurvi.

Soon they were at the prominent road in the city whose footpaths were
lined with an array of carts and mobile stalls of peddlers twice every
month. After parking their vehicles in ground beside the road they
walked up to one of the footpaths and Maurvi craned her neck to locate
the peddler she wanted. However, he did not fall in her sight. Just then
another peddler boy accosted them and asked them check out the wares he
had in his stall. Lootika noted from his accent, which blended the a-s
into e-s, that he came from elsewhere in bhārata, perhaps the cerapada.
He asked them to follow him. Maurvi was irresistibly drawn to follow
him. Lootika too felt some unusual force drawing her to go with him –
almost as if she was being hypnotized. One part of her brain said to he
that it was not right. She put her hand on Maurvi’s shoulder and said:
“do you really want to go with him?” Maurvi: “Why? I see he has great
stuff. Let’s go check them out.” Lootika now looked at the peddler-boy
closely and found nothing particularly untoward. Moreover, there was
throng of people milling around the various peddlers. But when she
looked at him she again felt as though being pulled to follow him. Then
again, something within was telling her that it was not right. She
dropped her hand into the pocket of her lower garment and felt the knife
she carried in it. The touch of the handle made her feel more reassured
and she went with Maurvi to the peddler’s stall. There Maurvi bought her
self some garments and a cast iron kaṭaha. Lootika did not find any of
the garments appealing to her despite the peddler pushing hard to sell
one to her. He then showed her a pair of slippers that caught her fancy
right away and she purchased it. He next offered her a jacket. She
realized it was more suitable for males, but liked it, and decided to
buy it for Somakhya. Maurvi wanted to browse more of the peddlers but
Lootika wanted to meet Somakhya so she left Maurvi to herself and
returned.

◊◊◊◊

Lootika met Somakhya at his home lab in the garage. She offered him the
dish she had cooked earlier in the day and also the jacket. Somakhya
felt rather coy seeing her offer these to him and wondered why she was
being so effusive in her expression that day. Lootika quickly read
Somakhya’s reaction and deflected the matter by claiming that her mother
had asked her to take some of the dish for him. She also added that as
she was to receive the mantra from him, she should at least offer him a
token dakṣiṇa – the jacket was supposed to be that.

After handing the dish over to his mother, he joined Lootika to drive
out to a large false rudrākṣa (*Guazuma ulmifolia*) tree at a secluded
spot in their university campus. Beneath it after placing darbha-muṣṭi
on Lootika’s head Somakhya imparted the aṣṭākṣarī-vidyā whose ṛṣi is the
great ātharvaṇa, āitaṣo bhārgava. He first told her the coded form of
the mantra and then unpacked it for her. Thereafter, he told Lootika the
lineage of the great mantra starting from the amaraugha down to the
mānavaugha \[Appendix 1\]. He then said that he who knows this mantra
knows the kaumāra-śāsana in the form known as the amaraugha-śāsana.
Next, he then told her the puraścaraṇa that had to be done, demonstrated
the homavidhi, and provided other secret instructions pertaining to the
mantra. He also told her not to give the manu to anyone, who had not
attained the appropriate understanding of the mantra-śāstra, lest the
wrath of ṣaṇmukha fall upon them. By then it was the evening hour and
they returned to Somakhya’s house. Somakhya told her that a comet was
visible in the constellation of Perseus. Hence, they went to the terrace
of his house and set up the telescope to catch sight of it. Soon after
seeing it, Lootika realized it was getting late and took leave to return
home. As Somakhya continued watching the sky, he felt an unseasonal cool
breeze blow. He hence donned the new jacket Lootika had given him and
continued his observations.

On her way back home Lootika was riding past the water-works department
building when her scooter suddenly seemed to splutter and run out power,
finally coming to a halt just beside the garden-hedge that ran around
it. She was startled – she had gone that way countless times in her life
and never given a second thought. Now, just where her sisters had
mentioned something strange happening to them she was also struck on a
dark night all by herself. Just then she saw the street lamps
mysteriously go off and in the darkness she felt as though blinded for a
moment. From the other side of the garden-hedge she heard a low moan of
a wounded man. The she heard a voice repeated yell: “If I get out of
here I will kill you.” Then the voice rang out loudly: “But for today
this girl will be my victim”. Lootika initially felt paralyzed with
fright. But then her adrenalin kicked in even as the voice kept
repeating those words. She wondered if it might be a brahma-rākṣasa or a
bhūta of some kind and mentally deployed the kaṅkāla bhairava manu. The
voice went utterly silent. Sensing victory, she started pushing the
scooter with all her strength and tried to get home as fast as possible.
She might have pushed it a few yards when a man sped past her on his
motorcycle and threw the bīḍī he was smoking towards her feet. The new
slippers she was wearing instantaneously and explosively ignited into a
fire ball. Lootika was badly burnt, and in the intense pain felt
everything turn black before her. But before passing out she managed to
place a call to her father: “Dying near the water-works dep…”.

◊◊◊◊

Lootika felt the haze clearing a bit before her eyes. She felt reassured
as her eyes fell upon her mother and she felt her father touching her
forehead. She saw her sisters with anxious faces peering at her. She
soon realized that her father had taken charge of issue to ensure that
she was getting the best possible treatment. Her mother felt
particularly relieved for apparently in the haze of the pain shortly
after the event Lootika had told her that it was good she had many kids,
for even if she died the rest will be there for her. Just then an intern
darted into the room and called her father away. He went out into the
hallway and began speaking with the intern and another physician. Her
mother told her sisters to keep a watch of Lootika and said that she
would go home to get some food since they had not eaten anything since
the previous evening. As their mother went out, Vrishchika accompanied
her to ask her father something. He told them something, and her mother
asked Vrishchika not to tell Lootika about what her father had just told
them. But it seemed Lootika overheard them; so, when Vrishchika came
back to her bedside she asked: “What did our father tell you?”
Vrishchika making sure that her parents had left said: “Bad news. That
girl, Maurvi, with whom you went out yesterday, has just passed away
from burns she sustained this morning. Our father was called by the
other specialist to look into the matter.” Jhilleeka: “That is such a
terrible coincidence. So glad that you made it alive\! ” Vrishchika:
“That does not seem like coincidence: Lootika do you suspect
bahānāmati?” Lootika in a weak voice: “Vrishchika you are brilliant\!
That is what it is. This was indeed the saṃgrāma the ascetic was talking
about. I am sure our mother heard it wrong; it was supposed to be
sūnā not snuṣā.” Varoli: “We could test the hypothesis if we could
get hold of a bit of your slippers.” Lootika was feeling the sedative
pull her back into somnolence. She muttered: “Check if Somakhya is still
alive. If yes, please tell him about it right away….” She mumbled some
more words that they could not catch and closed her eyes.

\~oOo\~

The next day Vidrum arrived at Somakhya’s house. Somakhya had never seen
him so crestfallen – his eyes were bloodshot, his face haggard and his
vesture in disarray. Somakhya: “Why Vidrum? You look as though struck by
the mudgara of kumbhakarṇa. Vidrum: “Maurvi died of burns yesterday.
Life has never been this bad. By some strange coincidence I hear your
friend Lootika has also suffered from burns and is in the hospital now.
At least she is alive. Somehow the gods always seem kinder to you.”
Despite the latter claim of Vidrum, his words agitated Somakhya. But he
kept a calm face and expressed his condolences to Vidrum but he had to
leave Vidrum to his grief because he had to know more of what had
happened to Lootika. At the end of their conversation he said: “Vidrum,
now that you tell me about this incident with Lootika, I better get in
touch her. I hope the deva-s are kind to you.” He decided to contact
Lootika’s family right away and seek their permission to see her. Just
then it struck Somakhya that he was not feeling too well – he sensed a
vague fever overcoming him. He thought it was psychological and
disregarding it he made contact with Lootika’s mother and sought her
permission to see her daughter in the hospital. It was decided that he
would accompany Vrishchika and Varoli the next day to see Lootika.

Somakhya arrived at Lootika’s home. Vrishchika: “Hey where were you? I
was trying to call you yesterday and day before.”  
Somakhya: “I never knew this had happened. Was away at the abandoned
quarry with Vidrum the day before. He was climbing rocks and I was
collecting stones…”  
Vrishchika interjected: “Glad to see you are alive. Lootika has been
asking repeatedly if you are alive. Let me go get Varoli and we will
leave.”  
Somakhya: “Vrishchika, I need to tell you something. I am actually not
feeling too well – some fever and some tight sensation below my throat.
Hence, I wonder if I have caught something and if I should be seeing
Lootika at this juncture with a possible infection.”  
Vrishchika backed away from him and yelled: “What\! That is bad. We must
get you tested for anthrax right away\! Let me call my father\! What did
you do with the jacket Lootika gave you?”  
Somakhya was utterly confused by the outburst: “What are you saying\!”  
Vrishchika: “You have know idea about this. We know this is a case of
bahānāmati and we should test you right away. I will call my father to
have you checked right away – it could be a matter of life and death.
There is not much hope with pulmonary anthrax unless we start now. I
will take care of informing your parents and dealing with that jacket.”

\~oOo\~

Somakhya could not still believe that he had tested positive for
anthrax. He was speaking to Lootika on his computer and they rued the
side effects of antibiotic therapy. But they repeatedly congratulated
themselves for being alive. After all, even this would pass, they said
to each other. Lootika longed for revenge. Her father had been trying
legal means to track down and punish the attackers but to no avail.
Somakhya told her: “They are merely the agents. The sūtradhāra will have
his day of reckoning in the future.”

◊◊◊◊

Vrishchika had finally completed her medical fellowship and was taking a
couple of weeks off before her marriage. During that time she decided to
hang out at Somakhya and Lootika’s house and wanted to complete an
unfinished paper on patients with mutations in the gene HMGBX3. The
three of them were seated after dinner in their home lab when Vrishchika
asked: “Where is that robot which you mentioned, which Jhilleeka made?”
Lootika pointed to it and said: “It is a pretty sophisticated one: give
it your tablet and it will read the news out for you.” Vrishchika handed
the table over to the robot and it started reading out the headlines.
Finally, it read out: “Police nab killers of Dr. Dvijendra Assolkar.”  
Somakhya: “Ah that sounds interesting. Was he not the rationalist who
sought to expunge the sanātana dharma from the Indian consciousness?”  
Lootika: “Yes indeed\! the founder of the deva-unmūlana-samiti”  
Vrishchika: “Do you remember that incident with our father?”  
Lootika: “Of course. In a sense as the old Hindus would believe perhaps
his karma came to visit him after all\!”  
Somakhya: “What was that?”  
Vrishchika: “When we were kids, this man, Dr. Assolkar, came home one
day. He told our father that he was running a free medical camp for poor
villagers. When our father asked details he said it was being funded by
the NGO known as the Unity Foundation run by the mleccha Randall
Nesbitt. Our father realized that this was the front-end of the Church
of Chicago. So he asked Dr. Assolkar how come with all his drive for
deva-unmūlanaṃ the church was alright for him. Dr. Assolkar said there
was nothing wrong for the foundation was doing a great job of funding
health and education. Who cared if they had broken shrines and tried to
prevent Hindu religious activities. After all that would make things
easier for the deva-unmūlana-samiti. That was what inspired our father
to counter attack by providing free medical services to repulse the
pretendra duṣṭa-s from those villages.”  
Somakhya: “Very interesting\! The line between the Dr. Assolkars and the
Dr. Abu Bakrs can sometimes be a thin one.”  
Lootika: “And then there was that incident, I believe, at the time of
Jhilleeka’s birth. The Assolkars had come to visit our family among
other guests. They had suggested that to maintain the spirit of
secularism we choose a good Arabic name for little Jhilli\! It was
followed by a little rant against theophorous names though we never kept
such.”  
Somakhya: “Yes, I was aware he was good secular. Had he not ranted
against the scientists who offered a coconut for ārya atop a hillock in
cerapada after the successful testing of the mṛtyu missile?” Then
Somakhya bade the robot to read that article further.  
The robot read on in its artificial voice: “Dr. Dvijendra Assolkar, a
noted activist for social justice and eradication of superstitions, was
assassinated two years ago during a demonstration intended to show that
bahānāmati was mere superstition. Initially, it was suspected to be the
handiwork of the followers of śrī śrī śrī khaḍā daṇḍā bābājī, who was
reputed to have performed many miracles according to his devotees. He
had been debunked and exposed as a fraud by Dr. Assolkar. However, the
police found no involvement of the organization of the godman despite a
thorough investigation. In course of another investigation concerning
the mysterious death of a city doctor’s female sexual partner they
chanced upon two suspects Kochchuni and Kutti Shareef in whose lair they
found evidence for a fire-blanket similar to that used in the killing of
Dr. Assolkar. They are believed to have confessed their crimes during
the interrogation by the police.”  
Somakhya stopped the robot from reading further and smiling at Lootika
remarked: “Well, there is always some doubt regarding whether the
daṇḍaka-s have got it right but, I guess irrespective of that, they
have given us the needed revenge.”  
Vrishchika: “Oh these were the guys behind the dreadful bahānāmati
episode? It still zaps me in my dreams.”  
Somakhya: “I realized that Shareef was striking at you all for twice
thwarting their plans, and I was caught in the crossfire. But,
Vrishchika, in the haze of all that we never fully learned how you and
Varoli got to the bottom of it. The nitrocellulose does not surprise me
one bit, though I would never trivialize Varoli’s confirmatory analysis
with a small amount of material. Most importantly how did you figure out
my anthrax? That seemed like a long shot of Qasar’s son\!”  
Vrishchika: “It is a strange story. Lootika had procured a book by the
title turuṣkarāja-bhairaveṇa proktaṃ bahānāmati-sarvasvaṃ. The day she
went to obtain those fateful objects and meet you for that secret
mantra, which I would like to obtain too, I was reading that book. It
had a variety of interesting chemical preparations that seemed to
fascinate Varoli. But an appendix by the editor, who interestingly went
by the name Kochchuni, caught my eye. It spoke of peculiar preparations,
which had been made by a bahānāmati expert in the Panjab for the Mogol
tyrant Awrangzeb. One of those was made from dead cattle. Intending to
annex the Hindu kingdom of Marwar, around 1677-78 CE Awrangzeb deployed
these weapons to destroy the rulers of Marwar. At first he commanded
Jasvant Singh Rathod to accompany the Mogol army to fight the Pathans in
Afghanistan. There, he bumped him off with one of those bahānāmati
poisons. Then he invited his son Prithivi Singh Rathod to come to his
darbār in Delhi. During the meeting with Prithivi Singh, Awrangzeb
seized his hands and said he would kill him if he did not convert to
marūnmāda. But Prithivi Singh flung Awrangzeb’s hands away and said the
Rathods were willing to fight to death but will not accept the Arab’s
disease. Awrangzeb decided to give him another disease instead. He
suddenly changed his line and said that Prithivi Singh was his valued
friend and asked him to take a seat in the royal pavilion. Then he had
delivered to Prithivi Singh an ornate Khilat robe, which he insisted he
wear right away and sit for some time while he was served Sherbet and
sweets. Prithivi Singh is said to have died 10 days later with
difficulty breathing and black lesions on his skin. So, that might be
one of the earliest attacks with anthrax, though most attribute it to
the German Karl von Rosen in the Finnish war against the Rus during the
World War I. While others have thought it was small pox or plague, the
symptoms of Prithivi Singh, particularly the blackening of his skin
suggest anthrax. How they managed to do it without killing themselves is
still not clear to me.”

Somakhya: “Indeed, the issues regarding playing with anthrax make it a
difficult prospect for use in the Mogol era. Whatever the case, the
Prithivi Singh incident might have inspired modern marūnmatta-s with
access to the Mohammedan bioterrorists from the terrorist state to the
north to make it a good bahānāmati agent.”  
Lootika: “As Maurvi and I had been hit by the fire trick, and you were
still alive but showing symptoms, I guess it was not that hard for
Vrishchika to take a shot. After all urgency was a key in not going the
way of the lamented Prithivi Singh.”  
Somakhya: “Vrishchika, now for that mantra – you will get it from
Indrasena after your marriage – I have already imparted it to him. But
remember kumāra is a roguish deva and his mantra-s do not necessarily
come easy as Lootika would probably agree. And Lootika this morning when
I made the oblation with:  
idam aham dviṣantaṃ bhrātṛvyaṃ bhrātṛvyamābhyo digbhyo’syai divo’smād
antarikṣād asyai pṛthivyā asmādan nādyān nirbhajāmi nirbhaktaḥ sa yaṃ
dviṣmaḥ । you asked why I did not use a specific bhrātṛvya’s name.
Sometimes it is good to be inclusive for you never know which bhrātṛvya
might strike from where. You wanted instant revenge after the attack.
That is like antibiotic therapy. But sometimes it is good to let the
*Bifidobacterium* kill the *Clostridium*”  
They all smiled at each other. Vrishchika: “But what about that agent in
the water-works department?”  
Lootika chuckled and said: “Well, the unmūlana-vādin would have clapped
us as unmadita-s into a mental hospital for that\! So in his memory and
in the interest of pleasant dreams tonight let’s keep it for another
day\!”

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Appendix 1: The secret teaching of the mantra goes thus: nīlakaṇṭha :
lakṣmī : śikhaṇḍin : khaṇḍa : ḍamaru : vāk : hari : nalakūbara :
puliṅgam | The mantra was first seen by the divine eagle garuḍa when
skanda was installed as the commander of the deva-senā. He transmitted
it to vīrabhadra, he then transmitted it to vīrabāhu. This is the
amaraugha. Among the ṛṣi-s it was first seen by aitaṣo bhārgava that
great ātharvaṇa. From him it was eventually transmitted to his
descendant vājaratna. From him it was transmitted to somaśuṣman
vājaratnāyana who was the prefect at the aśvamedha of the bhārata
emperor śatānīka sātrājita. This the vipraugha. Eventually, it was
transmitted to the yuganātha ṣaṣṭhīśanātha and his dūtī viṣākha-maṅgalā.
From them to mayūranātha and his dūtī nakṣatra-mekhalā. From them to
manvarṇavanātha and his dūtī sarvamaṅgalā.
