+++
title = "The cairn beyond thexa0crag"

+++
It was the an early Indian summer morning. The type that makes one rise
rapidly from bed rather than remain tucked in like the mornings in the
cold northern lands. Vidrum had arisen from his bed and briskly jogged
up to the small temple on the edge of the cemetery that enshrined a 16
armed kAlI. He mentally recited the incantation “krIM krIM krIM sA mAM
pAtu devI kAlI bhagavatI vijayaM dadAtu naH ||” He then picked up pinch
of vermillion from the old calvaria placed in front of the image and
smeared it on his forehead. Thereafter he ran back home and seated
himself on the Damaru-shaped cane chair and lazily looked out at the
road and the field beyond the compound wall – after all it was vacation
time and free from the cares of life he had all the opportunity to just
sit and stare. Sipping the coffee his grandmother had given him, staring
at the yonder space, he wondered how wonderful it might have been if
Meghana of pretty locks was seated as his side. Just then he saw Lootika
passing by holding a net and a bag with pill-boxes in it. He was
surprised. What was she doing in this village of his? After all she was
not from these parts. She had always been frosty towards him, perhaps
because of her distaste for Meghana, whom she considered superficial and
dimwitted. Or perhaps it was her belonging to the socio-economic
pinnacle that placed a divide between her and the middle class types. He
had heard her refer to Meghana as “j\~NanashUNyA” several times. But
carried by the surprise of her unexpected appearance he went up to the
compound wall and called her, enquiring what she was doing in these
parts.

Lootika, it seemed to him, was more relaxed and amenable to conversation
in these days of vacation than at school. She said that she was on her
way to collect false scorpions and daddy-long-legs in the jungle that
lay just beyond the cemetery. She then excitedly showed him a photocopy
of a book titled “*Chelonethi, an account of the Indian false scorpions
together with studies on the anatomy and classification of the order*”.
This book published in 1906 was so hard to obtain that there was
apparently only one copy of it in India. But her relative had managed to
provider her a copy from abroad. She then went on tell Vidrum that the
Scandinavian arachnologist Carl Johannes With had made an expedition to
India at the beginning of the 1900s to discover and describe false
scorpions at length. No one had studied these arachnids in detail after
that in the subcontinent. Then, Lootika went on that closer to her time
there was a naturalist named Krishnan who had spent a lifetime studying
these arachnids and wrote a book on them. But then most of his people
looked at him much like Tennyson’s wife had looked at Charles Darwin and
felt Krishnan must be positively mad to be seeing arthropods where
others saw only a heap of desiccating vegetation. Indeed, Somakhya had
told her that though there were few men as learned as the old ayya, they
would dismissively say of Krishnan in the dramiDa language: “*avaruku
velayE ille; chumma edo kuppaya nonDiNDu irrupar*”. In any case, ever
since Somakhya had shown her these arachnids she found them fascinating
and finally decided that summer to launch a new study of them. She
excitedly remarked that it was truly uncharted territory with
discoveries waiting to be made by the observant and the patient.

Vidrum found all this utterly bizarre and felt more sympathy with the
detractors of Krishnan than Lootika. He was reminded of the lecture he
had heard from an advaita-teaching saMnyAsin where the renunciate
clarified that “sapta-dvIpa vasumati” was an example of useless
knowledge. Vidrum remarked to himself that if such basic geography was
useless then the engrossment in the ways of false scorpions must be the
epitome of it. Just then there was a blaring noise from a wind
instrument and much beating of drums. Lootika was startled and asked
what that was. Vidrum asked her to climb up on to the wall since a
procession of the kAlI temple was to pass through the street she was on.
It featured the temple elephant and also a buffalo, which was to be
eventually be “married” to a horse at the house of a brAhmaNa, after it
had made a round to the ritual at the shrine of the sister deity
[mahAmArI](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/05/19/rudra-his-agents/).
Lootika was excited by this new distraction and decided to watch it all
sitting on Vidrum’s wall. The procession wended its way and the elephant
as well as the buffalo copiously defecated on the street in front of
Vidrum’s ancestral home. Once the procession had gone past something
extraordinary happened. A couple of street dogs came running and rolled
vigorously for a while on the dung. Vidrum thought of his renunciate’s
lecture and remarked to himself that this must be truly the lower animal
birth he was admonishing about, for what else would delight in something
as undignified as a viShsnAnaM. But his curiosity was also aroused and
he asked Lootika as to what that might mean. She said she was as puzzled
as him and would think about it.

Then she gathered her stuff and was about to leave when Vidrum turned to
her and said: “Hey, it is not really safe for a pretty girl like you to
be wandering in the yonder forest all by yourself.”  
L: “Oh there is no cause of concern. My relatives are the local IAS
officials with some “powers” who administer these regions. Anyone would
be a fool to do something to me if they want to remain standing.”  
V: “Well but you never know … some desperate rogues…”  
L: “I am not as vulnerable as you think.” Saying so she drew out an
asi-putrikA with a 7 inch gleaming blade. “I got this from the feral
brAhmaNa gardabhImukha.” Then she took out something which looked like a
bottle of nail polish and said: “Moreover if that fails here is a secret
weapon. I heard you and Somakhya talking about how the Soviet agents
used to assassinate people with the umbrella tip. So some days back I
talked to Somakhya about making such a weapon for ourselves. Here is the
result and the herbal formulae remain our secret.”  
V: “Ah, I never thought you were so much a female version of a
‘chupA-rustam’\! Good luck with your wanderings.”  
Vidrum spent much of the rest of his day sitting and starring or taking
circles around his grandfather’s house, much like an ox driving an old
oil-press, or reading some mangas. That night he heard some strange
howls and went out into the garden to check those out. He saw eyes
flashing in the dark and eventually as his own adjusted to the dark he
made out the shapes of jackals. They ran on to the street in front of
his house and, like the dogs earlier in the day, rolled vigorously on
the elephant and buffalo dung. He remarked to himself that he should
mention this to Lootika in case he saw her the next day.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-a4qZ0N2atn0/UsfBDbLFWsI/AAAAAAAAC1o/GUcibRCmAL8/s400/cyclic_qad.png.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/1mDCMrOMdrfr2AxoFhzfodMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The next day Vidrum spent the time constructing geometric figures using
his old compass box. In one such construction he observed the incenters
of the 4 triangles with the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral as one
of their sides formed a rectangle. He did this construction again and
again and found that irrespective of the cyclic quadrilateral he got a
rectangle. He wondered why this was so and roamed out that evening to
make circles around his grandfather’s house. Just then he caught sight
of Lootika who was returning from her false scorpion and opilione hunt.
He called out to her and told her of the jackals and his constructions
of cyclic quadrilaterals. She was also unable to prove why always a
rectangle is obtained but hoped to work more on it. She in turn
excitedly showed Vidrum her drawing of a false scorpion attached to a
fly.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-qoZ7WtMQSG0/UsfBDaQFoTI/AAAAAAAAC1s/ZR2I8lnqU_k/s800/pseudoscorpion.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/PDMmXnEuyIKIGKGDKOQYF9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

At that point Vidrum proposed that the next day they should probably
climb up a crag that lay in the midst of the jungle and explore the
environs of a cairn that lay beyond it. Atop the crag lay a shrine whose
deity was called chauryalakShmI. A legend, which Vidrum had heard,
claimed that thieves after their plundering expeditions used to come to
worship this deity. There were rumors of buried wealth in its vicinity
but also one that people who tried to take it would be killed by the
thieves. Lootika was immediately game because she felt it might give her
the opportunity to explore a more diverse array of ecological niches.
Accordingly they set off the next day. Vidrum had picked up a goodly
billhook from his grandfather’s collection which came in many shapes and
sizes. He was confident that with that muscular billhook he could defend
himself sufficiently against any local rowdy who might take a chance.
After scaling the steep crag and reaching its top Lootika and Vidrum
went their own ways. Lootika was carefully turning leaves and stones and
picking up her scorpions – interestingly, she found that the version
which Somakhya had shown her prowling in the used-book store was common
even in these wooded environs near the cairn. After digging for a while
in the vicinity of the chauryalakShmI shrine Vidrum went on to explore
the circumference of the cairn. He remembered that Somakhya had
described these as remnants of the megalithic people who probably
brought the Prakritic languages to southern India. There, after some
scratching around he found two implements that were somewhat out of
place vis-a-vis the megalithic era – an old rusted billhook with an
inscription in a West Asian script and the barrel of a gun. He carefully
collected these and that afternoon Vidrum and Lootika returned, both
immensely pleased with their spoils.

Some weeks later Vidrum was back in his town and went to meet Somakhya.
They spent a long time palavering about how their vacations had
progressed. Vidrum had much to say, from the rectangle within the
quadrilateral, to the animals wallowing in dung, to the climax of his
metallic finds. He asked Somakhya what the origin of those implements
might be. Of course Somakhya had no answer but only felt a bit envious
of that Vidrum had found stuff so interesting. Some days later Somakhya
was engaging in ball-making as he did during most summers those days: He
had gathered a large mass of raintree pods and was de-seeding them. Then
he took the fruit walls and was crushing them with a stone pestle to
obtain a paste with which he would make the ball. As he was hunched
pounding the pods, Lootika, who was prone to display of childish
activities on occasions, stole up from behind Somakhya and covered his
eyes with her palms. As a result, rather than take in the pleasure of
the sparSha with Lootika he now smashed his own finger with the stone
pestle and was in deep agony. Lootika wanted to help but he shooed her
away because he did not want to be seen in her presence as he ran to the
elders for some help. Soon his wound got infected and he lay in bed with
a high fever, perhaps in a delirium induced by the bacterium.

\-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-

May be it was during this delirium or perhaps it was under the influence
of the opioid he had been administered after the physician had lanced
the wound, Somakhya saw something like a dream. It was a small nR^isiMha
temple in a well known town of the mahArATTas. A mahArAShTrI brAhmaNa
from the clan of the kauNDinya-s arrived at the temple. He was unlike
many of his coethnics of the age, who were closer to what the old ayya
samarapu\~Ngava had to say about them in his travelogue through
bhAratavarSha a few hundred years ago: “neglecting the shAstra-s they
are more like a mArvADI of the 3rd varNa or a kAyastha account-keeper”.
He took out a text of the R^igveda and began his daily pArAyaNa, that
day starting with the 9th maNDala. He still belonged to the world that
was crumbling around him; his clansmen still performed soma rituals and
his community still counted several who knew one of more of all the 4
veda-s in entirety. He too had hoped to be a R^itvik who might perform
rituals all the way up to the great vAjapeya with its long-distance
shooting contest and grand 17 lap chariot races.

At the same time the heavy air of defeat still hung all around – he had
not yet entered his teens when he saw with his own eyes the catastrophic
defeat of the Indian army in the first war of independence, many of
whose leaders had been his own coethnics. Some of his own relatives from
the extended family had been slain in the great battlefields of North
India in the attempt to shake off the shveta-shavasAdhaka yoke. The news
had reached him of the genocide of Indians in the north. In his own
circles he had heard the story of how a coethnic who had protected an
Englishman and his girl from being killed during the Indian attack was
skewered like a kebab by the bayonet of the very same Englishman at the
end of the war. He had learned English in school and had read in person
the account of the total genocide conducted by the pretasAdhaka warrior
Hugh Rose in Jhansi: “*No maudlin clemency was to mark the fall of the
city.*” As he ended for the day with the gAyatrI “siShAsatU rayINAM
vAjeShv arvatAm iva | bhareShu jigyuShAm asi ||” his mind wandered
towards the catastrophe of the first war of independence again. He had a
conflicting thought run through him. After all the shruti had just said
that the soma was drunk by victorious warriors conquering in battle like
indra and soma with their horses racing with booty. After all the great
vAjapeya was performed by the victorious Arya, with bow held aloft,
whose horses had trampled upon his vanquished foes and had beaten his
foeman’s land flat beneath their hoofs. So what was the point of
performing the vAjapeya when bhAratI, who is invoked to come to the
ritual arena at the beginning of every rite, was bound by the
pretAchArin-s.

He noticed that the pavilion beside the temple was unusually filling up
with a small crowd. There was some tension in the air as few brAhmaNa-s
were talking in hushed but angry tones with others. He went there and
enquired as to what was afoot. They told him that a learned brAhmaNa who
as an official in the court of the white sahibs was to give a speech
inaugurating a new movement. He knew that brAhmaNa. He came from a
family of learned shrIkula sAdhaka-s belonging to the bharadvAja gotra.
In fact his grandfather had written new commentaries on the
yoginI-jAla-shaMbara and the nityAShoDaShikArNava tantraM. But this
brAhmaNa himself had immersed himself in English education; however, he
had not neglected his study of saMskR^ita and the history of
bhAratavarSha. The young kauNDinya decided to attend that bharadvAja’s
speech. The latter briskly covered the empire of the marAThas under
shivAjI, then the peshva-s and the defeat of 1857 CE. Thereafter, he
declared that there was no point continuing with the old strategy but a
complete change was needed. He advocated that bhArata had to first
industrialize on a massive scale and move from an entirely agrarian
economy to one where heavy industry played a major role on a national
scale. He listed out the kinds of industries and the order in which they
should be developed and emulating the Deutscher Bund on some matters
where he felt they were superior to the English tyrants. He also
declared that there was no point for brAhmaNa-s to spend time writing
moronic avirodhaprakAsha-s defending a geostationary, geocentric,
flat-earth universe. Instead, called them to closely study science
irrespective of whether it came from the English, French or the
Deutscher Bund. In particular, he prophetically declared that the works
of James Maxwell and Charles Darwin that had just come out were of great
significance and needed to be understood despite being difficult.

Finally, he came to the most contentious topic of all. He declared that
the preta-sAdhaka-s were exploiting the stratification of Hindu society
to break away the avarNa-s and the service jAti-s and making them a
front against the savarNa-s. He described how recently an avarNa Marathi
gentleman whose clansmen had been bowermen and florists, who faithfully
served the erstwhile brAhmaNa prime ministers and fought in 1857, had
converted to the pretamata under the influence of a Brahmin-hating
padre. Now he was leading an anti-Brahminical crusade among his avarNa
coethnics to calling upon them to uphold the British Raj. Thus, the
bharadvAja concluded by stating that they need comprehensive reforms
which included temple entry and Sanskrit education for the avarNa-s, as
also an educational movement among them that would help them re-identify
with and recover their Hindu roots. For this he proposed his new ideas
for religious discourse within the Hindu fold. As he ended there was a
murmur within the sabhA. Clearly, his lecture had deeply affected the
listeners. One paNDita stood up and asked on what basis could he claim
that the avaraNa-s had any adhikAra to the holy Sanskrit language when
even brAhmaNa women did not. The bharadvAja cited a verse from from the
Kashmirian Sanskrit poet bilhaNa who was in the karNATa court: “There is
no grAma or janapada, no rAjadhAnI or no araNya, no garden or school
where learned and ignorant, young and old, male and female alike do not
read my poems and shake with pleasure.” Having said this he cited other
verses about king bhoja-deva to show how the shUdra woman was equally
versed as a brAhmaNa one in the deva-bhAShA during his reign. Hence, he
said there is enough evidence that Sanskrit was the national language
understood by all. Then he concluded that this is how bhArata used to
be, and that the view of the paNDita is contrary to the real situation
before the Islamic and Christian deluges. The paNDita thought it was
strange way to answer his objection – he was arguing based on historical
precedence rather than by citing authoritative shAstra-s. He remained
unconvinced and declared he would write a virodha demolishing the
bharadvAja-s claims.

But a lot of what the bharadvAja said seemed to resonate with the
kauNDinya and he was pretty convinced they should go ahead in some such
way. For his part he wrote up a little tract on the solar system in
Sanskrit and read it out to his students in a little school he taught
in. He hoped this might introduce them to the ways of current science.
He also drew up plans for founding a larger educational body that will
start colleges and schools for the wide-ranging modern education of all
Hindus. To make this come true he approached many a businessman and
sought their aid. In the mean time his circle was abuzz with a
distressing event. A brahmaNa paNdita surnamed Natu had converted to the
preta-mata; calling himself Jeremiah, he was vigorously propagating the
preta-mata and hurling abuse on the Hindu dharma in English and Sanskrit
tracts. The English were tacitly supporting the publication and
distribution of these works. “The Hindoos are horse-fornicators,
incestuous, bestial and immoral” wrote Jeremiah with copious citations
regarding the ashvamedha and gosava rituals. The kauNDinya was incensed
with these tracts and he went to he bharadvAja stating that they should
write a vigorous polemic on the preta and the preta-pustakam. The
bharadvAja said they should be positive and rather than engaging in
polemics they should compose a tract outlining the sublime teachings of
the veda and vedAnta and distribute them as a counter to the writings of
Jeremiah and his friends. Unconvinced, the kauNDinya wrote a fiery
polemic condemning the preta and his cult. But strangely he found the
bharadvAja too scared to publicize it widely.

Worse was to come. One day the kauNDiya had to travel urgently to
another town to attend a family funeral. On his way back he was in a
carriage where a rich Hindu businessman and his youthful daughter were
seated in the adjacent compartment separated from his by bars. In the
same compartment as the businessman were two uncouth English youth. Even
as they neared his town the kauNDiya noticed that the Englishmen were
harassing the young lady with their advances. He was furious but could
do nothing but watch it play out till finally they disembarked at the
station. He again went to the bharadvAja and sought his help saying they
should make a legal complaint or in the least write tract on the
incident and distribute it. The bharadvAja rebuffed the kauNDinya saying
it was impossible to do anything with such slim evidence against the
English youth; it was up to the lady’s father to do so. A few days
latter he heard that a similar incident of an assault on a Mohammedan
woman by English youth had happened near the cantonment close to the
Islamic quarter. His interlocutor was a local Pathan extortionist, going
under the colloquial moniker Zabardast Khan, who helped the mArvADI
money-lenders extract their arrears for a commission. The Pathan swore
that the incident would not go unavenged. A few days latter the
Englishmen who had molested the Mohammedan woman were cornered on a
lonely street, even as they were returning home from a late night party,
and promptly beheaded by the billhooks of Zabardast Khan and his aides.
Thereafter, they quickly placed the dead Englishmen in coffins and
simulated an Islamic funeral procession the next day to bury them in
their graveyard. When the English police enquiry came after the Moslems,
they threatened a mass riot if the Kaffrs set foot in the graveyard. Not
wanting to upset the calm, and given the slim evidence they had, the
English let it pass and the case remained unsolved.

The incident with the marUnmatta-s profoundly impressed itself on the
kauNDinya. It brought forth some inner concern he was unable to clearly
articulate. Though both the Islamic Jihad and the Hindu war of
independence had been crushed by the English, it appeared that the
Mohammedans, whom his coethnics had come closely to rolling back from
the holy land of bhAratavarSha, were still abrasively gritty as ever,
whereas the Hindus had gone flaccid. In the mean time he had been
seriously working on the education and integration of avarNa-s. In the
process he had befriended a nAyaka of a predatory hill-tribe whose
ancestor had been overnight re-designated from chor to koTvAl by the
Holkar in the yester-years. This nAyaka’s tribe had now been conferred
to the rather disparaging title of “criminal caste” by the English. The
kauNDinya was trying to inculcate in them the values of a more benign
existence and the nAyaka appreciating the value of the kauNDinya’s
teachings was trying to propagate it in the midst of his people. In
return he introduced the kauNDinya to their physical culture which
greatly improved the kauNDinya’s health and strength. However, the
incubus of about 1100 years of predatory existence vis-a-vis urban
populations could not be erased by a mere few years of education and the
hill-tribes were in still restless for their old ways.

One day the kauNDinya and the nAyaka went to spy an old forest region
where they considered starting an akhADA. The kauNDinya believed that
the cairn in that old forest marked the spot where an old advaitin of
the dattAtreya tradition had founded an astradhArin akhADA about a
millennium ago. They climbed up the crag in the midst of the forest and
seated themselves even as the great eye of the two heavenly kShatriya-s
was sinking. In the grassy clearing that lay beyond them a trio of
gayals were grazing peacefully. All of a sudden a great pack of dholes
closed in upon the bovids with their ferocious cacophony. Two gayals
escaped their dragnet but the third did not make it in time. Over the
next hour despite its size it was overwhelmed and rent apart by the
dholes which settled into a feeding frenzy. Suddenly, the kauNDinya felt
inspired by the sight even as ashvatthAman had been inspired by the owl
on the kuru field. He told the tribal nAyaka: “We are a pack like these
dholes and the English, while big like the Gayal are just one. If we
fall upon them with the unity of this pack they would be destroyed.” The
nAyaka was inspired too and agreed with the kauNDinya. He declared his
whole marauder tribe will be ready for such action.

\-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-

Both had a premonition that this was going to be their last meeting.
While the bharadvAja and the kauNDinya had drifted apart and even had
serious differences of opinion they respected each other. The kauNDinya
had helped the bharadvAja draft a tract based on his study of the
bArhaspatya nIti which had been composed in the mahArATTa country in the
days before the Mohammedan onslaught. In this text it was stated that
all the limbs of Hindu society had to study the nIti and artha texts in
order to be politically aware and this was an activity ordained for both
the present and the future as it was done in the enlightened past. The
kauNDinya had argued that neglect of this injunction coming down from
the great law-giver bR^ihaspati was the cause of the doom of the
bhArata-s. But today he had come to say something way more serious… The
bharadvAja disapprovingly told the kauNDinya that by looting the English
tax-revenue which was being taken to Bombay he was only taking away the
money that belong to his own people rather than the English. Moreover,
he said that the whole idea of forming a truck with the Arab ghazi
Shaikh Idris from Hyderabad was a recipe for the highest disaster. He
said: “You saw how it failed in 1857 and now you want to do it again?
Remember our ancestors under the great Chatrapati fought hard to drive
away the same Mohammedan invaders not for nothing.” Then the bharadvAja
added that he should return to the path of doing something constructive
– industries, education, social reform he declared. But the kauNDinya
was adamant. He said all that could only happen if the tyrannical
shvetavarNa-s, who had nothing but deep hate for our people, were slain
in battle or driven out, even as indra had slaughtered the hundreds of
thousands of dAsa-s led by varchin…

It was around 1.00 PM. The English convoy was led by Capt David Low
along with white officers Lt Richard Hayes and Lt Konrad Bassler,  a
Swiss missionary who was now working for the English corps. They were
accompanied by a company of sepoys who were sandwiched between the white
officers and grunts. They guarded the collections of revenue which was
being borne to Bombay. Even as they passed through the forest path
beneath the crag the kauNDinya took aim with his rifle and nailed a
perfect hit that brought down David Low in a pool of blood. The company
was startled. Taking advantage of their confusion the bands of Shaikh
Idris, Zabardast Khan and the nAyaka fell upon the company. In the melee
that ensued Zabardast Khan got close enough to Hayes and struck his head
off with a tremendous blow from his sword. In the meantime the nAyaka
scored a shot from among the trees which found the heart of Konrad
Bassler sending him right away to his spot reserved in the raurava realm
of vaivasvata. This slaughter of the accursed shveta-s, who had all
along treated the Indians as viNmUtra, gave great encouragement to their
bands who despite the heavy firing completely overwhelmed the English
force and took possession of the the revenue cases. As per their
agreement they quickly divided it among themselves. However, Shaikh
Idris had his own plans – not satisfied with the victory over the
English, his Arab band rode on to the village beside the forest with the
objective of looting it and also slitting some Kaffr’s throats.
Zabardast Khan and his Pathans, and the kauNDinya, the nAyaka and their
tribesmen were to go their own way. The nAyaka said that they must place
a part of their spoils as an offering for chauryalakShmI. But just then
they were surprised by a whole battalion led by the Lt Col Stephen
Jackson, who had vowed to put the “uppity heathen black devils” in their
place. Zabardast Khan’s band had a mole who had already conveyed their
plans to the English authorities. They had sent Jackson to relieve the
convoy but he was just a little late in arriving. The surprise of
Jackson’s assault quickly ended the lives of the nAyaka, all Pathans and
many of the tribesmen. The kauNDinya and Zabardast Khan kept fighting.
The former was shot from behind by a marksman who had climbed up the
cairn to get a good shot. He went down with his rifle beside him. The
Pathan was left with just his billhook and tried an exaggerated swing,
but before he found his mark he too had been mowed down. Jackson
declared: “let the wild dogs eat these black devils” and rode away in
victory to pursue Shaikh Idris.

That night uchchratyAnandanAtha was going by with his disciples. He saw
the corpse of the kauNDinya. He said to his students: “This is the body
of a brAhmaNa. We should not let it go uncremated. Let’s set up a pyre
for him – his Atman has a couple more janma-s to take”. The students
asked: “Why did he die?” uchcharatyAnandanAtha: “The gods indeed send
lessons in the form of ways of other animals. But not all learn them
completely. Indeed, if they learned all those teachings which the wise
jagadguru viShNusharman had conveyed they would not be in such dire
straits. This brAhmaNa observed the dholes. How did the dholes get so
close to the grazing gayals without the latter not even noticing the
harbingers of their death? What our brAhmaNa did not know is that before
the assault they had rolled repeatedly in the viNmUtra of the gayals and
elephants. Thus, they smelt not like dogs but other herbivores. Thus,
they raised no alarm even as they closed in on the cattle. This brAhmaNa
did not realize that to pounce upon enemies as evil-minded and
accomplished as the mlechCha-s one needs the same level of concealment
and surprise as the dholes after their viShsnAna.”

In his haze Somakhya cried: “Lootike\! Why is the scorpion on your
thigh\!”
