+++
title = "Some meanderings on early medieval history from the view point of nAstikaxa0compositions"

+++
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-CQNol2n_DXw/U8N8qbhqhhI/AAAAAAAADAU/6oIy61oFtvA/s800/vajreshvarI_small.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/5ac9u8vUP2IK1RwBFwU-WNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
A image of the goddess vajreshvarI from a Dilwara temple built by a
jaina banker-businessman of the chAlukya period later embellished by
bhAmA sAH

This epistle is a brief discussion on the socio-political developments
in early medieval India emerging from philological comparisons between
jaina sources, other nAstika material and Astika sources. To give some
background we point to some jaina and other nAstika narratives, some of
which were posted on these pages such as:  
1\) [A tale from the samarAichcha
kahA](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/06/29/the-sixth-cycle-of-samaraichcha-kaha-a-vanija-tradition/ "The sixth cycle of samarAichcha kahA: a vaNija tradition")  
2\) [Some anti-Astika tales of the
jaina-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/05/11/some-anti-astika-stories-of-the-jaina-s/ "Some anti-Astika stories of the jaina-s")  
3\) [dharmakIrti’s anti-Astika
polemics](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/23/an-indigo-south-asian-hemus-salt-and-other-interlocutions/ "An indigo South Asian, hemu’s salt and other interlocutions")  
4\) [A narrative from the ma\~njushrIya
mUlakalpa](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/01/17/brahmana-s-and-nastika-s/ "brAhmaNa-s and nAstika-s")  
5\) To the above we may also add the famous novel on the hero varA\~Nga
written by the naked jaina jaTAsiMhanandin (those unfamiliar with it can
easily find the plot online)

These tales come from a time when the Astika deva-dharma was resurgent –
it had evolved a strategy that no longer depended on royal patronage.
Rather royalty needed to adopt some form of the Astika deva-dharma for
its ultimate legitimacy. On the philosophical front despite the great
ingenuity and sophistication of both the clothed and naked nAstika-s,
they were again on the back-foot with respect the Astika
counter-polemics. No longer were the Astika-s limited by the confines
and pitfalls of the prAjApatya tradition of the veda – their deva-dharma
had evolved new strategies that spanned a wide spectrum of thought
suitable for a wide range of human proclivities in religiosity. These
included the resurgent mImAMsaka-s, rising vedAntin-s and the great
waves of sectarian traditions, starting with the newer versions of the
shaiva, vaiShNava and kaumAra mata-s that had already swept across
jaMbudvIpa and beyond, spawning the tantra-age. Under these
circumstances the jaina-s and bauddha-s adapted differently. The former
were simply unable to break the patronage model, which heavily depended
on the third varNa. Yet they longed for royal patronage – occasionally
they did get it (e.g. chAlukya emperor pulakeshin-II’s wife) but they
had to be content sharing it with the dominant Astika-s and evolving
mantrayAna bauddha-s, that too typically receiving only the smaller
share.

● A key motif running through a large body of the jaina texts is the
merchant-hero – the shreShThin – a banker and merchant (the pan-Indian
surname, Neo-Indo-Aryan: seTh, seThI, sheTTi\[ar\], is an attestation of
their spread throughout the subcontinent). In the jaina lore he is
typically a devote lay jaina on the path to jaina perfection that he
would attain later in his life. He has come a long way from his
precursor the 3rd varNa of the veda. In the older layers therein, the
3rd varNa was much more the general cattle/land-owning laity than
specifically the merchant – cognates of the Iranian vAstryo-fshuyant.
While having adhikAra to vaidika rituals and serving as yajamAna-s, they
were not exactly part of the Indo-Aryan elite circles or aristocracy
comprised of brAhmaNa-s and kShatriya-s. Only few among them contributed
to vaidika compositions (albeit some important ones, e.g. vatsapri and
bhAlandana). However, by the time the Indo-Aryans had settled in India
they were probably socially dominant in urban localities, especially by
way of channelizing production by the service castes (e.g. maNikAra,
rajjusarja, takShaka, rajayitrI, etc., mentioned in the yajurveda; today
often included in the OBC category of the Indian reservation system).
Their trade systems appear to have been subservient to the protection
and organization offered by the mobile and militarily dominant
trans-regional 1st and 2nd varNa-s – a phenomenon that probably ensured
the dominance of the Indo-Aryan languages in the sindhu-sarasvati-valley
system of cities and towns. Whatever the case, by the so called second
urbanization of the India the vaishya-s had expanded their role beyond
the old pastoralist-agrarian economy and were now part of a booming
trade system that not only spanned the subcontinent of jaMbudvipa but
spread beyond via both the east and the west coasts. Thus, they were in
possession of a new-found status as financial elites, in competition
with the old Indo-Aryan elite. Indeed, their early active participation
in the veda-virodhaka traditions such as jaina and bauddha might have
represented their attempt at coopting alternative religious identities,
specifically to rival the two old Indo-Aryan elite varNa-s.

However, given that the founders in both cases were kShatriya-s, and
that both cults drew Brahminical participation, meant that, to a degree,
there was still the remnant of the “old order” despite the occasional
protestations within these heterodox traditions. Examination of the
older sthaviravAda traditions shows that the early bauddha did not
extensively perform classical Indo-Aryan rituals. For instance, we do
not find specific homa vidhAna-s or importance attached to homa-s. This
perhaps represents the phase when, despite the presence of the first two
varNa-s in high positions, the praxis of bauddha-mata was still catered
primarily to groups not deeply embedded in the old ritual performance.
But with the rise of bauddha brAhmaNa-s and the Sanskritization of the
bauddha dharma, homa rites and mantra practice became increasingly
important in the mahAyAna and subsequent phases of bauddha tradition.
Thus, bauddha fell more in line with the Astika tradition. Consequently,
it started competing for the same niches as the Astika traditions.
However, in contrast, the jaina-s appear to have stuck with the vaishya
patronage and increasingly coopted them as a vehicle for their
alternative identity. Both the bauddha-s and Astika-s in their early
medieval formulations also valued the vaNij vaishya-s and accorded them
a respectable position. For example, in the case of Astika-s we see the
respectable depictions of vaishya-s as early as the pa\~nchatantra
itself and this continues subsequently in the early medieval period like
in daNdin’s dashakumAra-charita. However, unlike in the jaina tradition,
vaishya-s were rarely, if ever, cast as the primary heroes. Thus, the
high incidence of vaishya heroes in their tradition is a departure from
what is seen in the Astika or bauddha traditions of the same time. Not
surprisingly, even today the jaina tradition is still primarily
associated with the tradesmen caste.

● As a consequence of the above situation jaina lore tells us much more
about the ways of the vaishya-s than any other Indian tradition. One
theme that repeatedly emerges in the jaina tales is the attack by
predatory forest tribesmen on traveling vaNij-s (merchants) on business
trips as well as their settlements. For example, a central event in the
varA\~nga-charita is the conflict between the pulinda-s and the
shreShTin-s. Here a band of 3-4000 pulinda-s attack the caravan of the
merchant chief sAgaravR^iddhi and were close to completing the plunder
of his goods, when the jaina hero of tale, varA\~Nga enters the fray and
kills the pulinda chief and his son. Similarly, other tales (see those
linked above) mention attacks by shabara-s and in yet other places they
are called dasyu-s. In the anti-astika tale of hariSheNa we hear of the
attack and arson by predatory tribesmen on a town populated by vaishya-s
in Gujarat. Thus, attacks on and arson of both mobile caravans and
frontier towns by plundering tribesmen often organized in to fairly
large groups appears to be an persistent feature of the jaina
experience.

● The jaina tradition was already moving away from the absolute ahiMsa
of tIrthaMkara mahAvIra and violent retribution towards rivals of the
jina-mata or violent action towards enemies of the mata by jaina-s was
becoming acceptable. From their own sources we hear that haribhadra sUri
had his bauddha rivals jump into cauldrons of boiling oil and die as
revenge to the bauddha killing nephews after defeat in debate. We also
hear jaina sources themselves of the naked jaina akala\~Nka physically
thrashing his bauddha rival after defeating him in a debate. Likewise,
we hear in the prabandha-koSha that the jaina tAntrika mahendra used his
abhichAra to behead the brAhmaNa administrators of pATalIputra and force
them to convert to the jina-mata. However, as is typical of the
nAstika-s, when there is real danger they are quick to fall in line in
collaborating with their Astika rivals: The 13th chapter of the
bhadrabAhu-saMhitA attributed to the legendary bhadrabAhu a contemporary
of chANakya but composed much later calls upon jaina ritualists to
operate in conjunction with brAhmaNa-s to perform apotropaic and
prognostic rites before military operations \[Footnote 1\]. Given this
backdrop, it is not surprising that with much higher stakes at hand, the
jaina vaNij were pragmatic in their response to the above-described
depredations and formed private armies to protect their caravans. This
is indeed the central theme in the story of varA\~Nga where the vaNij
private army is overwhelmed by the marauding force of pulinda-s before
the jaina hero varA\~Nga arrives to shore up the former and slaughter
the pulinda-s. Some jaina-s have made the bold claim that certain local
shrines of mailAra (i.e. khaNDobA) near the gigantic monolithic monument
of the nagna in the karNATa country are actually vIrakal-s or
commemorative shrines of a sword-wielding jaina fighter from such a
private army who died while trying to save vaNij caravans from
predators. Indeed, in the shvetAMbara polemical literature we hear of a
temple ritualist jaina of the vaishya caste named padmaprabha in the
court of pR^ithivirAja ChAhamAna. This jaina is said to have been a good
wrestler and a warrior. Just on the eve the Islamic assault on the
ChAhamAna-s another rival ascetic shvetAMbara jaina, who was opposed to
the temple ritualist jaina-s, had padmaprabha excommunicated from the
court. The loss of such merchant warriors could have contributed among
other things to the outcome of the battle with the Mohammedans that
followed.

But this tradition was not lost in the rAjput lands especially among the
war-like haldiyA-s a guild of jaina banker-businessmen of the khaNDelvAl
vaNij clan. Indeed, the jaina vaNij experience with private armies and
warfare was to have a crucial role in Hindu history in the form of two
figures from Mewar bhAmA sAH, friend of mahArANA pratApa during the
Jihad of the tyrant Akbar and minister dayAl sAH during the Jihads of
tyrant Awrangzeb. bhAmA sAH and his brother tArAchand were sons of a
vaishya businessman who had served the valiant mahArAnA sangA. They
fought with their vaishya private forces alongside pratApa siMha and
organized the traders to join the Hindu struggle against the the army of
Islam. Later, after pratApa siMha’s defeat in great battle of Haldighati
(1576 CE), they retreated and hatched a plan to help the rAnA revive his
struggle. Even as they retreated the vaishya brothers and their sons
made 5-6 sorties on the Mogol forces to fight off their attempts to
encircle pratApa siMha. They stopped the renovation of the large temple
to the first tIrtha\~Nkara at Dilwara and diverted the money from this
venture and their personal finances from their business to reorganize
their private vaishya army numbering several thousand men. They then
launched a series of mobile cavalry attacks on the two ghazi-s
Shihab-ad-din and Qutb-ad-din who were appointed by Akbar in Malwa.
After constant fighting for about two years they either killed or
deposed (the records are uncertain) the two jihadists and captured their
hoard of Akbari gold coins amounting to 2.5 million rupees. This they
gave to the mahArANa along with horses bought from their own wealth as
well as their own contributions of personal wealth. This allowed pratApa
siMha and his son amara siMha to continue their struggle against Akbar
and Jahangir. bhAmA sAH also helped organize the finances of the Mewar
kingdom and for these services he was raised to prime minister under
pratApa siMha and amara siMha.

In the 1600s, rANa rAja siMha revived the martial spirit of his
ancestors like hammIra, kumbha and pratapa to fight against the Islamic
yoke. Legend has it that the conflict was precipitated with a kShatriya
woman, whom Awrangzeb had demanded in marriage for a Mogol, having sent
a message that for a kShatriya woman to mate with a monkey-faced
Mohammedan is like having a swan mate with a stork. rAja siMha decided
to intervene seeing this as a moment when the honor of the Hindus was in
utmost danger from the Mohammedans. This was followed by further events
that Awrangzeb assembled a mighty force to attack Mewar. Importantly,
the death of Chatrapati shivAjI in mahArAShTra gave Awrangzeb the much
needed breather to concentrate his entire force against Mewar. He called
all his sons to join the effort along with the veteran jihadi Dilir Khan
who had killed shivAjI’s kAyastha general at purAMdara to reduce shivAjI
to a surrender. He was also joined by an artillery brigade of Portuguese
Christian allies who hoped to wage holy war on the infidels (note the
mlechCha-marUnmattAbhisaMdhi). Several fierce encounters took place
around 1680-81 CE. In spring of 1681 CE, even as Awrangzeb was besieging
Chittor with his sons, sUryadAs (sawaldAs) descendant of the valiant
rAya jayamalla (rai jaimal, who fought tyrant Akbar during his invasion
of Chittor) swiftly attacked the Mogol rear. Awrangzeb fearing
sandwiching between two rAjpUt forces retreated dispatching the Rohillas
to attack sUryadas. He was joined by the forces of durgAdas and together
they slaughtered the Rohillas. In the mean time to relieve the pressure
of the Mogol attack, the rANa’s son bhIma siMha launched an invasion of
Mogol-held Gujarat and in course of the campaign slew several Mullahs
and demolished 30 Masjids. Another counter-attack was launched by the
jaina dayAl sAH; he was a financial adviser of the rANa but deployed his
private vaishya army, which he had used to protect his business
caravans. He launched a ruthless attack on the Moslem forces in Malwa
reaching Ujjain and gave them a taste of their own medicine. In his
great sweep, the Mohammedans in the garrisons at Sarangpur, Dewas,
Mandu, Chanderi and Ujjain were systematically slaughtered to man and
all their settlements were burnt down, civilians included. He is said to
have converted captured mullahs to Hindus and burnt all copies of the
Qoran that fell into his hands. He too like his predecessors captured
the Mogol treasury at Mandu and gave it to the rANa to finance his war
against the Mogols.

Thus, at critical junctures, the vaishya army of the jaina-s played an
important role in the defense of the dharma. It is said that the
shvetAMbara Acharya of bhAmA sAH even told pratApa siMha that it was
important they stand together in the fight so that the veda and jina
dharma might be saved. In this they differed from the sthaviravAdin
bauddha-s who betrayed the Hindu defenses to the Mohammedans on multiple
occasions and also the vajrayAna bauddha-s. The latter initially boasted
that the mantra-powers of their siddha lIlAvajra would destroy the
Mohammedans but then came running to the Astika-s for help even as
nAlandA and jagaddala were going up in smoke.

● The break down of the gupta unification and the emergence of the
tripartite struggle between northern (e.g. harShavardhana), central
(e.g. pulaskeshin) and southern (e.g. pallava-s) power centers appears
to have allowed the expansion of predatory tribal activity in the
interstitial zones. The jaina experience regarding the predatory attacks
of tribal groups is likely to be genuine because Astika sources from the
same time period also allude to such attacks albeit at a much lower
frequency. For example, we encounter such predatory tribesmen in the
great novel of daNDin (dasha-kumAra-charita) or the works of
vAkpati-rAja from the neo-maurya yashovarman’s court. It should also be
noted that these predatory activities were not solely the domain of
tribals as they also drew renegades from Arya society as indicated by
the feral brAhmaNa in daNDin’s novel. Indeed, the tradition of such
feral brAhmaNa-s continued into the Islamic period especially in
mahArAShTra, parts of which became an interstitial zone then. We have
the well-known case of the marAThI brAhmaNa brigand murAri rAu who
alternately worked as a private thief or lent his services to Moslem
marauders. Among his many predatory actions was the raid on Ahobilam,
where he stole the golden and gem-studded idol of nR^isiMha and sold it
to the Qutb at Golconda. He also joined various tribal brigands and
laMbADI-s after the fall of Hampi to loot the city. This predatory
tendency persisted among certain marAThI brAhmaNa-s down to the marATha
period, where we may mention the example of kR^iShNa rAu khATAv. He was
an educated brAhmaNa who had even written a commentary on
pA\~ncharAtrika worship of viShNu in the various vaiShNava
bhuvanAdhvan-s but upon the murder of shaMbhAjI by Awrangzeb he set
himself up as a brigand. He soon drew the attention of the Mogols, who
offered him recognition and weaponry as a captain in their ranks, and he
expanded his extortion and plundering operations while giving the Mogols
a cut from his spoils. After the marAThA-s defeated the Mogols and
expelled them from mahArAShTra he again set himself up as an independent
brigand with a band of hill-tribe assistants. Finally, Chatrapati shAhu
in his bid to restore law and order in mahArAShTra had him arrested in
major military operation and quietly assassinated (since he was a
brAhmaNa) while in custody.

● A closer examination of the Astika sources also points to a notable
difference with respect to the vaishya-centric jaina traditions on the
matter of Arya-tribal relationships. As we have noted before, the Arya-s
had long and varied interactions with the proto-Indian tribals after
their invasion and settlement of India. While there were episodes of
antagonism over time they evolved a symbiotic relationship as
illustrated by the vaidika injunction granting the tribal chieftain (the
niShada sthapati) rights to serve as a yajamAna in the shrauta ritual.
The epics also reflect this symbiotic relationship in the tales of guha
the ally of rAmachandra aikShvAkava and nala the nishAda chieftain.
Thus, the Astika-s were clearly moving towards a gradual accommodation
and partial Aryanization of the tribal groups. In period under
discussion here this movement seems to have been expanded further, even
as the newer forms of the Astika tradition represented by the smArta and
sectarian tAntrika mantra-mArga-s started further accommodation and
incorporation of tribal groups into the greater Hindu system. For
example, in the famous smArta-kaula paurANika narrative, the
lalitopAkhyAna we hear of how a predatory tribal chief and his wife in
the Tamil country were given rights to deployment of vaidika mantra-s
and domesticated as a honorary kShatriya who would protect the
deva-dharma and urban travelers. This is consistent with a long history
of “work” among tribal groups of shaiva mantra-mArga practitioners –
e.g. one might consider the story of the siddha vidyAnandanAtha, son of
the muni shIlAchiti, an early teacher of the kAlI-kula tradition, who
lived among the shabhara-s at the shaiva-pITha of shrIshaila in the
andhra country. The saiddhAntika shaiva-s also had a program for
integration of the avarNa castes and tribesmensinto their framework.
Thus, unlike the jaina-s, the Astika followed a subtle social program of
integration of the predatory tribal groups to the extant possible rather
than merely engaging in conflict with them. Likewise, the bauddha-s also
followed their suit and appear to have made some efforts for
incorporating tribal groups. The bauddha-s even appear to have invented
two tantrika deities parNa-shAbarI and jA\~NgulI both of whom are
“forest goddesses” who appear to have been the focus of this
interaction with the tribal groups.

This rapprochement of tribal groups by the Astika-s again came to help
them in their struggle against the army of Islam. Whereas vIra hammIra
was still putting down predatory bhilla tribesmen, mahArANa pratapa
siMha had incorporated them as auxiliaries in his army and they played a
key role in reconquering lost land in the battles following Haldighati.

● Thus, the alignment with the wealth-generating vanij class, raising of
private armies by the vaNij-s, and instances of tactical alliance with
the Astika-s resulted in jaina-s surviving the Islamic hurricane,
whereas the bauddha-s died out. However, even before the invasion of the
Indic heartlands by the Mohammedans, the jaina-s were facing an issue of
relevance. The metaphors and the ritual systems of the rising
mantra-marga Astika-s in the tantra-age were so gripping to the Indian
mind and beyond that the old appeal of the two major nAstika systems to
the masses began to decline. Indeed, the bauddha-s adapted to this
evolving situation by creating their own parallel system based on shaiva
and other Astika mantra-marga systems culminating in their mantrayAna
system. In this ritually rejuvenated form the bauddha-mata acquired
great following particularly in central and east Asia among Turks,
Tibetans, Chinese, Mongols, Japanese, Vietnamese, Cambodians, and
Austronesians. The jaina-s too started widely adopting imitations of the
Astika mantra-marga. In both cases they justified these innovations by
presenting the founders their respective cults, the shAkhya-siMha and
the mahAvIra, as great mantra-magicians who had beaten their brAhmaNa
and AjIvIka (like the founder of that cult, maskarin goshAla) rivals.
Thus, even though their middle-period jaina Acharya-s (e.g. haribhadra
sUri) wrote scurrilous tracts on Astika gods and heroes their successors
ended up producing mantra manuals to the imitations of those very Astika
deities they had impugned.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-weT32X53gqc/U8N8qfmCUoI/AAAAAAAADAY/DL0kgVhoSeM/s800/indra_vimalavasahi.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/IyILMHqtT-1pe6sSLjlDFtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
The old Indo-Aryan god indra depicted in a Dilwara jaina temple

In general, like the early bauddha-s, the early jaina-s tried not to
upset the ground situation of the old Indo-Aryan religion by accepting
the great god indra as the supreme leader of the pantheon, the good
upholder of dharma, and coopting him as validating the jaina ford-makers
and providing succor to the jina-mata. However, they attacked the chief
deities of the sectarian system like rudra, skanda and viShNu as also
brahmA of prAjApatya vaidika-s or tried to downgrade them as mere
yakSha-s. But with the resurgence of Astika religion among the masses,
they first they allowed imitations of Astika deities as shAsana-devatA-s
(e.g.
[padmAvatI](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/12/21/the-basic-invocation-of-padmavati-according-the-padmavati-kalpa/ "The basic invocation of padmAvatI according the padmAvatI kalpa")
taken straight from the Astika pantheon) who protected the teachings of
various ford-makers. Once they had opened the doors for the shAsana
devatA-s they could no longer close it. Fundamentally, the Astika
divinities in their original or imitated forms were more appealing to
both the masses and a notable subset of the intellectuals than the naked
ford-makers as they touched truly primordial chords in the human
religious instinct. Soon many deities of the shaiva kaula-mantramArga
pantheon like chakreshvarI, vajreshvarI, pratya\~NgirA and the like made
their entry with even notable jaina Acharya-s composing stotra-s to them
and worshiping their yantra-s. They started taking a prominent place in
jaina temples and among the laity they started displacing the prime
position of the tirthaMkara-s.

Not surprisingly, this resulted in a resentment among the jaina
fundamentalists especially in their naked sect. Textual justifications
and down-gradations of the shAsana-devatA-s were suggested. Importantly,
by this period the army of Islam had defeated the Hindu resistance over
large tracts of northern India, demolishing Astika and jaina temples
alike and placing severe restrictions on both religions. With the temple
tradition dying out both jaina-s and Astika-s faced a great crisis in
observing their religion. Many of the Astika-s retreated into a mental
cocoon of taking solace in aniconic religion, bhakti cults, or an
amalgam of the two, stating that the brahman is not ultimately limited
by physical form and one does not need icons consecrated according the
mantra-mArga traditions. Consequently, such anodynes opened the way for
even more half-baked and ill-conceived constructs such as the
uShnIShamoha in the pa\~nchanada and satnAmI. Similar effects were also
felt on the jaina-s. Ironically, the jaina fundamentalists saw the
destruction of the temple religion as reaffirming their own opposition
to it. As a result, a few started supporting Mohammedans against
Astika-s and their own temple worshipers. One may in this context note
the ironic case of the jaina Acharya who is supposed to have helped the
Ghazi Ahmed Shah, [the vandal of karNAvatI
(Gujarat)](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/07/11/islamic-vandalism-in-gujarat/ "Islamic vandalism in Gujarat"),
by performing mantra counter-attacks on his behalf when kaula shaiva-s
are supposed to have caused the Sultan to get possessed by a yoginI
prayoga. Other jaina-s condemned the worship of any deity other than the
ford-makers. While such a streak was always prominent in the digaMbara
sect, the shvetAMbara-s also started adopting such views with the
emergence of the anti-iconic sthAnakavAsin-s and the terapanthin-s
thereafter. Here again, the connection with the vaNij networks that
spread throughout the subcontinent resulted the wide dispersion of these
“Protestant” sthAnakavAsin-type anti-iconic ideas through the jaina
community. Thus, many of them were again pulled away from their
ancestral deva-dharma roots closer to our times \[Footnote 2\].

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: This prolonged contact with jaina-s is evidenced in the ways
of a group of degenerate atharvavedin-s from Rajasthan known as the
dAdhIcha brAhmaNa-s. From their tradition they were originally followers
of the paippalAda branch of the AV tradition. However, unlike their
Gujarati cousins (who recite and follow the AV-vulgate) they appear to
have entirely lost the saMhitA. They are supposed to have performed
apotropaic rituals for the rAjpUt rulers in the Marwad region. They are
strict vegetarians who are supposed to have instituted a completely
animal-free ritual abjuring animal sacrifices of the shrauta type or
those specific to AV tradition. This animal-free ritual is emphasized in
their origin mythology rather in contrast to their paippalAda
affiliation – the AV having several distinctive animal sacrifices.

Footnote 2: Some years ago in the madhyama-mlechChavarSha the
idol-worshiping shvetAMbara jaina-s were organizing a temple ritual to
the goddess sarasvatI (or they might say shrutAdevI) in which each
participant was given an idol of sarasvatI and the ritualist led them
through the worship of their personal idol. This attracted much
criticism from the anti-iconic jaina-s who felt these were not jaina-s
at all and emphasized their “corruption” by Astika-s.
