+++
title = "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag ofxa0earth-II"

+++
[From chapter
1](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/05/06/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth/ "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-I")  
mR^ita-matsyo nAma dvitIyo.adhyAyaH |  
Sometime later the country abruptly returned to normalcy – the Hindus
heaved a sigh of relief. The buzz going around was that the seasoned
politician and home minister Vidharam Yadav, who was reputed to have
never been on the losing side, had negotiated a deal by which national
peace was restored instantly. He had appeared on national media and
declared that in a week a major announcement would be made regarding the
peace deal and its details. Thus, the last semester of their degree
course resumed and Lootika, Somakhya and others were back in their
university. Somakhya and Lootika, having much to catch up, went to their
favorite meadow behind their university departments and wandered to the
shade of the large elephant apple tree that stood in the midst of it.
Somakhya eagerly inquired about the results of the experiments of Varoli
on the *Gambusia* fish. He excitedly asked: “Did you sequence the
\`acclimatization-negative loci\` of the mutant fish that appeared to
prevent them from transmitting the acclimatization capability to their
offspring.” Lootika: “Yes we got 4 of them and sequenced them though I
have not looked at the sequences yet as you are best qualified to take
the first stab at them.” She pulled out her tablet and showed the data
to Somakhya. Lootika: “Ah the first mutation seems like in no man’s
land.” Somakhya snatching her tablet and scrolling down the chromosome
remarked: “Hey, not really\! See it is in the regulatory region of WDR5:
part of the MLL1 histone H3K4 methylase complex. That clinches our hunch
that this is an epigenetic phenomenon\! Let’s look at the next one.”
Lootika taking back her tablet said: “Here it is, one of the DNMT3
paralogs of the fish-specific expansion. And look at this\! The
remaining two are also other DNMT3 paralogs.” They did a spontaneous
high-five and said: “This is splendid\!” Somakhya: “I have devised in my
mind a new sequencing methodology. I think you should get your little
sis Jhilleeka to try to implement it along with my acquaintance Sandeep,
who seems to have conquered the necessary microfluidics technology and
has obtained some money to do such things. It would be a good thing for
Jhilleeka to spend her long vacation on. We can then sequence the
methylomes and study the status of the various heat acclimatization
loci.” Lootika: “Indeed that would be a great thing to do. It could also
be leveraged for our long term plan to understand how the XX-XY and
WZ-ZZ sex determination evolved in the two species of *Gambusia*.”

A week later Vidharam Yadav made his much awaited announcement. In the
deal he had cut, the two opposition leaders Azhar Mehmood and Sajid Mir
were to respectively become prime minister and deputy-prime minister.
The UCC bill would never be mentioned on the floor of the parliament
again and Sharia law would be implemented in all places the Momin were
in majority. Its implementation was to be in three phases: In the first
it was jail time for most crimes deemed fit for such by the Qazis. In
the second the amputations and lashings were to follow and finally the
beheadings and stonings in the third. They also wanted to ban the
rAShTrIya svatantratA senA, but that did not come through – the
compromise was they were banned from starting a shAkhA in any area
having more than 40% Momin. Somakhya was walking into the university
department. He ran into Sharad who excitedly remarked: “That was a
master stroke by the revolutionary and seasoned politician Vidharam
Yadav. Indeed, who else in the ruling coalition would have thought of
ceding power in the interest of national peace.” Somakhya: “Well, I
really do not want to hear any of that crap – the consequences of this
will be felt for long.”

He felt low and deciding not to attend classes walked away towards the
meadow and sat under the large elephant apple tree. He kept looking at
the alignment of the DNMT3 genes from Lootika and Varoli’s fishes. After
some time he sensed Lootika walking towards him. He did not look at her
face but as she neared him he asked: “What about the fishes; did you
resequence the mutants?” Lootika did not answer but appeared to be
quietly standing beside him for sometime. Surprised he looked up. Her
face was drawn and she was almost in tears. Somakhya: “I know it is a
depressing day but your face looks funereal. Why what happened?”
Lootika: “Well, the fish are dead and worse things have happened. All
the fish mysteriously died. When I was away at college my mother asked
Varoli and Jhilleeka to dispose them right away as she feared the house
being polluted by the stench of dead fish. They seem to have thrown them
out and our cat chitra seems to have eaten them. Now it is seriously ill
and I doubt it would make it past this day despite my father attempting
to treat it.” Somakhya: “Lootika, if there is even one of these dead
fish left ask Vrishchika to do a blood agar culture as soon as possible.
Instruct her to be careful – wear gloves and work in a hood and all
that. Then get the plates to me.” Two days latter Somakhya lifted his
eye from the ocular of the microscope and turning to Lootika and
Vrishchika remarked “Look at those saffron rods – it is *Edwardsiella
tarda*.” Vrishchika: “trayastriMshAH\! Good we took precaution. Our
father had described to me a case: a man had come to him from Mumbai
where he had sustained an injury while sailing. His leg muscles were
undergoing rapid necrosis. It turned out to be *E. tarda*\! We may be
able to save chitra after all.” Somakhya: “We must sequence the genome
of this killer – there must be something of interest there.”

Lootika isolated DNA from the cells. She had to put it away in the
freezer because the exams were round the corner and they had no time for
sequencing. The evening their exams were over, Lootika, Vrischika and
Somakhya walked towards the AvaraNa of the sarasvatI temple that was at
the edge of the cemetery. The sarasvatI was the only deity that remained
of the pantheon of the shiva temple that once stood at that place.
Vidrum wanted to join them too. However, he was with Meghana and feared
that a dreadful confrontation might emerge between her and Lootika. So
he merely waved to the three and went his way. As Somakhya, Lootika and
Vrishchika sat in silence on a culvert of the temple to take in the
quiet and mild evening breeze they heard a couple of talking mynahs (a
common Indian starling). The mynahs fluttering up and down said:
“pilipichChikA pilipichChikA ||” Vrishchika: “That surely looks like a
sign to us.” Somakhya: “Perhaps. In any case let us perform the homa.”
They soon created a sthaNDila in the temple courtyard and having kindled
the fire started making oblations with the mantra: “pilipichChike\!
skanda-dUte\! juhuyAma tvA asmAkam prAkAra samIpe vetAlaM shIgram Anaya
Anaya svAhA ||” After they had finished about 52 oblations they had a
real scare as they saw a being walk towards them holding a broad-bladed
weapon. They thought we have not even said “prakaTi bhava” and who is
this being that has so menacingly arrived – it looks like a rAkShasa and
not the vetAla whom we were expecting. But their fears were laid to rest
as the being came closer – it happened to just be Vidrum who had arrived
carrying his billhook and took a seat in their vicinity. As they
completed the 143rd oblation they felt a sensation of being overwhelmed.
They immediately switched to the incantation: “rudrasya bhR^itya\! iha
prakaTI bhava hulu hulu hili hili svAhA ||” After sometime they felt
they were entering a trance. At that point they knew the vetAla had
indeed come and they started calling upon him to start speaking. As a
vetAla might respond to the AryavAk or to the dramiDa vAk or the
apabhraMsha they had to call upon him multilingually: “bho vetAla
shIgraM vada vada\! Dei chollu chollu vetAlaNe shIgrama pechu pechu\!
arre bhetAla mahNa mahNa\!” Soon they felt lapsing into an utter
silence. And then they heard the vetAla speak to them in their minds.
When it was over they snapped back to the realm of the “real world”.
They typed in what they had heard from the vetAla on their tablets and
emailed it Vidrum.

They asked him to open and compare the messages. To his surprise he
found Somakhya, Lootika and Vrishchika had sent more or less the same
thing as the message of the vetAla:  
*“The dead fish’s story has just started. It will verily be like the
utkrAntida which has come to the world of men. The bhArata-s will
tremble like never before. The pANDu host had faced the prospect of
arjuna kaunteya dying from failing to kill jayadratha. Then kR^iShNa
devakIputra led him to the realm of the young hero who revealed the
mighty pAshupataM; thus the feet of the young hero will show you the way
out when the moment of reckoning arrives.”*  
Vidrum remarked: “That is really strange. A fitting message from a
vetAla. May be you guys are destined for attain the status of a
vidyAdhara\!”

Lootika and Vrischika: “That is a real one. Somakhya do you make sense
of that?” Somakhya only said: “Let’s go home. Now that our business is
over, there is no point lingering here with gaNapati’s agents.” Vidrum,
Lootika and Vrishchika were really curious and kept pestering Somakhya
about the vetAla’s revelation but he said nothing. They sauntered back
towards their houses at the fork they parted ways with Vrishchika still
yelling: “You have to figure this out; you seem to know something but
still keep quiet. Truth to be told, it sounds a bit ominous.” Somakhya:
“vetAla-s are always ominous. It’s getting late your parents might get
worried.” Then Somakhya continued ambling with Vidrum towards the
latter’s house. Vidrum: “Would you like to catch today’s match with
some pakoDA-s or samosA-s.” Somakhya: “Better get home soon, you know
the marUnmatta-s or shavasAdhaka-s could be on the prowl as night
grows.” So he took his bike from Vidrum’s home and sped towards his
own which was at some distance from those of the other three, ensconced
in a walled compound.. Once there he typed out an email to Lootika:  
“*We should try to sequence that E.tarda DNA you isolated as soon as
possible. We will try it out in Sandeep’s machine tomorrow. Get
Jhilleeka along so that we could prime her to get started.*”  
Just before he hit the bed he saw Lootika’s response:  
“*OK, will get the DNA and meet you after lunch at Sandeep’s lab.
Jhilleeka has been making good progress she has already got her code to
respond to the mock hardware she rigged up at home. I also have made the
clones of the archaeal reverse gyrase and the plasmid DNA polymerase you
indicated. Let’s see how much protein we get.*”

The next day they got the sequencing going and spent some time marveling
at Jhilleeka’s hardware and code and playing with it much to the
encouragement and delight of the youngster. A day latter whole sequence
was ready and the common place genes annotated. Lootika visited
Somakhya’s house and showed it to him as he had asked her not to email
it to him. Somakhya scrolled through the genomes and remarked: “Well, it
seems to have a multi-drug resistance plasmid. That is interesting but
not entirely surprising given your cat’s demise despite all attempts to
save it. But there is something more. Do you see these three unusual
genes which have not been curated in the midst of this type VI secretory
system operon?” Lootika: “Well those should be the clue as to what this
bug did our fishes and cat. Would you be able to crack them?” Somakhya
transferred the sequences to his work station and spent some time
analyzing them. After a few minutes he remarked: “They are pretty
interesting indeed. The first is a caspase-like peptidase – notice that
histidine and cysteine – it should be an active enzyme. The second is a
deaminase – notice those two cysteines and that aspartate and glutamate
– should be an active one too. The third is defeating me – I will need
to throw all my skills at cracking that one if at all possible. Finding
their substrates is going to be harder. Dear Lootika I leave that to
your wizardry.” Lootika: “Yes I could try to figure those out but it is
going to be some effort and time is short as we will be leaving the
country in a few days.” Somakhya: “In any case I will continue working
on the third one.”

While Somakhya and Lootika were already fully formed scientists, ahead
of their peers in more than one way, the conventions of the world
required that they acquire a doctoral degree to be accepted as so.
Hence, as was traditional, they decided to go a mlechCha country to
pursue the same. Some days later it was time for them to go. They met
for one last time in private before leaving; they had already bid good
bye to their friends Vidrum and others. They spontaneously embraced each
other. Though experiencing high pleasure from the contact with Lootika,
Somakhya was tinged with sorrow and thought: “Pleasure and sorrow are
two sides of the same coin. The source of pleasure is also one of
sorrow. Alas our paths diverge and the vyomayAna will place us apart –
Out of sight is out of mind and a woman like her would not be found even
if one were to go around the world like kumAra in the contest for
brahmA’s mango.” He looked intently at Lootika’s pretty face. He felt
it was cold and unemotional. He quickly snapped back reminding himself
that as the shAstra-s had warned such pleasures were ephemeral and are
ordained to go away. He thought: “After all she might get a hundred
males to mill around her wherever she goes; so why should I reside in
the torment of pining for her.” So he abruptly turned to leave. However,
Lootika extended her hand and grasped his palm and placed something in
it. He took it but did not see it until he had mounted his bike and sped
away. When he opened his palm he saw a square clay tablet, much like a
Harappan seal with a spider carved on it. He felt the connection was
after all not entirely lost.

The rest of the day he applied himself to the mystery gene and by night
he figured it out after a complex battle with its sequence. The last
email he sent that day was addressed to Lootika:  
*“lUtike priyatame: it is an ADP ribosyltransferase. May pUShaN bear you
aid\!*”

Lootika caught in the bustle of leaving the country the next day never
got to respond to his mail or appreciate the great conquest of Somakhya;
nevertheless she quickly recorded it in her files and left.

[To chapter
3](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/05/15/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth-iii/ "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-III")
