+++
title = "Some comparative considerations on the Indo-European religion with a focus on the Roman religion"

+++
**Studies on the Roman religion**  
The Roman religion is important for our understanding of the early
Indo-European religion which forms the basis of our own religion,
tradition, and identity. Unfortunately, the religions of the western
branches of Indo-European were destroyed by Abrahamism; hence, we are
left with what are at best reconstructions rather than a living
tradition. One of the early modern works on this topic that unearthed a
large amount of useful material was that of the German scholar Georg
Wissowa ‘*Religion und Kultus der Römer*’. Thereafter one might name the
French scholar Dumézil and Puhvel who extended his work to bring the
Roman religion into the realm of the comparative Indo-European
framework. While Dumézil overdid his structuralist tripartation
hypothesis his contributions to Indo-European comparative analysis
remain an important foundation. More recently there has been a work by
another German scholar Lipka that also furnishes some useful and updated
information in a concise form but suffers from certain defects
comparable to what one encounters in works of white Indologists on
Indo-Aryan material (Note his remark which epitomizes western
Abrahamistic thinking: *“The homogeneity of functional foci of the
Christian and Jewish gods throughout the ancient world could thus never
be achieved by any god hailing from a polytheistic system. In short, the
Christian and Jewish gods were basically the only truly international
divine concepts in the ancient world in functional terms.”* This
illustrates a certain ignorance of the Indo-European religion brought on
by imposition of Abrahamism on the very thought process itself of a
western scholar). Another German scholar Jörg Rüpke’s work might also be
consulted for a more recent treatment of the subject. While one may
appreciate the insights or thoroughness of some of these scholars, we
should remember that none of them have a visceral stake in the subject
matter as, unlike us, they are not heathens. Moreover, while the modern
west might appropriate the Roman past as their own they are particularly
keen to rescind its heathen foundations and use only the facade of its
“secularized” institutions. This prevents most western analysis from
realizing the fundamental meaning of the religion to Roman people and
presents some errors of understanding. Hence, it is important for us as
the last Indo-European heathens to present an analysis of this material
from a purely heathen standpoint.

**The Roman situation compared to other branches of Indo-European**  
The Roman situation is important to understand the different processes
by the different branches of Indo-European spread into their final
homelands. In India and Greece there were multiple waves of related
peoples moving into territories which were already housing urban and
literate civilizations. In both cases the invasive Indo-Europeans
established complete dominance over the substratum in a relatively short
period of time, especially in India. While both of them underwent
extensive genetic admixture with the substratum, they retained much of
their ancestral Indo-European traditions intact, which then became the
foundation of their respective civilizations in their new homes. This
was rather unlike the case of the Hittites where the substratum
component played a huge role alongside their early Indo-European
inheritance. However, the Greeks differed from the Indo-Aryans in
primarily establishing themselves in the form of several dispersed and
disconnected foci, often contending with each other, and with different
governmental systems, with only a much later, only partly successful
attempt at creating a unified center. The maritime mode of spread with
naval/amphibious warfare capability was important in establishing many
of these regional foci. The Indo-Aryans in contrast fluctuated between
periods of early widespread unification followed by regionalization.
However, even in the latter periods there were fairly large and dominant
kingdoms. The first major unification appears to have been that under
bharata and his immediate successors which gave the name to their new
homeland. A subsequent unification of the powerful kuru and the
pa\~nchAla successors of the bhArata-s under parIkShit and janamejaya
established the basic of Indo-Aryan pattern in the Indian subcontinent.
The control of river-valleys by means of wide-ranging mobile armies was
the primary mode of power projection used by the Indo-Aryans. In the
case of the Romans the progress was gradual with establishment of
several disconnected foci to the north of their final home. In their
final home were the Etruscans, who were already urban. While they were
not Indo-European, their contacts with the Greeks had already
Indo-Europeanized them to a degree (e.g. adopting the worship of the god
Apollo and explicitly equating their deities with the Greek deities) and
also made them literate by way of adopting a Greek script which later
became the Latin script. The Romans at first established only a single
major focus – namely the city of Rome (itself an Etruscan place name)
and were already influenced in many ways Etruscan and Greeks tendencies.
From this focus they gradually expanded outwards engulfing and
overtaking the Etruscans. The success of the Indo-European invaders in
establishing their language and culture over that of the urban and
literate substratum in India, Greece and Rome despite different dynamics
and modes of dispersal is something one might ponder about in private.

Against this backdrop, one might then ask the question regarding how the
originally Roman religious ideas were affected by their adoption of
iconographic trends from another phylogenetically distant but
geographically proximal Indo-European people, the Greeks. This dynamic
was of some importance to us because it provides some parallels to our
own history. The early parts of the shruti and the avesta, as we have
described before, were largely aniconic. The zarathuShtrian strain of
the avestan religion acquired a positively iconoclastic strain
resembling the iconoclasm of the Egyptian ruler Akhenaten. In contrast,
the Indo-Aryan religions became increasingly iconic, just as the Greek
and Roman religions, starting from the late stages of the Vedic period.
Despite the lack of clearly attested iconography in the early period, it
is apparent Indo-Aryan tradition, shares with non-zarathuStrian Iranian
religion, Slavic and Greek tradition (much muted in the iconic period) a
conception of polycephalous or polymelous deities – a feature only
rarely seen elsewhere among natural religions. A corollary to this is
that one of the earliest examples of religious iconography in the Indian
subcontinent might have had an Indo-Aryan influence. This is the image
of the tricephalic, horned, ithyphallic deity from the sindhu-sarasvati
civilization who shows continuity with the later iconography of the
Indo-Aryan god rudra (of course we cannot rule out that the SSVC deity
was rudra himself). Thus, as an example of how lateral transfer of
iconography might work it is instructive to study the Roman religion.

In the Roman religion the “indra-like deity” was represented by
Iuppiter: an etymological cognate of Indo-Aryan dyauH-pitR^i and Greek
Zeus Pater (vocative: dyauH pitaH and Zeu Pater;). Like in other
branches of Indo-European he was the head of the pantheon and the chief
god (Footnote 1). However, Romans were distinct in having Mars as a
prominent deity perhaps nearly of the same level as Iuppiter. Mars had
functional and iconographic similarity to kumAra the deity of para-Vedic
provenance, who became a major deity among the Indo-Aryans starting from
the latest-Vedic period. Thus, in a sense the Roman function of Mars
could be compared to that of kumAra in certain Indo-Aryan settings, such
as in the yaudheya republic of northern India. An interesting feature of
the iconography of Mars was his non-human representation in the form of
a spear. This was particularly important in the Regia, the office of the
senior-most ritualist (Pontifex Maximus; Footnote 2), which lay between
the temple of Vesta (where the Roman equivalent of the gArhapatya fire
was housed) and the memorial of Julius commissioned by Augustus. Here
along with the spear, there were two more lances (hastae Martis) and the
two shields (ancilia) which might have represented his two wives, Nerio
and Moles. The Roman authors are clear that the spear was an important
religious object that was worshiped as a representation of Mars himself.
This object does not seem to have a Greek cognate at all even though
they possessed a cognate deity Ares. Hence, (contra Lipka) we suspect
that this was an early, purely Roman, non-anthropomorphic representation
of the god Mars. This was distinct from the temple of Mars with
anthropomorphic icons, e.g. the temple of Mars Ultor of Augustus. There,
offerings relating to military or political victories were made, like
the Roman standards whose return Augustus negotiated from the Iranians,
which the latter had captured after the rout of Crassus.

Like the Indo-Aryan skanda, the Roman Mars had a wider functional
repertoire than being the god of war alone (in contrast the classical
Greek Ares). This becomes clear from an incantation to Mars preserved by
Cato:  
prohibessis, defendas averrunces que;  
morbos visos invosos que;  
viduertatem vastitudinem;  
calamitates intemperias que.

Ban, repel and sweep away ;  
illness, seen and unseen;  
depopulation, devastation;  
calamities and bad weather \[Footnote 3\].

He not only protects against ill-effects of war but also against disease
and bad weather, which points to the ancient link between the Mars-like
deities and the “rudra class” of deities.

The importance of the Mars and his abstract representations become even
more apparent in one of his major rituals the March ritual which began
on March 1 and continued for several days. The specialist ritualists
officiating this rite were the Salii and it was supposed to have been
initiated by the legendary second king of Rome, Numa. Numa is supposed
to have been an agent of the gods who organized the rituals of the
Romans and established their four types of ritualists the Flamens, the
Pontifices, the Salii, and the Fetiales (a potential parallel to the
four-fold division of ritual specialists among the Indic and Iranic
Aryans). In the March ritual the 12 Salii carried forth the 12 shields
kept in the Palatine temple of Mars in Rome and they themselves carried
a spear in his right hand and wore a sword. The performed a ritualized
dance during the procession by clanging their spear against the shield.
The ritual also included the chanting of the Saliaria Carmina which were
ancient incantations which were part of the Roman “shruti”. They were
composed in an ancient form of Italic that predated Latin and their text
was faithfully handed by the ritualists along with their correct oral
form. By the classical Roman period few understood their meaning they
were learned by rote and deployed in the ancient language even as the
ancient language of the veda is deployed by the Hindu ritualists. The
core verses of the incantation appear to have had Mars as the “devatA”;
this was followed by several verses to many other deities of the
pantheon which were called Januli (Janus), Junonii (Juno), Minervii
(Minerva) and the like for the deities. Then the name of the ruler of
Rome were taken in the final incantation in certain instances. For
instance, we have record that this honor was conferred on Augustus. That
this importance of Mars was not just limited to Rome but more widespread
in the old Italic sphere is suggested by the Iguvine bronze tablets from
around 200 BCE which contain instructions of certain complex rituals
with multiple animal sacrifices performed by the 12 ritualists of the
Umbrians. The primary deities of these rituals were Iove Patre, Marte
and Vofionos of whom the first two correspond to the Roman Iuppiter and
Mars. Identity of Vofionos is unclear, though he is often equated with
Roman Quirinus who himself might have been a Martian ectype derived from
another Italic people in the region the Sabines. Interestingly, these
tablets also frequently use the theonym Sherfe Martie (Çerfe Marti),
which as Grassmann and Max Muller correctly deduced (but ignored by
italicists) has a relationship to the Vedic term, shardho mArutaH. Thus,
there was possibly a concept of the hosts of Mars, similar to the Vedic
marut-s, in the old Italic religion and this preserved in the ancient
Roman ritual incantation the Carmen Arvale, which we have discussed
before.

**The preservation of ancient ritual language in the Roman religion**  
In this context we shall examine the two small fragments of the Saliaria
Carmina that survive today as it points to important parallels between
the Indo-Aryan and Italic religions:  
Coz-eulodoiz eso, omina enim vero  
Ad patula’ ose misse Jani cariones.  
Duonus Cerus esit dunque Janus vevet.

I will be a flute-player in the chorus,  
for the ritualists of Janus have sent omens to open ears.  
Cerus will be propitious so long as Janus shall live.

Divom empta cante, divom divo supplicante.  
Chant by the impelling of the gods, chant as the suppliants of the god
of gods \[Iuppiter\].

These fragments, while meager show that the Saliaria Carmina were not in
Latin of the age but an earlier form of Italic. This is also the case
with famous Carmen Arvale to Mars. Interestingly, Quintilian remarks
that although the ritual specialists knew precise recitation of the
Saliaria Carmina they barely understood its actual meaning. Pliny the
elder states: “a sacriﬁce without incantations is thought to be useless
and not a proper consultation of the gods”. So clearly the oral
rendering of the incantation was central to the performance of ritual.
Here one might also consider the legend of the second Roman king Numa:
He is said to have received the divine teachings of the rituals to gods
from two goddesses and written them down in the form of books. However,
he had these books buried with him at his death as he felt that the
rituals and incantations should be preserved in the memory of the ritual
specialists rather than the books so that they may not induce
forgetfulness and loss of precise person to person instruction. Thus,
the ordinance of Numa to the ritual specialists emphasizes oral
transmission of ritual over that via books. Indeed, it is said that
these recitations were kept as a close secret by the pontifices and
flamens. Valerius Maximus also writes that for different purposes there
were different incantations and they had to be used exactly as per
ancient tradition. Livius mentions that in the town of Lanuvium the
magistrate made an error in the recitation of the formula (typically
repeated after the recitation by the ritualist) and hence the entire
ritual had to be done again for the error rendered it ineffective. Thus,
the correct, secret incantation in an orally transmitted, precise form
was critical for the performance of a ritual.

The above raise three clear parallels to the Vedic rituals and
incantations in India: 1) The Arya-s also held that the precise form of
the incantation was important and any error in it would result in wrong
results (the brAhmaNa itself cites the example of the accent error in
the compound indra-shatru in the tvAShTrI incantation). Depending on the
extent of the error the whole incantation and act might need to be
redone or expiations offered at the end of the ritual. 2) The ritual
incantations and instructions were to be primarily passed orally –
indeed the Arya-s termed the core of their ancient knowledge centered on
the rituals (the veda) as the shruti – one which is transmitted by
hearing. Even later when they were written down the ritual specialists
received their first instructions via hearing an oral recitation rather
than reading it off a book. 3) Even by the time of the brAhmaNa texts,
some of the ancient incantations preserved in the saMhitA were becoming
obscure to the average ritual specialists. In the post-brAhmaNa period
there were even theorists such as kautsa who emphasized the precise
preservation of the ancient incantations while going as far as to say
that there was really no meaning in the ancient incantations beyond
their exact sound value. A prominent lineage of mImAMsaka thinkers
remained close to this line of thinking in the post-Vedic period. The
difference between the Vedic form of Sanskrit and its classical form is
clear to any student. The Iranians too clearly held a similar views.
These parallels between the Roman religion and that of the Indo-Iranians
suggests that the following key ideas might go back to early
Indo-European: 1) The importance of the precise form of the ritual
incantation: this relates to the concept of the language of the gods (as
opposed to the language of men) which also appears to have had an early
Indo-European provenance. 2) The performance of a ritual was successful
only if it was accompanied by the appropriate incantation which was
properly recited. 3) These incantations were the secret property of the
elite, which had to be transmitted orally even after the Indo-Europeans
acquired literacy. Thus, the Indus script/graffiti could have well
coexisted beside Indo-Aryans whose ritual literature was consciously
uninterested in writing even if aware of written material in the later
periods (e.g. the reference to leaf manuscripts in the terminal section
of the sAmaveda brAhmaNa-s).

One may then ask that, if the above were the case, why are the sacred
recitations of the different IE branches not in proto-Indo-European or
some early version of Indo-European. In this context one should note
that the earliest attested versions of the spatial distant branches of
Indo-European (leaving out Hittite, especially given that the
Indo-Hittite hypothesis is most likely) namely Old Indo-Aryan, old
Iranian, old Greek, and old Italic are rather similar to each other
especially in features going beyond basic etymology, i.e. morphology in
contrast to the comparisons between much later versions of these
branches (e.g. apabhraMsha versus contemporaneous old French). This
suggests that post-Hittite split of the other Indo-European groups was
an explosive one swiftly radiating out from their homeland. Thus, we
posit that the early versions of these languages were close enough to
early Indo-European such that they could transmit the incantations into
their respective languages without much difficulty. This is supported by
retention and consistent use of old Indo-European features in early
Vedic, among others: 1) peculiar aoristic forms of verbs; 2) A complex
system of infinitives which is consistently used in the early Vedic
language but not later (I would like to acknowledge a coethnic brAhmaNa
woman from the pANDyan country, one of the few shrauta yajamAna patnI-s
actually well-versed in Vedic, for first clarifying this to me). For
example: yAtám pArÁya gántave \[Infinitive\] |; ví yó jaghÁna
shamitéva chárma upastíre \[Infinitive\] pR^ithivÍM sÚryAya |; 3) The
use of modal forms of verbs: e.g. vocam in: índrasya nú vIryÀNi prá
vochaM yÁni chakÁra prathamÁni vajrÍ | 4) The unaugmented aoristic
forms or the injunctive forms of verbs (which Michael Witzel foolishly
claimed pANini was unaware of\!). Despite, the closeness to old IE,
certain atypical structures with respect to the meter of the verse
suggests that they could not perfectly “translate” the old IE form of
the incantations into their languages. But as the divergence increased
even more within their own lineages they had to freeze their old
language as they could no longer “translate” it effectively and were
even starting to not make complete sense of it (barring few “high”
ritual experts who have always existed at least in India, may be in the
Iranosphere, but we do not know if this was so with other IE branches).
In India this seems to have happened in the post-saMhitA period where in
the focus was in collecting an preserving ones shAkhA without any
alterations. The parallel developments in Iran and the Roman world make
this hypothesis more likely that Witzel and his students’ peculiar claim
that the mantra-composers of the kuru-pA\~nchAla realm purposely
composed the shruti around 1200-1000 BCE in a far more archaic form of
the language full of old Indo-Europeanisms than what was actually
current.

**Transition from aniconic to iconic worship**  
We conclude this note with a few further issues concerning the rise of
the iconic religion among the Romans. Archaeological evidence that has
survived Christian vandalism suggests that the Romans were making images
first around 600 BCE. Around this time early deva temples were also
emerging in India. From the early Roman imagery it was clear that they
were imitating the Greek iconography: e.g. the creation of images of the
fire deity Volcan (cognate of Indic agni, etymologically cognate of
Sanskrit word ulka) based on the Greek idols of Hephaistos around 600
BCE. This trend was maintained over a long period. The emperor Augustus
in particular appears to have been a big admirer of Greek prototypes as
he modeled several of the idols of gods installed in the Palatine temple
he commissioned after the works of reputed Greek idol-makers (it appears
he was a big proponent of strong anthropomorphism as he expressed
disdain over the theriomorphism of Egyptian idols, though this might
have been more a dislike for Antonius). However, in the case of Mars it
appears that good Greek prototypes were not available because, unlike
Mars, Ares had become relatively obscure in the Greek pantheon with
little devotion to him. Hence, in this case a new Roman iconography was
developed. The presence of an aniconic Mars representation suggests that
the Romans might have been far more aniconic in the beginning. Indeed,
this is supported by the presence of several aniconic objects, which
were important in their religion such as the flint stone of of Iuppiter
(silex Feretrius), the fires, a li\~Nga-like phallic emblem kept in the
Vesta shrine, and various baetyl stones which were used for different
gods and goddesses. But in most cases the transition was made in Rome
towards entirely iconic representations of the deities under Greek
influence. However, in the case of the deity Apollo who was acquired as
is from the Greeks, his worship in an aniconic representation, a
li\~Nga-like form known as Apollo Agyieus, was also acquired from the
Greeks. The Greeks also used a li\~Nga-like representation of Apollo,
know as the omphalos, a decorated version of the Agyieus, at his famous
temple of Delphi. This interesting presence of a li\~Nga-like
representation for the rudra-like deity in both India and Greece raises
the possibility that there was indeed an ancestral cult centered around
such an aniconic object. While such this cult did not make its entry
into the worship of rudra in the core veda, it probably existed in
para-Vedic rudra-centric circles and was finally admitted into the
latest stratum of vaidika mainstream perhaps after certain friction
\[Footnote 4\].

An interesting development pertaining to natural li\~Nga-like baetyls in
the Roman religion was the case of the Semitic deity Elagabal (Semitic:
Ilāh hag-Gabal). His name derives from El, an ancient, major Semitic
deity who was widely worshiped as the father of the Semitic gods
(including that of another major deity Baʿal Hadad), especially in the
north-western regions of the Semitic world. His symbol was a bull and he
along with Baʿal Hadad was a horned-deity like several others in the old
Eurasiatic world. It was probably his bull that was worshiped by the
people of Musa the paleo-Abrahamist before he destroyed it. However, El
and his hosts of Semitic gods were absorbed into the frame of the
mono-deity Yahweh (who himself was probably just an epithet or an ectype
of El) in paleo-Abrahamism. In Emesa (Homs), Syria, El was worshiped in
a rock that some believe had fallen from the sky (a meteorite) and was
thus known as El of the rock or the mountain (Ilāh hag-Gabal). This cult
was brought to Rome by Elagabalus who was priest of Elagabal in Emesa
before he became emperor of Rome in 218 CE. This deity was worshiped
even in Rome in the form of the aniconic conical rock, which was borne
on a chariot of his own with no driver. Elagabalus tried to subvert the
IE religion of Rome by placing Elagabal as the supreme deity and he even
made Iuppiter as an underling of the former. He gave Minerva as a wife
of Elagabal and identified her with Ishtar. He removed all the aniconic
images of the original Roman deities, including those of Mars, and
placed them in a new temple of Elagabal to indicate the subservience of
the Roman deities to Elagabal. This, along with his sexual excesses and
zealotry, infuriated the senators and the praetorian guard who promptly
had him killed and returned the cult of Elagabal to Syria. However, the
deity did enjoy a certain level of popularity, though no longer as the
head of the pantheon, in the heathen Roman empire. He was now iconized
as an anthropomorphic image and identified with the solar deity popular
in certain Roman circles. However, it appears that the cult of Elagabal
in a transformed version persisted in the midst of the Arabian desert,
where much later it became the focus of the third Abrahamism which
emerged among the Arabs whose mono-deity was the cognate of the same El.
Indeed, a baetyl similar to the original stone of Elagabal, was the only
religious object that survived the intense iconoclasm of the founder of
the third Abrahamism and to this date is worshiped by the followers of
that cult. One wonders if some of the zealotry of Abrahamism might have
been immanent in the Elagabal cult from a certain point onwards.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: A closer study reveals that this function was probably
distributed among three distinct deities, albeit with overlapping
functionality, in the early Proto-Indo-European religion (i.e. even
before Hittite split from the rest: we favor the Indo-Hittite
hypothesis). All three deities are preserved only in the old Indo-Aryan
vaidika religion – dyauH pitR^i, parjanya and indra vR^itrahan. Thus,
dyauH pitR^i represented the ancestral sky deity with a thunder weapon,
parjanya the fertilizing rain deity, and indra vR^itrahan represented
the deity who was the supreme divine warrior. However, due to their
overlapping functionality they were rolled into one in most branches of
Indo-European with one of the three being made the sole possessor of the
combined functionality. In the Hittite religion the cognate of dyauH
pitR^i was retained as Tarhuwant while the cognate of indra was retained
in female form as the goddess Inara the daughter of Tarhuwant. In
Germanic and Celtic the same cognate deity as Tarhuwant was retained
with the appellation invoking the term for the thunder, respectively,
Thor and Taranis. In Greek and Roman religions again it was the cognate
of dyauH pitR^i. In Baltic and Slavic it was the cognate of parjanya,
respectively Perkūnas and Perun. In the Baltic religion indra survived
as the planet Jupiter (Lithuanian Indraja). In the vaidika and the
Kalasha, non-zarathuShtrian Iranian and perhaps Armenian religions,
indra vR^itrahan became the dominant possessor of this function.
However, in the vaidika religion alone the essence of the remaining two
deities were retained along with their specific ancestral functional
aspects. Thus, parjanya was specifically the fertilizing rain deity. In
the vaidika religion he receives a specific cooked rice offering (charu)
on the day before the full-moon as part of the vaishvadeva ritual as
ordained by Apastamba. In the bali ritual of the Indo-Aryan householder,
he offers a bali for parjanya near the drum in which he stores water.
The connection of thunder and dyaus is explicitly mentioned in the
famous recitation with which the fire is taken forth to the new altar:  
akrandad agni stanayann iva dyauH kShAmA rerihad vIrudhaH sama\~njan |
RV 10.045.04ab  
agni roared like dyaus when he thunders; he licked the plants off the
earth, anointed \[with ghee\]. The deity dyauH is invoked in one of the
mantra-s with which the churning of fire takes place. He also receives
oblations along with pR^ithivi in the mR^igareShTi ritual of the
atharvan-s.

Footnote 2: The Roman term for this senior priest, an office occupied by
Julius Caesar who was a pious man, has an interesting parallel in the
Indo-Aryan world: The Sanskrit equivalent of Pontifex is pathikR^it,
both meaning the maker of the path (ponti= path; fex=maker). In the veda
it is applied among others to: 1) To the god bR^ihaspati who has
the function of the chief ritualist among the deva-s. This is observed
in the mantra of gR^itsamada shaunahotra:  
tvaM no gopAH pathikR^id vichakShaNas tava vratAya matibhir jarAmahe |
RV 2.23.06ab  
You are our protector, the path-maker, the wise one; for your ritual we
recite mantra-s.  
2\) It is also applied to human ancestors who were literally makers of
religious path of Arya-s – the path of the gods. Thus, such ancestors,
who were mantra-seers, are worshiped along with yama:  
idaM nama R^iShibhyaH pUrvajebhyaH pUrvebhyaH pathikR^idbhyaH | RV
10.014.15cd  
This salutation is for the seers, the ancestors and the former
path-makers. Interestingly, the founder of the jaina religion chose the
term tirthaMkara, which is the semantic equivalent of these terms, for
their highest figures.

Footnote 3: Latin que is cognate of the enclitic particle cha in
Sanskrit and is used similarly in this hymn as it is used in
Indo-Iranian incantations such the chamaka prashna of the yajurveda.
Second, the use of the imperatives in the first foot of the Roman
incantation is a parallel to such imperative constructions in the
vaidika mantra-s:  
bAdhasva=prohibessis (e.g. in Are bAdhasva duchChunAm |)  
pAhi= defendas (e.g. in dahAshaso rakShasaH pAhy asmAn druho nido
mitramaho avadyAt |)  
prati vidhya adhi = averrunces (e.g. in Urdhvo bhava prati vidhyAdhy
asmad AviSh kR^iNuShva daivyAny agne |)

Footnote 4: The hint of some friction is suggested by a tale in the
skanda purANa where when brAhmaNa-s were performing a Vedic ritual a
skull appeared in the ritual arena. They removed the skull and put it
outside the arena. This repeated itself daily until a pile of skulls
collected outside the ritual arena. Beneath that pile the ritualists
found a li\~Nga, which they then realized was a manifestation of rudra
and started worshiping him in that form.
