+++
title = "Denisovans, Sherpas andxa0Tibetans"

+++
[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-pROy10QSE7o/U7UACC9jxcI/AAAAAAAAC9M/2E9kS9PZztI/s800/tibetan_denisovan.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/DN7tPzT-gCynZxe8qC1sDNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Many years ago we discovered that EGLN1 and its orthologs were  iron and
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase that hydroxylated prolines. About 8
months after we had published a paper detailing this discovery a band of
mlechCha-s led by an English robber-baron said essentially the same
thing, as though it was a new discovery, while failing to cite us
entirely – iti mlechChAnAM mlechChatvaM | But this EGLN1 was destined to
have a long and interesting career at the foundation of many an
interesting discovery. Years later, studies on the genetic adaptations
that help Tibetans thrive at high altitudes revealed a role for EGLN1
and another gene EPAS1, which had also crossed our path. The latter
protein had a domain which we were among the first to characterize and
discover to be a binder of small molecule ligands. The recovery of these
two genes was satisfying as they code for proteins which are part of a
sensory pathway for hypoxia – this is in itself again not being
surprising as it stems directly from our original discovery that EGLN1
needs molecular oxygen for its catalytic activity. Indeed, a key to
adaptation for high altitudes is being able to survive in rarefied air
that’s low in oxygen. Indeed, we have known of more that one plain
dweller who in their desire to have a glimpse of rudra at kailAsa
instead got called for a premature appointment with chitragupta due the
hypoxia. However, a question that remained was how did the Tibetans
acquired these genetic adaptations? The Tibetans were otherwise part of
the great radiation of closely related peoples including the Han chIna-s
and other East Asians.

The first discoveries leading to a possible answer came from the work of
Jeong et al published earlier this year. They showed that the EGLN1 and
EPAS1 alleles, which confer the high altitude adaptation to the Tibetans
were acquired from the Sherpa, another legendary high altitude people
famous for their mountaineering abilities. Based on this they proposed
the model that the Sherpas were the original high altitude people, from
whom an East Asian population, genetically similar in general terms to
the Han, acquired these alleles through admixture giving rise to the
Tibetans. But this led to the question how did the Sherpas acquire these
adaptations? The partial answer to this came in rather interesting
fashion via the work of Huerta-Sánchez et al. They focused on the EPAS1
gene which shows the signature for strong positive selection in these
high altitude peoples and sequenced the region around the gene in
Tibetans and Hans. What they found was that the gene was associated with
an unusual haplotype structure that was otherwise found only in
Denisovans and at a very low frequency in the Hans. The length of the
haplotype and the total absence in a diverse set of world populations
they surveyed establishes that more or less this region was acquired via
introgression from Denisovans and amplified by positive selection
exerted by the high altitudes. The authors of this work appear to have
been unaware of the parallel work of Jeong et al hence did not look at
Sherpas (Alternatively, the work being backed by chIna scientific
institutions may not have had access to Sherpas and also wished to make
a subtle political point to legitimize their stranglehold on Tibet).
However, it is clear from that work that this introgression from
Denisovans did not happen directly into Tibetans. Rather it most likely
proceeded via the Sherpa intermediate.

This Denisovan admixture via the Sherpas is consistent with the
observation that there is no evidence for noticeable Denisovan
introgression in Hans and other East Asians. Likewise, there was no
evidence for Denisovan admixture into most sampled Indians all over the
Subcontinent including the Andaman islands. This raises the possibility
that there was an isolated population of Denisovans in the Himalayan
regions who came in contact with the Sherpas and conferred their genetic
adaptations to high altitudes to them allowing them to effectively
colonize those regions. Eventually, an East Asian population entered the
region and admixed with the Sherpas further acquiring this adaptation
and giving rise to the Tibetans. This gives the first hint that
Denisovans might have reached the Northeastern mountain regions of the
Indian subcontinent but perhaps did not penetrate beyond into the Indian
plains. This is not the only adaptation acquired from Denisovans and the
other species of ancient men, the Neanderthals. Earlier studies on the
MHC proteins, which present antigenic peptides from pathogens to
T-cells, had shown that there is a major contribution from these
para-human versions to the modern human complement of MHCs. For example,
in the case of the MHC class I molecule HLA-A, the alleles derived from
para-human species comprise more than 50% of those in Europeans, more
than 70% in Asians. In several Papuans nearly all the HLA-A alleles are
of said to be of para-human origins. Thus, as *Homo sapiens* radiated
out of Africa they used the introgressed Denisovan and Neanderthal
alleles of these key immunity molecules to meet the challenges of the
new pathogens they encountered in their advance. This raises the
possibility that the divergence of non-Africans from Africans has been
notably influenced in other ways than we currently know by admixture
with non-sapiens Homo.

In conclusion, one could see this acquisition of archaic alleles by
*Homo sapiens* as a parallel to how bacteria acquire various genes
through lateral transfer to rapidly gain new adaptations such as
antibiotic resistance.
