+++
title = "Tyrannosaurs of the south redux: megaraptorans as tyrannosaurs?"

+++
Shortly after we had reached the mlechCha-land we read an abstract of a
presentation in a meeting on vertebrate paleontology where Argentinian
scientists reported the discovery of a large theropod (\~6m long) with
huge claws. At that point those claws were compared to the pedal claws
of deinonychosaurs and it was seen as a huge southern deinonychosaur.
But the story of these claws did not end there. The owner of these claws
was eventually named Megaraptor namunhuaiquii and it became clear that
they were not pedal claws but manual claws. The affinities of Megaraptor
have since then been in a state of flux. We had it being classified as a
coelurosaur, a carcharodontosauroid, a spinosauroid, and a basal
tetanuran. Thus, it was more or less placed all over the tetanuran
subtree of theropods. This is very typical of morphological phylogenies,
which, as we have noted several times on these pages, are not very
reliable, especially when confronted by highly derived morphologies.

In the meantime, more of Megaraptor was found and several relatives also
started emerging in South America and elsewhere. From south America we
had Aerosteon and Orkoraptor. From Australia we had Australovenator, and
from Japan we had Fukuiraptor. These new discoveries resulted in two
competing hypothesis. As we detailed before, the analysis of Orkoraptor
and Aerosteon suggested they were coelurosaurs and not allosauroids as
Sereno et al had proposed. Thus, by association it would mean that
Megaraptor was also a coelurosaur. But contrary to this, [a major
phylogenetic analysis by Benson/Brusatte et al resulted in all these
dinosaurs being recovered as a monophyletic megaraptoran clade in a
larger clade together with carcharodontosauroids within the allosauroid
clade](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/10/18/of-allosaurs-and-megalosaurs/ "Of allosaurs and megalosaurs").
This suggested that [the coelurosaurian features we had observed in
Orkoraptor and
Aerosteon](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/03/28/orkoraptor-and-aerosteon/ "Orkoraptor and Aerosteon")
were purely convergent features.

However, the discovery of new Megaraptor remains along with two new
phylogenetic analysis by the Argentinian team lead by their veteran
paleontologist Novas has resulted in restoration of the coelurosaurian
hypothesis, now with a further twist – the megaraptorans including
Aerosteon, Orkoraptor, Megaraptor, Australovenator, and Fukuiraptor are
a clade of tyrannosauroids, whereas Neovenator, Concavenator,
Eocarcharia and go along with the crown carcharodontosaurs (including
Shaochilong) inside the allosauroid clade. Chilantaisaurus, which
Benson/Brusatte found to be a carcharodontosauroid, now emerges as a
basal coelurosaur.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-Pm8t-h_oVJw/U6pyJQgU1oI/AAAAAAAAC7o/UV3taf8fmr8/s640/Megaraptorans.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/dj-wlXILyNjht2MFhUbjt9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

All this is of considerable interest given that we had noted that the so
called [basal tyrannosaur Yutyrannus had several characters generally
shared with the basal carcharodontosauroid
Concavenator](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/07/on-feathers-fleas-and-big-stem-birds/ "On feathers, fleas and big stem birds").
Thus, irrespective of which hypothesis might be correct, there appear to
be certain convergences between tyrannosauroids on one hand and
allosauroids of the carcharodontosauroid clade on the other. Hence, at
this moment we are undecided between these two hypothesis – however, we
may note that the authors test several alternative topologies. Of these
grouping of megaraptorans with Neovenator either inside tyrannosauroids
or with it in the position they recover it results in trees which are
26-37 steps longer. Thus, given the codings and matrix they are using it
would seem that megaraptorans are not closely related to Neovenator at
all – a key contradiction to the phylogeny proposed by Benson et al.
Importantly, Novas and colleagues note 14 synapomorphies that support
the nesting of the megaraptorans within the tyrannosauroid clade. Of
these the following are indeed suggestive:  
● premaxilla with incisiviform teeth with “D”-shaped cross-section  
● premaxilla with very large, circular foramina on the lateral surface  
● external naris major axis length more than three times its maximum
dorsoventral height  
● pubic boot 60% length of the bone  
● dentary ﬁrst alveolus substantially smaller than the more posterior
ones

Thus in their tree the megaraptorans are nested within tyrannosauroids
as a sister group of Xiongguanlong (and possibly Alectrosaurus) and the
remaining crown tyrannosaurids. Santanaraptor emerges a sister group to
both the above clades and they in turn are joined by a clade formed by
the basal tyrannosauroids Dilong, Tanycolagreus, Guanlong, Kileskus and
Protoceratosaurus (probably including Sinotyrannus). Holtz had earlier
noted that the Brazilian Santanaraptor might be a tyrannosaur from the
South (i.e. Gondwana) and that seems to be borne out by this study too.
They also recover Eotyrannus from Cretaceous of Britain as a
megaraptoran but caution this is not reliable – indeed it seems
unlikely. In purely visual terms their comparison of the reconstructed
skull of Megaraptor with that of the basal tyrannosauroid Dilong makes
striking impression.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-6dDmf-jo5QI/U6pyJTxRxcI/AAAAAAAAC7s/K8a_Qg2g5oQ/s640/Dilong_megaraptor.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Cv2fQpeK5HiNH6eD7vjbE9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Thus, the authors propose based on their phylogenetic analysis that the
tyrannosaurs followed two distinct trajectories in the northern and
southern continents. In the north they evolved into large bone-crushing
predators epitomized by the last member of the clade Tyrannosaurus or
those retaining the apparently ancestral longistrine condition seen in
Xiongguanlong (and probably also its close relative Alectrosaurus)
prototyped by the Alioramus from Mongolia and China (including the
recently named Qianzhousaurus which seems to be just an adult
Alioramus). However, both these northern forms evolved small hands with
just two functional fingers. In contrast, the southern megaraptorans
evolved larger hands with powerful claws thus developing a mode of
predation similar to the allosaurs and carcharodontosaurs that appear to
have directly used their powerful hand claws as weaponry. However, the
ground reality is rather different: there are forms like Dryptosaurus
which might have been “two-fingered” (certainly closer to the crown
tyrannosaurs than megaraptorans) but had large claws which were used as
direct predatory weaponry. Then there are the small tyrannosaurs of the
Northern Cretaceous whose such as Bagaraatan and Xinjiangovenator which
may have paralleled the smaller megaraptorans like the Japanese
Fukuiraptor.
