+++
title = "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-V"

+++
[From
part-IV](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/05/21/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth-iv/ "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-IV")  
trayAyudho nAma pa\~nchamo .adhyAyaH |  
The next day Somakhya was browsing the news when he came across a
curious item:  
“*There are reports of heavy cross-border shelling by Pakistani troops
in the Kupwara district. To take stock of the situation the Chief of
Army Staff Vijay Simha had an urgent meeting with Air Chief Marshal
Rudra Nayak. They discussed the possibility of deploying the air force
in light of the possibility of insurgent activity on the Indian side of
the LoC. They also held meetings with the defense minister shrI
Narayandev and Prime Minister shrI Pratap Simha with regard to the
increased activity at the LoC. The mlechCha spokeswoman Elizabeth
Whiteside issued a statement asking both sides to deescalate, while
Organisation of the Islamic Conference strongly condemned the plans by
India to escalate the conflict. The Inter-Services Public Relations
spokesman objected saying that India has been waging a propaganda war
since the aggressive Hindu nationalist government of shrI Pratap Simha
has taken power.*”

Somakhya wondered why there was talk of escalation if there was
cross-border shelling which is fairly common occurrence. Importantly,
the consultations for deployment of the air force suggested that
something was amiss. He was wondered what the link was between this to
Vrishchika’s account of the epidemic outbreak in the soldiers from that
very region. Shortly, thereafter Vrishchika, Varoli and Jhilleeka
visited Somakhya’s house to join him for lunch. Then Vrishchika said the
situation was more explosive than what it seemed. She mentioned that
there was much pressure from the army on the hospital that they figure
this out. A senior army physician had dropped by and expressed dismay to
the senior physician of their hospital that the investigation had been
handed to someone who was just an intern when it was so serious a
matter. At least Vidrum should be directly handling it he pressed. It
took some convincing to make him understand that while Vrishchika might
be just an intern she and her team was perhaps the best in the country
to deal with unraveling such “emerging” pathogens. Then she said
something even more serious: “We have just got the samples of a couple
of patients from Kurukshetra, which is far away from the border, who
seem to show some symptoms as though they have been exposed to
radiation, but there is absolutely no evidence that they were exposed to
such. Yet they show multiple mutations in their cells from several
tissues.” Somakhya: “Ah… ADP ribosylation of Mov10, cleavage of Shank3,
now mutagenesis of DNA\! Did you detect a virus in these new patients?”
Vrishchika: “Investigation underway, will return to it as soon as we are
done.” Jhilleeka: “Here is the sequence of the first virus.” Somakhya
got to analyzing it right away. After sometime he remarked: “This is no
natural virus but one designed by a clever engineer. However, I am
puzzled – it simply cannot explain any of those biochemical changes you
mentioned. Varoli are you sure you detected them right.” Varoli: “I know
how fraudulent researchers see results that do not exist; but let me
assure you these are as real as you and me.” Somakhya: “But I see no way
these changes can be catalyzed by anything in this virus.” Vrishchika’s
forehead was furrowed with worry: “There is something we are not
understanding because the biochemical changes Varoli detected are
entirely in line with the symptoms of the patients. Remember Shank3 is a
neuronal scaffold protein and Mov10 degradation has been implicated in
hardening fear memory.” Somakhya: “I fully understand, but I just cannot
figure out how this virus causing all that?” Varoli: “Let me get some
more data for you may be late tomorrow.”

Vrishchika: “As you know, Lootika is coming tonight and our parents do
not want us to go along. They say they will go by themselves and drive
her and her student Temülen back. We are scared for the shAstra says:
Asane shayane yAne pAna-bhojana-vastuShu |  dR^iShTAdR^iShTa-pramatteShu
praharanty arayo.ariShu||  
While seated, while sleeping, while in a vehicle, via items of drink and
food,  
due to ignoring of seen and unseen attacks enemies strike their foes.”  
Somakhya: “Do not worry, I doubt the mlechCha-s would resort the means
they used for you for they are facing a potential foreign-relations
crisis on multiple ends from these exposures resulting from their
screw-ups. Nevertheless, Sharvamanyu and myself shall provide cover for
them even as the former did for us.”

Unlike Somakhya, Lootika arrived without an event with her pupil, who
was interested learning the devabhAShA in bhArata. Even as she was being
filled in with all the news by her sisters, new surprising data was at
hand from Jhilleeka. Lootika and Varoli quickly grasped its significance
and decided to go and see Somakhya right away. When she burst through
Somakhya’s door it was as though the intervening years and all the ice
between them had never existed. She raised her hand for a high-five
saying: “You were right. That virus whose sequence you saw yesterday
could not cause these biochemical changes that Varoli had identified.
But there is something really strange here: The samples have a second
virus that in large part is identical to what you saw but lacks one gene
while having 3 additional genes. I am sure you need to sit down on the
couch before seeing what those extra genes are – you won’t believe it\!”
Somakhya calmly replied: “I guess two of them are the caspase-like
peptidase and the ADP-ribosyltransferase I had identified in your fish
pathogen; which you and Temülen so beautifully brought to a conclusion.
As for the third … I am not sure.” Varoli: “Well, it is the ciliate
MAC-Perforin protein you and Indrasena had published.” Somakhya, now a
bit shocked, replied: “Varoli that looks like a construct from your
hand\!” Lootika: “Sort of\! In my opinion only one man could have been
the engineer behind this – it is a fellow named Dick Shuman. I recall
sending him the paper with Varoli on those delivery vectors with the
MAC-Perforin proteins. It appears he has combined it with the three
toxins. I had already gamed most of this when I got Vrishchika’s mail
while waiting in Moscow. I felt it was no coincidence that Dick’s
friend, Harry Kornberg was making himself comfortable in the desh. I
guess you had reached your own convergent conclusions since you alone
understood what came via the vetAla-mArga. On top of all this I am sure
Vrishchika told you of the newest scare of the mutagenizing agent.”
Somakhya: “Yes, it crossed my mind right away that it must be the third
toxin – the deaminase, since Temülen had managed to show that it is
potent mutator of DNA in that paper. But dear Lootika tell me how did
you conclude that there was trouble brewing – was it just Vrischika’s
mail.” Lootika: “Dear Somakhya, I should tell you that Dick Shuman had
an interest in me beyond my science. His garrulity got better of him
once and he dropped a bit of his biography – he’s a consultant for the
mlechCha terrorist organization Blackwater and earns contracts from them
– an odd thing for an engineer of genes to do, except if he is… That was
sufficient information for me to get alert.” Somakhya: “Truth to be told
the vetAla alone was not enough; my friend Indrasena gave a vital clue
to put things together.”

As Lootika and Varoli prepared to leave to pick up Temülen from her
class, the former remarked in a heavy voice: “I am really scared for my
dear sister Vrishchika. She is in close contact with this dangerous
stuff and what we see is really depressing. I wish she could opt out of
this right away and may be we should all retreat to Mongolia.” Somakhya:
“I hear you, we need to find a real way out this – it is going to come
to our doorstep.” Varoli: “In all this we forgot to tell you that you
should join us for dinner tonight. We’ll talk more then.” Saying so they
jumped into their car and sped off. Somakhya noted that the pradoSha
hour was closing in on that kR^ittikA Sunday. He decided to perform the
great skanda ritual. Having kindled the ritual fire he started
performing the rite of the mighty six-faced god with incantations, which
are known only to those who have mastered the complete tantra of the
ShaNmukha-kalpa with the mayUrachandrikA. He sprinkled sand all around
uttering the incantation:  
OM mahAsenAya vidmahe kumArAya dhImahi | tan no guhaH prachodayAt svAhA
||

Thereafter he made the primary kaumAra oblations with the incantation:  
OM namaH kumArAdhipataye mAtR^i-graha-jyeShTAyaantarikSha-charAya
deva-devAya ShaNmukhAya mahAsenAya mayUravAhanAya svAhA ||

Then he poured ghee on to the idol of kumAra with the incantation:  
OM AyAtu bhagavAn deva-devA\~Nkusha-pAshadhara-kanaka-shakte
ghaNTA-kolAhala-priya pratiShTha mArge .arghyaM pratigR^ihANa namo namaH
svAhA || huM ||

After several oblations to skanda he then made the oblations to the
great goddess ShaShThI: OM namo bhagavatyai mahAmayUriNyai hariNyai
ShaShaThyai svAhA ||

Then he made the oblations to the 33 great gods and there after started
making offerings to the hundreds of divinities of the great circle of
kumAra including: shAkha, viShAkha, nejameSha, mukhamaNDikA,
nandikeshvara, the gigantic, terrifying elephant duHsaha, revatI, the
dolphin-headed shishumAra-mukhI, the buffalo headed mahiShAnanA,
chatuShpatha-niketA, lohitAyanI, mi\~njikA, mi\~njika, dreadful
vinAyaka-s, the rakShasa-graha, the pishAcha-graha, various
skanda-graspers and skanda-seizers and the circles of goddesses. After
having concluded the offerings he sat beside the idols of skanda and
ShaShThI for japa of the secret mantra. After sometime he perceived with
the inner “eye” the appearance of a goddess wearing a mask around her
eyes. He realized that it was mukhamaNDikA. He heard her divine voice:
“sarvAn viShayAn chintayitvA shIgraM bhaiShajya-rasAdi- karmANi
sakhIbhiH saha kurvIthAH | saptadashaM manuM prayu\~njIthAH |”
Thereafter Somakhya performed japa of the dravyaparIkShaNaM kartukAmaH
of the uttara-tantraM of the ShaNmukha kalpa. Finally, after offering
tarpaNa to the lineage of AchArya-s of the tantra starting from
laMbaka-bhUShanAda of gandhAra (i.e. the ancient kaumAra shrine at
Laghman in modern Afghanistan), and hoping that someday those lands are
cleansed of the evils of rAkShasonmAda, he ended his ritual.

Somakhya had arrived at Lootika’s house for dinner. Having known her for
years, he could say that while outwardly putting a smiling face and
introducing her student, something was bothering her. He saw Vrischika
walk up from behind them and noted that her face more plainly betrayed a
deep sense of fear. Somakhya did not remark anything about this then
because he knew their parents were only incompletely informed of the
truth. He allowed to dinner to proceed and after that Lootika drew him
aside in private for a moment and after embracing him and holding his
hand said: “I am very scared.” Somakhya unemotionally looked at her and
said: “And we need to get ready to fight; call the rest and let
Vrishchika tell us the news.” Now fired by Somakhya’s demeanor she
called in her sisters and student for a grand council. Somakhya:
“Vrischika tell us all that you know.” Vrishchika, still looking very
worried: “Things have gone from bad to worse. We have intelligence that
the mutagenizing virus with the deaminase gene, now confirmed by Lootika
and Temülen, has broken out in several places across bhArata. This is
going to have the effects of a dirty bomb going off in multiple cities
and towns. We do not know what to do. While Lootika has figured out that
in principle an effective vaccine can be developed, that is going to
take a long time and before that we could all be engulfed. We have the
first case in our own city\!” Somakhya: “No doubt we need to go ahead
with the vaccine development. Hopefully, you can convince the highest
powers to get this moving.” Vrishchika: “An officer on special duty from
the health ministry is coming to visit me tomorrow. He said he will have
an additional special official with him – I suspect he is an agent from
the Intelligence Bureau.” Somakhya: “The second point is we need to
protect you from this first and foremost for you are like the ANI
(lynchpin) of the akSha (axle) of the rathachakra (chariot wheel) in
this business. With Indrasena we had discovered a novel steroid from a
ciliate that can block the MACPF protein from deploying. We should see
if this might be fit for human use and perhaps provide some prophylaxis.
I do know it cannot do much against the neural manifestation of the
caspase-ADP ribosyltransferase-engineered virus.” Lootika: “We have
quick assay for testing human toxicity, but what about the cell lines
for those experiments?” Varoli: “That should not be a problem.”

Somakhya: “I realize neither the steroid nor the vaccine are going to be
easy to quickly confirm or deploy. We need something faster than that
but we need to get working on them as the long term solutions. But now I
have something to say that you will find positively weird. Jhilleeka
with Sandeep’s help do a metagenome sequencing of bacteria from the bag
of mud Lootika intended to give me many years ago but forgot. Get the
sequences to me as soon as they are ready and I will tell you all how to
proceed.” They all looked at Somakhya as though he had gone mad. But he
merely smiled and said: “Do it as though you are a yakSha who has been
ordered into action by skanda. Lootika you be the coordinator of all of
these efforts – I will say more on the action once we have the sequences
from the mud. However, before I leave let me tell you something more:
Look at this. The Ghazis from TSP are invading Kashmir despite the
outbreak. Harry Kornberg and Tom Church are enjoying their sojourn as
though nothing has happened. I saw a news item that the chIna advisers
have left TSP in wake of the invasion and they are not launching any of
their own. Rather, there seems to a be grave fear in their media of what
is happening here. This tells me that the mlechCha-s already have the
vaccine and have given it to the TSPians; hence their courage to attack
and the fear of the chIna-s to take advantage of this. Moreover,
Sharvamanyu told me that the church of South India and the Evangelical
Society had some major vaccination drives in the past three months which
were funded by the John Doors foundation. I doubt that is coincidental.
One expedient way is to get the vaccine out of the mlechCha-s before we
make our own.” Vrischika: “Should I tip off the officials about this?
Moreover, I heard from Vidrum that we were going to be visited next week
by Faqih ibn al-Ass, the top epidemiologist of the barbarian kingdom of
Saudia Arabia. What could that mean in this context?” Somakhya: “Ah\!
Faqih ibn al-Ass sounds like the capstone of this whole affair – seems
to be the clinching signal of the mlechCha-marUnmattAbhisaMdhi.”

Day after day was passing by. The despair and uncertainty in the country
was steadily rising. All kinds of theories were being floated and the
side-effects were being felt on commerce, travel and education. Vidrum
had just called Somakhya to vent his frustration that the latest edition
of the Indian Cricket League had been canceled and that his tickets had
not been refunded. In the mean time Somakhya and Lootika had met in
their secret lair in the nearby hills one afternoon. For a while they
sat in silence enjoying the mild breeze, the solitude and the flight of
the coelurosaurs ranging in the welkin, and then looking at insects and
arachnids through their portable microscopes. Then Lootika explained the
difficulties Varoli faced with making the libraries for the metagenomic
analysis of the mud and how finally she had to intercede and get it
done. Then Somakhya detailed to her a construct of a similar virus with
a secret toxin known only to him: “If we make this perhaps we might have
a counter-weapon, which could be used as a deterrent or a retaliatory
astra. After all, not for nothing our ancestors praised that which is
called pratIchInaM\!” Lootika decided to get Temülen to test that toxin
and get the said virus constructed. Then they parted ways and went to
their homes.

Finally, after a wait that seemed like ever, Vrishchika arrived one day
with Jhilleeka to Somakhya’s place. She seemed tired and haggard and
said: “This thing is sapping me. More than the death and disease all
around, I am wilting under the drama from my parents who want me to give
all this up and just stay at home till it all blows over.” Somakhya:
“That’s tragic for this is not going to blow over without you bringing
it to a stop.” Vrishchika: “But the good news is Temülen has managed to
do all the assays and they suggest that your steroid is fit for human
use. But it might have some side-effects. However, since I now have a
very good picture of the disease progression I know I can head it off by
using the steroid within the first 24 hours if I happen to get infected.
But things are getting really hot: You may remember your classmate
Meghana. She has been infected by the deaminase-containing virus. It is
not looking good and as you might expect Vidrum is distraught and
nearing a dysfunctional state due to this.” Somakhya: “I feel bad for
Vidrum and all the people – remember the vetAla’s message?” Jhilleeka
“Finally I have for you the metagenomic sequences from the mud. Here
they are for what they are worth.” Somakhya’s eyes light up: “Wonderful,
little one. I’ll get working on them right away.” Jhilleeka protested:
“I am no little one any more\!” Somakhya then called Vrishchika into
his room, and pulling out a vial gave it to her: “Here is a peptide
Indrasena isolated from a toad. Take it with you and spray a little into
you nostrils when you feel like you are feeling now after not having
slept for almost three days.”

Somakhya threw himself at the sequences he had received. After a few
hours he came across a toxin locus from an actinobacterium which coded
three toxins and at the 3′ end of each of them was a gene for an
immunity protein. He found that the toxins were very similar to the
three toxins from the fish pathogen. He felt a sense of deep
satisfaction and took a deep breath. Then he called Lootika and told her
that they should meet at his place for dinner. After dinner they went up
to the terrace of Somakhya’s house. It was a dark new moon night with no
clouds. They set up a telescope, observed M104, and took a few pictures.
Thereafter, they spoke for a while about why spiral galaxies with
greater central bulges have more globular clusters. Lootika felt
strangely at ease: “Somakhya there must be more to this?” Somakhya
pointing to the sequences on his tablet: “Here are the three immunity
proteins for the respective toxins. Give these to Temülen and have her
test the same against their toxins. Once confirmed, you all should make
viruses exactly like those of Dick Shuman but now having the immunity
protein genes in place of those of the toxins. Let Vrishchika then put
them on trial as an experimental treatment for those infected.”

Of course things are easier said than done. The pressure was mounting on
all fronts with kAla turning on even as the writhing of the serpent
beneath viShNu. The mlechCha-s were constantly offering help to deal
with the deadly epidemic and seeking to send in their teams. The air
force had with great difficulty curtailed the TSPian incursion, but
without effective action by the ground forces it could not be entirely
cleared. News was reaching Somakhya’s ears that with the army unable to
act effectively, the prime minister was about to give in to the
suggestion that as a part of the foreign-direct-investment program for
the military the mlechCha-s set up a facility for vaccine development
and distribution. But Vrishchika had conveyed enough to the officials
she had met that the intelligence bureau got into action. It was trying
hard to prevent the mlechCha-s from being brought in for vaccine
development. Finally, one morning Vrishchika arrived at Somakhya’s
house; she did not even enter and called him to the gate: “Finally the
viruses you suggested are ready. It really took all the skills of
Lootika, Varoli, and Temülen to get them made at top speed, with some
improvisation in terms of robotics from Jhilleeka and her colleagues.
They have worked perfectly in our tests and I am off to use them on the
patients. Sadly, early this morning Meghana succumbed to the disease.”
In the meantime Harry Kornberg and Tom Church were lobbying hard for
setting up the mlechCha vaccine facility. But Vidrum curtly told them
that was not possible and they had devised their own treatment for the
epidemics. The mlechCha-s asked that he share information on that with
them, but he refused. They declared that the collaboration with him was
over and that they were leaving right away.

Some months later Somakhya and Lootika briefly checked the news just
before setting out on an expedition to study the infection of toads by
the apicomplexan parasite *Lankesterella minima*. They saw a curious
item: “*The scientist Dick Shuman and Saudi Arabian epidemiologist Faqih
ibn al-Ass were taken into custody as part of an investigation relating
to the outbreak of a deadly viral disease among marines and civilians at
Fort Redstone. Possible involvement of a bio-warfare agent is being
suspected.*” Soon thereafter Somakhya and Lootika were receiving frantic
messages from the mlechCha-s asking them to help out with this
situation. They responded to the mlechCha-s that they would certainly
look into it once they were done with their investigation of
*Lankesterella* and proceeded with their expedition.

[To part
VI.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth-the-end/)
