+++
title = "Notices of Hūṇa-s in kāvya and an excursus on their origins andxa0ethnicity"

+++
This article was originally published in a slightly modified form at
[IndiaFacts](http://indiafacts.co.in/tracing-huns-sanskrit-kavyatradition/#.VKDfH14APM).

Starting sometime shortly before 200BCE all the way down to the 7th
century of the common era, there occurred a series of irruptions of
Inner Asiatic peoples, who appeared to have their origins in Mongolia
and the lands in the immediate vicinity of it. These people were
recorded by the Chinese as the Xiongnu (Hung-no in Cantonese). Shortly
after 215 BCE, the Xiongnu in response to the expansionist policies of
the first unified Chinese empire of the Chin founded by Shi Huangdi
organized themselves into a powerful, mobile fighting force along the
lines of the Iranic peoples of the steppe. This lead to a series of
conflicts between the Xiongnu and these Iranic people, as well as other
Altaic tribes of Mongolia and Southern Siberia. In the process the
Xiongnu emerged as the dominant power and they also regained the ground
ceded to the Chinese. In China the Chin empire collapsed and was
replaced by the Han empire, which gave the modern Chinese their core
ethnic character and identity. Not surprisingly, the rising Xiongnu
power in Mongolia under their leader Motun \[Footnote 1\] came in
conflict with the nationalist and expansionist Han power in China, which
had imposed trade embargoes on them. Motun lead the Xiongnu to a major
victory against the first Han emperor Gao-zu around 201 BCE, where his
Mongolian cavalry destroyed up to a third of the huge Han army. In the
mid-170s before the CE, Motun and his son lead a series of massive
attacks against the tribes to their west, which were recorded by the
Chinese. The first of these were against the Iranic Yüeh-chih, the
ancestral confederation of tribes from whom the Kuṣāṇa-s descended. Most
were slaughtered or enslaved, while the survivors fled westwards to
eventually found the Kuṣāṇa empire in India and Central Asia. The
Tocharian groups, like the Lou-lan and Wu-sun and the probably Altaic
Hu-chieh (together these were predecessors the Uighurs) were also
crushed and subjugated by the Xiongu in course of these operations
\[Footnote 2\]. By 91 CE the Xiongnu empire was on the verge of collapse
and a branch of them moved westwards to established a short-lived
kingdom near the Caspian Sea. These were recorded by the Roman historian
Tacitus as the Hunnoi. A group of foreign people from inner Asia are
known in Hindu paurāṇika texts as the Hūṇa-s. In Central Asian Iranic
sources studied by de la Vaissière the Xiongnu were described as Huns
\[Footnote 3\]. This suggests that Chinese Xiongnu, Latin Hunnoi, Hindu
Hūṇa and Iranic Hun were probably originally inspired by the ethnonym of
the same horde of people associated with the first great Altaic
expansion that occurred out of Mongolia.

Centuries after these events the Christian Roman empire and their
Germanic neighbors (starting in the late 300s of the CE) faced invasions
by an inner Asiatic people, who eventually established a short-lived but
vast empire at the expense of the former. These peoples were also
referred to as the Huns by the western sources. They reached the
pinnacle of their power under a shrewd leader named Attila. A couple of
years after Attila’s death in the west (\~453 CE) there were a series of
invasions of Bhārata and Iran by people who were again referred to as
the Hūṇa-s or Huns. Some Indian sources do distinguish these from the
regular Hūṇa-s as the Śveta-Hūṇa-s or White Huns. Likewise, in some
Iranic and west Asian sources these are distinguished as Hephthalites or
Hayatal. While the Gupta empire in Bhārata under the great rulers
Kumāragupta and Skandagupta decisively defeated these Hūṇa invaders
\[Footnote 4\], in the period after the collapse of the centralized
Gupta rule the Hūṇa briefly established an empire in northern Bhārata.
They were eventually defeated and overthrown by the efforts of
Prakāshadharman and Yashodharman of the Aulikara dynasty and Bālāditya
of the eastern Gupta kingdom. Further invasions by the Hūṇa-s occurred
in the early 600s of the CE and these were successfully repulsed by the
brothers Rājyavardhana and Harṣavardhana the emperors of the Puṣyabhūti
dynasty and their ally Īśānavarman. The names of the famous Hūṇa rulers
of Bhārata such as Khiṅgila, Toramāṇa and Mihirakula were clearly Iranic
in origin, though they followed the Hindu religion. In contrast to the
Guptas, the Iranian Sassanid empire did relatively poorly against these
Hūṇa-s in the initial period. In 484 CE, their emperor Phiroz was killed
fighting the Hūṇa-s. The Hūṇa-s who invaded the Sassanid empire are also
recorded as having Iranic names such as Akṣuṇvār. The relationship of
all these later groups of Huns to the earlier irruptions of the empire
founded by Motun and subsequent Mongolian confederations of the Xianbei
Khanate and the Tuguhun Khanate has been the source of much controversy
and discussion. However, the persistence of the ethnonym is something
which cannot be denied.

Against this background, we would like to bring attention to a peculiar
verse composed by an obscure Sanskrit poet Aparājita-rakṣita, which in
our opinion obliquely throws some light on the possible ethnicity of at
least some of the people who were known as huṇa-s to the Hindus. We know
next to nothing of Aparājita-rakṣita’s and only a few verses of his
survive, perhaps the earliest mention being in a citation by vāmana in
the 700-800s of the CE. Thus, all we can say is that Aparājita-rakṣita
lived before that time. However, as the verse below would suggest he was
likely to have been familiar in person with at least one of the group of
people who were known as Hūṇa-s to the Hindus.

The verse, found in subhāṣita collections goes thus:  
udgarbha-hūṇa-taruṇī-ramaṇopamarda-bhugnonnata-stana-niveśa-nibhaṃ
himāṃśoḥ |  
bimbaṃ kaṭhora-bisa-kāṇḍa-kaḍāra-gaurair-viṣṇoḥ padaṃ
prathamam-agra-karair-vyanakti ||

udgarbha= pregnant; hūṇa-taruṇī= young Hun woman; ramaṇa= lover;
upamarda=fondled; bhugna= pressed; unnata= full; stana= breast;
niveśa-nibhaṃ=as though dented; himāṃśoḥ= of the icy-rayed (moon) |  
bimbaṃ= orb; kaṭhora=mature; bisa= lotus; kāṇḍa= stem; kaḍāra=
yellowish; gaurair= white (instrumental); viṣṇoḥ= of viShNu; padaṃ=
step; prathamam= first; agra-karair= with its first rays; vyanakti= to
make visible ||

Thus, one may translate it as:

*The icy-rayed moon looks dented*  
*as though it were the full breast*  
*of a pregnant, young Hun woman*  
*pressed while fondled by her lover;*  
*the lunar orb with its first rays,*  
*pale yellow as a mature lotus stem,*  
*makes Viṣṇu’s first step to be visible.*

Here, “Viṣṇu’s first step” means the earth, which was spanned by the
first of the famous triple steps of the god. Thus, the pale yellow, rays
of the rising moon are said to make the earth visible by their
illumination.

The striking thing about this verse is the metaphor where the rising
moon with a pale yellowish tinge is compared with the breast of a young
Hun woman. This, is notable because it is a very specific and unique
metaphor. The moon is commonly compared with the faces of women or on
occasions their breasts in kāvya literature, but the specific use of a
Hun woman’s breast as a descriptor for the rising moon, we believe, is
not coincidental. Rather, we posit that it reflects the actual,
distinctive, pale yellow complexion of a Hun woman. Such a complexion is
not typical of Iranic people but of East Asians, suggesting that Hun
woman in Aparājita-rakṣita’s metaphor was likely to have had East Asian
ancestry in the least.

One may also compare this metaphor of Aparājita-rakṣita with the origin
myth of the much later Chingizid Mongols (1100-1350 CE) found in the
Secret History of Chingiz Khan. There, the origin of several Mongol
clans is traced to their legendary ancestress Alan-qoa. Her last three
sons, one of whom is presented as the direct ancestor of Chingiz Khan,
were said to be born without a visible father. Hence, the first two sons
wondered if their servant had fathered their half brothers after the
death of their father Dobun-mergen. Sensing their agitation, their
mother Alan-qoa said the following:

“*Every night, a shining yellow man came into the yurt,*  
*through the light of the smoke-hole and over the top of the door.*  
*He caressed my belly and his light sank into it.*  
*He \[slunk\] sheepishly away like a yellow dog*  
*by the light of the sun and moon.*”  
(Secret History translated from the original Mongolian by U Onon)

Alan-Qoa then clarified that they were the sons of Köke Möngke Tngri the
supreme god of the Mongols. It is interesting to note that in their
self-account the Mongols saw their divine ancestor as coming at night to
mate with Alan-qoa in the form of yellow moon beams. Indeed the
yellowness is emphasized in describing him as going away as a yellow
dog, and is specifically compared to the yellowness of the sun and the
moon. Thus, we find that Aparājita-rakṣita’s account of the Hūṇa woman’s
complexion compares with the self-perception of the Mongols who are
considered to be descendants of the old Huns of Mongolia.

This is not the only reference to specific aspects of the Hūṇa-s in
Sanskrit literature. The famous poet Rājaśekhara in his kāvyamīmāṃsā
lists them alongside many other northern peoples, such as the Śaka-s,
Kekaya-s, Kaṃbhoja-s, Bāhlika-s, Turuṣka-s (Turks) and Tuṣāra-s
(Tocharians) and Mārgara-s (Magyar tribe of Huns). The great Kālidāsa
also makes a specific mention of the Huns in his account of the Ikṣvāku
emperor, Raghu’s digvijaya. After his conquest of the Iranians
(Pārasika), Raghu is described as heading north to invade the Hun
lands:

tataḥ pratasthe kauberīṃ bhāsvān iva raghur diśam |  
śarair usrair ivodīcyān uddhariṣyam rasān iva ||

From there \[i.e. after defeating the Iranians\] Raghu proceeded to the
direction of Kubera to uproot with his arrows the northerners as the sun
to vaporize the northern waters \[during uttarāyaṇa\]

vinītādhva-śramās tasya vaṅkṣu-tīra-viceṣṭanaiḥ |  
dudhuvur vājinaḥ skandhāṃl lagna-kuṅkuma-kesarān ||

The horses tired from the march of his cavalry rolled on the banks of
the Oxus (Amu Darya) and they shook off the saffron flower stigmas
adhered to their shoulders.

tatra hūṇāvarodhānāṃ bhartṛśu vyakta-vikramam |  
kapola-pāṭalādeśi babhūva raghu-ceṣṭitam || RAGHUVAṂŚA 4.66-68

There, Raghu’s valor directed against the husbands in his attack caused
the cheeks of the \[women\] of the Hun harem to become crimson.

This is a very specific reference to the Hun custom of slashing their
cheeks as their dead were supposed to be mourned not just with regular
tears but with those of blood. This is recorded as occurring during the
funeral of Attila by Latin Christian author Jordanes and is also
mentioned as a custom among the Huns by the Latin poet Sidonius. It has
also been recorded among the Magyar ancestors of the Hungarians.
\[Footnote 5 \]. This suggests that Hindu poets had specific information
about the Huns. It goes on to support our contention that
Aparājita-rakṣita’s metaphor was likely based on fact. Taken
together, these observations of the Hindu poets add further points to
support the cultural and at least partial ethnic continuity of the Huns
who invaded China, India and the West.

Finally, one may ask how this squares with the Iranic names we encounter
among the Hūṇa-s associated with Bhārata and Iran. In reality the
picture appears to be more complex. We do have coins from Northwestern
India with titles such as Tegin, which is of Altaic origin (meaning
prince or young ruler). Moreover, a recent study of ancient DNA from the
Hun royal cemetery in Northeast Mongolia revealed that in addition to
people of Northeast Asian origin there were also people of Western
Eurasian origin as indicated by the Y-chromosomal R1a1 haplogroup
\[Footnote 6\]. This suggests that as recorded by the Chinese sources
the Xiongnu had absorbed Indo-Iranic peoples early on, and some of these
occupied elite status in the Hun society. Thus, it is rather likely that
as the Huns expanded from Mongolia they swept up within them people with
non-Turco-Mongol ancestry. These included people of Finno-Ugric, Iranic
and later even those of Slavic and Germanic ancestry. Even down to the
days of the Chingizid Mongols there were Finno-Ugric and Indo-Iranian
groups (like the Arans or Alans) active close to the heartland of the
former. Thus, some leaders of non-Turco-Mongol ancestry might have been
the dominant elite in particular Hun hordes, especially as they moved
away from their eastern inner Asian heartlands. For instance, the
Hungarians, a Finno-Ugric people, have an origin mythology of descending
from Attila’s horde in addition to including later Eurasiatic mobile
groups like the Avar and Magyar. In the case of the Huns who invaded
Europe, the Germanic etymology of Bleda, the Hun ruler and brother of
Attila, suggests that Germanic tribes might have been incorporated into
their confederation. However, it is quite possible the rank and file was
probably multiethnic including at at least some of Northeast Asian
descent alongside those of Iranic or Germanic origins. Thus,
Aparājita-rakṣita’s metaphor of the Hun woman of Northeast Asiatic
ancestry would be completely consistent with such a picture.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Motun is likely to be derived from the old Chinese rendering
of the word bāghātur a cognate of Hindi bāhādur a Turco-Mongol loan word
acquired during the Islamic period.

Footnote 2: For more details refer the UNESCO volume: “History of
Civilizations of Central Asia, Vol. II: The Development of Sedentary and
Nomadic Civilizations: 700 BC to AD 250”

Footnote 3: The French historian Étienne de La Vaissière has published
strong evidence supporting the identity of the Huns and the Xiongnu of
Chinese sources.

Footnote 4: Verse 8 of the Bhitari red sandstone pillar inscription of
the great Gupta ruler Skandagupta mentions the fierce battle with the
Hūṇa-s and his bow in that encounter is compared with the bow of the
god Viṣṇu.

Footnote 5: “The world of the Huns: Studies in their history and
culture” by O. J. Maenchen-Helfen.

Footnote 6: A western Eurasian male is found in 2000-year-old elite
Xiongnu cemetery in Northeast Mongolia. Kim K et. al. Am J Phys
Anthropol. 2010 Jul;142(3):429-40. doi: 10.1002/ajpa.21242.
