+++
title = "The monophyly of euryapsids and the radiation of marine reptiles after the Permian–Triassic- extinction"

+++
[This brief note might be read as a continuation of this
one.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/02/02/some-musings-on-the-age-of-the-ichthyosaurs/ "Some musings on the age of the ichthyosaurs")

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-f5fXvg4KUJ4/VGWpBgfi_cI/AAAAAAAADLI/3gljlYtSJoQ/s800/ichthyosauria_tree.JPG)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/u4y6V8bz2Ws7WMNdq-_AI9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)Phylogeny
by Motani et al

As noted in the epistle linked above, the possibility of the monophyly
of euryapsids, sometimes termed enaliosauria, has been spoken of
repeatedly over the years. This idea in a primitive form was expressed
by the odious Richard Owen, but he did go on to clarify that it might be
an artificial grouping. In recent times it has emerged in phylogenies
constructed by Caldwell, Merck, Rieppel and Motani as well as other
works utilizing their matrices. Motani and Rieppel have been careful in
stating that when they perform analyses where they remove characters,
which they argue to be aquatic adaptations, the euryapsid monophyly
collapses.

The most inclusive of these phylogenetic schemes includes the following
lineages in the large monophyletic Euryapsid clade:  
•Thalattosauriformes: This includes the two clades the Thalattosauroids
and the Askeptosauroids.  
• Sauropterygians: This clade includes the absolutely bizarre
Atopodentatus as the most basal representative. This reptile is
unprecedented in having a split bisecting the upper jaw with teeth
lining either edge of this split along the premaxillae. The remaining
clades are the placodonts and the eosauropterygians. The latter clade
breaks up into pachypleurosaurs and eusauropterygians. The latter of
those clades further splits up into the nothosaurians and the
pistosauroids. The crown pistosauroids are the plesiosaurians.  
• Saurosphargids: These are remarkable reptiles with broadly turtle-like
or placodont-like body shape with expanded ribs. They have a dorsal
carapace formed by numerous osteoderms that completely cover the dorsal
body (vertebrae and ribs) and ventral osteoderms that cover part of the
gastralia.  
• Ichthyosauriformes: These include the classical ichthyopterygians and
their recently described sister group *Cartorhynchus*.  
• Hupehsuchids: These are another remarkable group of reptiles which
have a generally ichthyopterygian-like body shape. However, their body
is encased in armor formed by dorsal osteoderms and ventral interlocking
gastralia. The arrangement of the dorsal osteoderms vis-a-vis the
vertebrae is similar to what is seen in the saurosphargids.  
• *Wumengosaurus*: Is a rather distinctive reptile with an elongated
neck reminiscent of both the basal members of the eosauropterygian clade
and several Thalattosauriformes like *Endennasaurus* or *Askeptosaurus*.
However, its skull displays features closer to the hupehsuchids and
Ichthyosauriformes. While it was originally thought to be sauropterygian
more recent analysis by Rieppel, Motani and colleagues clearly counters
this view.

Within this large euryapsid assemblage there are certain clades that
seem to be strongly supported. Most recent analyses have strongly
suggested that the Ichthyosauriformes and the hupehsuchids unify into an
higher order ichthyosauromorpha. Likewise, the sauropterygians and
saurosphargids are consistently recovered as uniting into a higher order
clade. In these analysis Wumengosaurus does not group with
sauropterygians but has some tendency to group with ichthyosauromorpha,
a grouping which persists even if the aquatic adaptations are removed
from the data matrix. In the most recent analysis by Motani, the removal
of these aquatic adaptations results in Thalattosauriformes,
ichthyosauromorpha and *Wumengosaurus* still remaining united into a
higher order clade, though sauropterygians+saurosphargids break away
from them. In most of these analyses, irrespective of whether aquatic
adaptations are scored or not the choristoderes and Helveticosaurus,
which are the other ancient aquatic/marine reptiles with an early
Mesozoic provenance, do not unite with this clade. Thus, we would
cautiously see the evidence as pointing in favor of a monophyletic
euryapsida comprised of the above-listed groups. Indeed
*Wumengosaurus* provides a form which could come close to their common
ancestor in appearance.

Another clade, for which links to this greater euryapsid clade has been
proposed is Testudinata (the turtles). In phylogenetic analysis by
Rieppel and colleagues they have emerged as a sister group of the
sauropterygians. In their recent analysis Hirasawa et al offer
developmental arguments in favor of this hypothesis by presenting
evidence that the rigid carapace of the turtle develops primarily from
expanded plate-like ribs and rib-derived ossifications. They then go on
to point out that the basal sauropterygians like the saurosphargids and
placodonts possess laterally extended plate-like ribs with a
configuration similar to the turtles and contributing to their rigid
armor. This rib morphology is characterized by the limited mobility,
reduction or loss of intercostal muscles and close contact between
adjacent plate-like ribs throughout their length. Likewise, Rieppel and
colleagues in their study of the basal ichthyosauromorph hupehsuchid,
*Parahupehsuchus* *longus*, point out a similar tendency in its rib
morphology, and explicitly state that: “there was no space for
intercostal muscles, which must have been largely absent”. They reason
that the lateral body armor in the hupehsuchians was similarly
rib-based. Thus, if Hirasawa et al developmental argument for carapace
formation are accepted, then in addition to bringing turtles into this
euryapsid clade it also further strengthens the the idea of euryapsid
monophyly.

However, the position of chelonians with respect to other euryapsids
relates directly to another question pertaining to these reptiles, i.e.,
is euryapsida part of archosauromorpha or lepidosauromorpha? If
euryapsida is not monophyletic then are specific monophyletic subclades
included in it closer to archosauromorpha or not? In our opinion this is
one of the biggest questions in reptilian phylogenetics that needs
attention in the coming years.

In this regard, the retrograde ideas of Lyson et al linking turtles to
the parareptile *Eunotosaurus* can be safely discounted because: 1) the
molecular phylogeny unequivocally places turtles inside
archosauromorpha; 2) splitting up Eureptilia as non-monophyletic or
dragging the primitive *Eunotosaurus* into archosauromorpha are very
unlikely given the rest of the molecular and morphological evidence.

In Rieppel’s earlier work the turtles and sauropterygians+saurosphargids
have emerged as lepidosaurmorphs as a sister group to the lizards and
tuataras. However, in Merck and Motani et al’s recent work the greater
euryapsid clade has emerged as archosauromorphs. However, this linkage
collapses on removing aquatic adaptations, with just the
sauropterygians+saurosphargids grouping with the lepidosaurmorphs as in
Rieppel’s trees. As we have discussed before, despite turtles having
thoroughly adapted to marine life from some point in the Mesozoic they
have never lost oviparity, a potentially disadvantageous character for
marine life. In contrast, the sauropterygians and ichthyopterians
rapidly evolved viviparity. Persistent oviparity, with no shifts
whatsoever to viviparity, appears to be a feature of the archosauromorph
clade – apparently something stemming from so deep in their reproductive
biology that they cannot lose it even under strong selection. In
contrast, viviparity might have been even primitive for
lepidosauromorphs, and in a recent phylogenetic analysis of lizards has
been shown to be extremely widespread in them. This would support a
lepidosauromorph affinity for the greater euryapsid clade away from the
archosauromorph turtles. However, we cannot rule out that the greater
euryapsids diverged early from the remaining archosauromorphs, before
the oviparity constraint emerged in them. In either case this puts
considerable strain on the hypothesis which groups turtles with the
greater euryapsid clade, contrary to the evidence of Hirasawa et al.
Thus, the basic question still remains in need of more rigorous
investigation.

Irrespective of the ultimate phylogenetic scenario, what remains clear
is that shortly after the P-Tr extinction, and the dawn of the Age of
the Reptiles, they underwent an extraordinary and explosive radiation
into aquatic and marines environments with several comparable
adaptations across distinct clades: flippers, body armor, viviparity and
quite likely endothermy. Motani et al conclude their *Cartorhynchus*
paper by stating: “The causes driving marine invasion could be multiple,
including predation pressure and competition for food that may be lower
in the sea than on adjacent land… The south China block was in the
tropical latitudes at the time, forming a warm and humid archipelago.
Future studies would be required to test if any climatic and geographic
factors may have encouraged marine invasion.”

However, that this great marine radiation of reptiles was not mere
chance and that there were some key biological pre-adaptations in the
greater euryapsid assemblage that contributed to this process. We
propose that these biological pre-adaptations were primary and whatever
role climatic or geographic conditions played were secondary and
transient in their effects. We hence posit that if the hypothesis of
euryapsid monophyly is strengthened then hypothesis of primarily
biological basis for the great marine radiation will be supported. In
contrast, the more the monophyly hypothesis breaks down, more the
geographic and climatic hypothesis gains credence. *Cartorhynchus* was
from the Spathian division of the Olenekian age of the Early Triassic,
approximately 248 Mya (within a window of 4 My from the great P-Tr
extinction). Motani et al note that it comes from the zone marked by the
ammonoid mollusc *Procolumbites*. In the older marine deposits from the
Smithian division of the Olenekian age , i.e., the earliest part of the
Triassic there are abundant fossil fishes but no reptiles have been
found to date. This suggests that this great Triassic invasion of the
sea began very close to 248 Mya within a mere 4 My of the great dying.
The anatomy of *Cartorhynchus* suggests that it still retained features
of its terrestrial ancestry in its limbs suggesting that it was capable
of some ambulation on the shore, perhaps like the mammalian pinnipeds.
Thus, at least in this case we are capturing something close to the
ancestral condition for ichythyosauromorpha. By the time of the zone
marked by the ammonoid *Subcolumbites* within a couple of more million
years the explosive radiation of marine reptiles is already prominent
with several new forms of various clades appearing: Recent studies by
Jiang and colleagues indicate that by the end of the Spathian division
we already have an ichthyopterygian *Chaohusaurus* and and the oldest
known sauropterygian *Majiashanosaurus*. By the Anisian of the Middle
Triassic they detect more than 15 species of marine reptiles such as the
ichthyosaurs *Mixosaurus* and *Phalarodon*, the placodont *Placodus*,
the eosauropterygians *Nothosaurus* and *Lariosaurus* and
saurosphargids. By the Ladinian age of the Middle Triassic the marine
reptile fauna diversifies even further to include pachypleurosaurs like
*Keichousaurus*, *Nothosaurus* and *Lariosaurus*. They are joined by a
new set of entrants in the form of the archosauromorphs of the
protorosaurian clade like *Macrocnemus*, *Fuyuansaurus* and
*Tanystropheus*, and even the poposauroid archosaur *Diandongosuchus*
which marked the first marine invasion by the crocodile-line of
archosaurs.

This invasion was marked by rapid emergence of morphological disparity:
Long-necked forms, completely fish-like forms, armored forms,
mollusc-crushing durophagous forms, and apex predators all emerged in a
short time interval marking the reptilian conquest of the waters at a
level which was never reached by the mysterious mesosaurs which are
believed to be parareptiles or other Permian forms like the engimatic
basal diapsids *Hovasaurus*, *Tangasaurus* and *Acerosodontosaurus*.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-dM8t3FOAKSA/VGWpBEkJnqI/AAAAAAAADLY/OiGdPjXs26E/s800/Triassic_marine.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/1V-ba0oVuAjI8lnvYXRGmNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

1, Wantzosaurus (trematosaurid ‘amphibian’); 2, Fadenia
(eugeneodontiform chondrichthyan); 3, Saurichthys (actinopterygian
ambush predator); 4, Rebellatrix (fork-tailed actinistian); 5,
Hovasaurus (‘younginiform’ diapsid reptile); 6, Birgeria (fast-swimming
predatory actinopterygian); 7, Aphaneramma (trematosaurid ‘amphibian’);
8, Bobasatrania (durophagous actinopterygian); 9, hybodontoid
chondrichthyan with durophagous (e.g. Acrodus, Palaeobates) or
tearing-type dentition (e.g. Hybodus); 10, e.g., Mylacanthus
(durophagous actinistian); 11, Tanystropheus (protorosaurian reptile);
12, Corosaurus (sauropterygian reptile); 13, e.g., Ticinepomis
(actinistian); 14, Mixosaurus (small ichthyosaur); 15, large
cymbospondylid/shastasaurid ichthyosaur; 16, neoselachian
chondrichthyan; 17, Omphalosaurus skeleton (possible durophagous
ichthyosaur); 18, Placodus (durophagous sauropterygian reptile). From
Scheyer et al; art by Nadine Bösch and Beat Scheffold, original
copyright \[2013\]. However, note that the extension of
ichthyosauromorphs in the Smithian is inaccurate

**Further reading**  
• Early Triassic Marine Biotic Recovery: The Predators’ Perspective;
Torsten M. Scheyer, Carlo Romano, Jim Jenks, Hugo Bucher  
• A basal ichthyosauriform with a short snout from the Lower Triassic of
China; Ryosuke Motani, Da-Yong Jiang, Guan-Bao Chen, Andrea Tintori,
Olivier Rieppel, Cheng Ji, Jian-Dong Huang  
• The endoskeletal origin of the turtle carapace Tatsuya Hirasawa,
Hiroshi Nagashima, Shigeru Kuratani  
• A new marine reptile from the Triassic of China, with a highly
specialized feeding adaptation; Long Cheng, Xiao-hong Chen, Qing-hua
Shang, Xiao-chun Wu  
• The Enigmatic Marine Reptile Nanchangosaurus from the Lower Triassic
of Hubei, China and the Phylogenetic Affinities of Hupehsuchia;
Xiao-hong Chen, Ryosuke Motani, Long Cheng, Da-yong Jiang, Olivier
Rieppel  
• The Early Triassic Eosauropterygian Majiashanosaurus discocoracoidis,
Gen. et sp. Nov. (REPTILIA, Sauropterygia), From Chaohu, Anhui Province,
People’s Republic Of China; Da-Yong Jiang, Ryosuke Motani, Andrea
Tintori, Olivier Rieppel, Guan-Bao Chen, Jian-Dong Huang, Rong Zhang,
Zuo-Yu Sun, Cheng Ji  
• New Information On Wumengosaurus delicatomandibularis Jiang et al.,
2008 (DIAPSIDA: Sauropterygia), with a revision of the osteology and
phylogeny of the taxon; Xiao-Chunwu, Yen-Nien Cheng, Chun Li, Li-Jun
Zhao, Tamaki Sato
