+++
title = "Some notes on the extra-military aspects of the Islamo-Hindu confrontation"

+++
Under the modern Indian practice of secularism it is common to hold the
view that Mohammedanism and the sanAtana dharma can come close together
to forge something termed as the Indian identity. Abroad, especially in
the Anglosphere, it is common for both mlechCha-s and people of Indian
origin to believe that the two can intimately coexist under what they
would term as “South Asian” identity. Versions of such views have been
expressed for over a century by influential Hindu leaders such as svAmI
vivekAnanda:

*“I am firmly persuaded that without the help of practical Islam,
theories of Vedantism, however fine and wonderful they may be, are
entirely valueless to the vast mass of mankind. We want to lead mankind
to the place where there is neither the Vedas, nor the Bible, nor the
Koran; yet this has to be done by harmonising the Vedas, the Bible and
the Koran. Mankind ought to be taught that religions are but the varied
expressions of THE RELIGION, which is Oneness, so that each may choose
that path that suits him best.*

*For our own motherland a junction of the two great systems, Hinduism
and Islam – Vedanta brain and Islam body – is the only hope.*

*I see in my mind’s eye the future perfect India rising out of this
chaos and strife, glorious and invincible, with Vedanta brain and Islam
body.”*

Hence, it is not surprising to see some form of such a construct
surfacing from time to time in expressions of what are called both
“left” and “right” in the Indian political spectrum \[it should be
emphasized that left and right in the Indian parlance are non-identical
to their homonyms in the leukosphere\]. We have argued on multiple
occasions on these pages that such synthetic formulations, which see a
union of Islam and the dharma, and identities that deny a root in the
sanAtana dharma (e.g. South Asian or secular Indian) are unnecessary,
and even extremely deleterious for those following the way of the
sanAtana dharma. Here we shall examine some extra-military facets of the
Islamo-Hindu confrontation that have a bearing on this issue. First, a
few premises and prefatory remarks: 1) We have previously discussed with
historical examples how Abrahamisms have had an extremely [destructive
effect on
heathens](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/02/10/the-end-of-the-heathens/ "The end of the heathens")
and developed a [theoretical
framework](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/ "khilonmAda-charchA")
to describe the same. Here, we shall assume that framework and not
dilate upon it any further. 2) Here we shall not be discussing at length
other predatory manifestations of Abrahamism, and specifically focus on
Mohammedanism. 3) We include under the rubric of “military” all events
that involved the use of force both in confrontations between armies and
on civilian populations during the entry and metastasis of Mohammedanism
in jaMbudvIpa. Thus, both the invasion of the Turk Mahmud Ghaznavi and
the enslaving raids conducted by him are military events. However, the
actions of a Naqshbandi Shaikh in terms of calling upon Sultans to
suppress Hindu practice or sending out missionaries to convert Hindus
will be considered as “extra-military” for the purposes of this epistle.

Our foray into this issue first arose when we were wandering in
bhagAnagari in the days of our vigorous youth. What in bhArata is often
described as a “riot between two communities” had broken out in a part
of the city just on the eve of our travel to our natal city in the
karNATa country. At that time an Amirzada, the Mohammedan K, descending
from the old Mogol aristocracy, paid us a visit in the lab where we
worked as an intern to enquire about a biochemical issue. In course a
digression which followed, with much clarity \[since he was aware we
entertained no philo-Islamic fuzziness\] he stated that the biggest fear
of the Mohammedan in bhArata was that he would be absorbed into Hindu
heathenism. He went on to add that they would take every measure to
ensure that the Hindu juggernaut does not roll over them, even if it
were to mean use of violence. Another, \[at that point\] nominally Hindu
acquaintance joined in, asking Mohammedan K if it was not possible for
Hindus and Mohammedans to live together. To this he gave a more animated
response which ran something like: “There is no need for Mohammedans to
follow primitive superstitions of Hindus. We come from a great culture,
which has invented algebra, built the Taj Mahal, saved women from
tonsure or sati, brought the sophisticated concept of monotheism to the
subcontinent and the like… We do not want any of that to be replaced by
Hindu stuff. If that is assured we might be able to live together.” Two
points became clear to us: First, he changed from being a third person
narrator of mass Islamic opinion while initially talking to us to being
a direct spokesman for Mohammedanism while answering the other
acquaintance’s query. Second, in his voice and body language there was
an unmistakeable undercurrent that he was the representative of a great
tradition that saw the Hindu tradition (at least as he understood it) in
a dim light. Analyzing this matter further, we realized that the
conscientious Mohammedans in the subcontinent typically felt a great and
explicit loathing for being absorbed by the sanAtana dharma and the
resistance to this is a very key aspect to their identity. Digging into
historical records of the Islamo-Hindu confrontation we see much
evidence for this as the defining aspect of the extra-military
confrontation between this invasive Abrahamism and the dharma of
bhAratavarSha. Its influence runs deep even today: we have run into some
Mohammedans (primarily from TSP and TSBD) who have lapsed out of Islam
into atheism or Isaism but still retain intact that pUrva vAsana of the
fear and loathing of the heathen sanAtana dharma. Thus, we see this as
an Indian version of a comparable fear, [seen earlier in Jewish history
regarding absorption by Hellenistic
heathenism](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/a-greco-semitic-apollonian-ritual-and-the-heathen-assimilation-of-paleo-abrahamism/ "A Greco-Semitic Apollonian ritual and the heathen assimilation of paleo-Abrahamism"),
or in the vigorous reaction of all three Abrahamisms against Hindu ideas
of brAhmaNa-s teachers introduced to West Asia by [the literature of the
Persian, Jewish and Arab
free-thinkers](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/ "Some more ramblings on the mlechCha-marUnmatta abhisaMdhAnaM").

As a starting point let us consider the words of the Naqshbandi Sufi
Shaikh, Ahmad Sirhindi, who lived during the reigns of Akbar and
Jahangir (1564-1624):

*“The spread of the illustrious shari\`a comes from the efficient care
and good administration of the great sultans, which has lately slackened
causing inevitable weakness of Islam. The infidels of al Hind \[thus\]
fearlessly destroy mosques and build their own places of worship in
their stead. In Thanesar in the Krukhet tank there was a mosque and a
shrine of a saint. Both have been destroyed by the infidels and in their
place they have now built a big temple. Again, the infidels freely
observed the rituals of infidelity, while the Muslims are unable to
execute most of the Islamic ordinances. On the day of ekAdashI when the
Hindus abstain from eating and drinking, they see to it that no Muslim
bakes or sells bread or any other food in the bazaar. On the contrary,
in the blessed month of Ramzan they cook and sell food openly. Due to
the weakness of Islam nobody can stop them from doing this. Alas, a
thousand times alas\!”*

It is necessary to understand the context in which Sirhindi made this
comment. For this let us take a brief look at a statement made by Abu
al-Fazl \`Allami a prominent courtier and confidant of the Mogol tyrant
Akbar:

*“Therefore the sublime decree (of Padishaw Akbar) went forth concerning
the book of the mahAbhArata, written by masters of genius, containing
most of the principles and applications of the beliefs of the brAhmaNa-s
of al Hind, than which there is no book more famous, greater, or more
detailed among this group. The wise of both factions \[Hindus and
Mohammedans\] and the linguists of both groups, by way of friendship and
agreement, should sit down in one place, and should translate it into a
popular expression, with the knowledge of judicious experts and just
officials.”*

In the same context we might also look at a grandiose, panegyric
inspired by vIrabala, a Hindu confidant of Akbar, provided by the Hindu
scholar vihArI kR^iShNadAsa who composed a grammar of Persian
(pArasI-prakAsha) based on pANini’s principles:

yad brahma vedena vikAra-hInaM pragIyate sma prakR^iteH parastAt |  
tad eSha go-brAhmaNa-pAlanArthaM mahI-mahendro .akavaraH prajAtaH ||

As brahman is sung by the veda as changeless and beyond prakR^iti, so
also Akbar, like the great indra on earth, was born in order to protect
cows and brAhmaNa-s.

yad asya nAmAkhila-shAstra-sAgare smR^itItihAsAdiShu sAdhu vishrutam |  
gataM trilokIShu chira-sthitiM tatas tadAkhyayA tantraM idaM vitanyate
||

Even as the name of \[brahman\] is celebrated throughout the ocean of
shAstra-s, smR^iti-s, itihAsa-s, and the like, and is established firmly
forever in the three worlds, so also with the name \[of Akbar\] this
work is composed.

yad gopAla-sutena kR^iShNa-vibhunA gAvas tathA pAlitA |  
rAmair bhUsura-daivatair dvijavarAs trAtA na chitraM hi tat ||

That cows were protected by the cowherd’s son kR^iShNa and the foremost
of the dvija-s were protected guarded by the rAma-s, deities worshiped
by brAhmaNa-s, is no surprise

go-viprAbhibhava-priye turuShkaje vamshe .avatIrNo vibhuH |  
go-viprAn pratipAlayaty akavaro viShNur vichitraM mahat ||

However, its truly mysterious that the god viShNu, having descended in a
clan of Turks that delights in injuring cows and brAhmaNa-s as Akbar,
protects cows and brAhmaNa-s.

The above textual extracts give a flavor of the vicissitudes of
religious sentiment during the long reign of Akbar \[readers may also
read an account of [the history of Akbar by shrI Sarvesh Tiwari on these
issues](http://bharatendu.com/2009/07/06/akbar-transition-5/)\]. Having
successfully conducted Jihads all over the northern subcontinent and
having piled pyramids of Hindu heads in the manner of his ancestor Timur
he was reigning as the supreme ruler of northern Hindustan. Indeed, the
Persian ruler, the Shia Jihadist, Tahmasp, sent Akbar a letter
congratulating him as the “unsurpassed upholder of the Koran and the
destroyer of the Hindus.” The Mogol tyrant who then indulged heavily in
gruesome hunting ventures often killing scores of elephants, tigers and
leopards in one go \[Footnote 1\], had experiences that made him take a
new turn. In 1575 CE he had built the \`ibadat-khanah at his capital and
was staging debates between Islamic groups as well as with non-Islamic
groups. Akbar keenly followed these and found himself increasingly
discovering an innate interest in natural religions. In 1578 CE while he
was on a mass hunt in the jungle, he felt thst his vision suddenly
became clear and that he was seized by a great upwelling of bliss. Then
he sat down in a trance. Upon coming out of it he declared that the
forest where he was hunting was no different from Mecca. He was also
attracted towards the suggestion of some rAjpUts in his retinue that
some vana-devatA-s had suddenly sent him a message of enlightenment.
Alternatively, some of Turko-Mongolic origin in the retinue recalled
elements of their pre-Islamic pagan religion and declared that the
animals were imparting him divine secrets even as they did to the Altaic
shamans of his ancestors in their trances. He felt all this must be true
and released the animals he had encircled in the hunt. He called upon
his officers to stop cow slaughter and declared that he was going
vegetarian on all Fridays, in addition to several other days (once he
observed a 9 month vow of being totally vegetarian). He also declared
that he would give up the garlic, onion, wine and narcotics on several
days, greatly moderate his hunting \[footnote 2\], and give up the old
Mongolian vice, qumis, for good. This was not the end of Akbar’s
heathenizing tendencies; they developed further with increasing interest
in Hindu matters and Hermetica, interests that were to last for the rest
of his life. Around the time of his special experience we see him pass a
decree that there was no point studying the Koran and Hadith and that
people should only spend time on useful stuff like astronomy,
mathematics, medicine, history, poetry and philosophy in Arabic
literature. He started wearing a yaj\~nopavIta and maintained a ritual
fire, where he performed homa-s uttering Sanskrit mantra-s. Thus, Abu
al-Fazl’s record of Akbar’s admiration of the mahAbhArata or
kR^iShNadAsa/vIrabala’s account of him as a protector of cows and
brAhmaNa-s are entirely in line with his religious transmogrification.

Within a decade of the high point of Mohammedanism, where Turco-Mongol
rulers from the [Osman Turk
Suleyman](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/09/23/turushkanam-madhyahna/ "turuShkANAM madhyAhna")
in the West to Akbar in East were crushing other Abrahamists and
heathens alike, there was a clear possibility of Islam being digested in
al Hind by the ancient heathenism of bhArata. The same [Shaikhs who had
triumphantly joined Akbar’s march against the illustrious mahArANa
pratapa
siMha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/09/13/the-battle-of-haldighat/ "The battle of Haldighat")
some years back with hope of becoming ghazi-s or shahid-s were now
finding themselves increasingly sidelined. Indeed, Ahmad Sirhindi gives
as the two main causes for the failure of Mohammedanism in al Hind: 1)
Akbar’s decree to translate Hindu dharmashAstra-s into Persian with the
objective of displacing Islamic law. 2) Akbar calling for the study of
the philosophy and knowledge systems of the Hindu sages. Thus, the
victories gained by Mohammedanism against the sanAtana dharma on the
battlefield, were now being nullified in the extra-military sphere. The
old sites like the one in Thanesar, which was seized by the Moslems for
the construction of Masjid, were now being taken back by the Hindus as
result of this extra-military triumph. It should be noted that this
phenomenon, while reaching its meridian point during the reign of Akbar,
was not something initiated by him. Rather he and his great-grandson
Dara Shikoh were a “symptom” of a more extensive extra-military response
of the sanAtana dharma after being “shell-shocked” by the initial trauma
of the Mohammedan irruption. In the days of the monstrous Sultan Firoz
Tughlaq we come across the following incident narrated by \`Afif:

*“A brAhmaNa of Delhi had constructed a wooden seal on which were
engraved the pictures of Hindu deities. Large numbers of Hindus resorted
to his house to worship the seal. He had also converted Moslem women to
the Hindu polytheism. For these crimes the Sultan sent for him along
with his idol. His case was placed before the qadis, fuckihs and sharifs
of Islam. Their unanimous verdict was that the Brahman must either
become Moslem or be burnt to death. The Brahman refused to embrace Islam
and therefore orders were issued for raising a pile of faggots in front
of the royal court. The Brahman was tied hand and foot and cast into it.
The wooden seal was thrown on the top of the pile and it was lighted in
two places at his head and feet. The ﬁre ﬁrst reached his feet where the
wood was dry and in a short while the crying Brahman was immolated by
ﬁre. Behold the Sultan’s strict adherence to law and rectitude, how he
would not deviate in the least from its decrees.”*

The Shaikhs and Sultans struck hard as noted above (another comparable
incident is narrated during the Lodi period) but the Hindu influence
exerting itself on Moslems could not be entirely blunted continued
throughout the subcontinent. For example, we may note the case of the
famous Hindu physician and poet lolimbarAja from the mahArAShTra country
who ran away with a Turkic Moslem woman Muraza and converted her to the
Hindu fold upon marriage as ratnakalA, even naming a medical preparation
he discovered after her (the ratnakalA chUrNa). Eventually, with Akbar
and Ibrahim Adilshah-II the Hindu influences started swaying even the
Sultans. Even after the reign of Akbar was brought to conclusion by
Jahangir and Mohammedanism reinstated as before the Hindu
counter-activity continued. Jahangir himself records that numerous
Moslems were taking to the Hindu dharma due to festivals/rituals
organized by temples in Mathura and Kangra in Himachal. In mahArAShTra
the influencing and conversion of Moslems by Hindu religious figure is
recorded into the 1600s of CE – e.g. an enigmatic female shaiva teacher
who was active in this regard in the Adilshahi territory of the 1600s.
In south India we hear of the great bhAskararAya makhIndra converting a
Turkic woman to the Hindu fold in the 1700s. Moreover, there was also
the passive interest in Hindu expression that contributed to a creeping
influence via interest in various artistic media. Thus, we encounter
instances such as the Persian Mohammedan historian Rafi \`al-Din Shirazi
express some regret for the destruction of Hindu religious art and
interestingly calls on Allah to forgive the Mohammedan ruler for this
act:

*“Imagine how much work has been done on the inside and outside of all
the idol temples, and how many days and how much* *time it took to
complete them. May Allah, the exalted and transcendent, forgive the
emperor (Ali Adil Shah) with the light of his compassion, for after the
conquest of Vijayanagara, he with his own holy hand destroyed five or
six thousand adored idols of the Kaffrs, and ruined most of the idol
temples (of Vijayanagara). But the limited number \[of buildings\] on
which the welfare of the time and the kingdom depended, survive as the
art of Ellora in Daulatabad; this kind of idol temple and art we have
forgotten.”*

These observations suggest that despite not being a missionary religion,
the dharma was able to hold its own against the actively proselytizing
and demographically aggressive Mohammedanism and even counter-attack. In
this regard we may also note that Abu al-Fazl unhappily and defensively
records Hindu polemicists aggressively attacking the Mohammedan faith:

*“They regard the group of those who are connected to the religion of
Mohammed as utterly foolish, and they refute this group ceaselessly,
although they are unaware of its noble goals and special sciences.”*

We may also observe that Islamic accounts right from the early invasions
mention Hindus actively keeping out Islamic missionaries: The Moroccan
traveler Abd-al-Lah ibn Battuta who reached bhArata during the reign of
Mohammad ibn Tughlaq states that Hindus in India do not let Moslem
religious men into their houses or the give food or water with their
utensils. Thus, while on one hand the Hindus kept away Moslem god-men
from intruding into their homes, on the other hand the dharma was also
on the warpath by disputing Mohammedanism and even converting its
votaries to the Hindu fold. Thus, we posit that Mohammedanism needed
special backing for its effective survival in the subcontinent. The
Shaikhs were quick to realize this and seeing that their desert delusion
was in the danger of being subsumed by desertions to the dharma started
taking steps to call upon their rulers provide muscle for the
enforcement of Mohammedanism. While Jahangir and Shah Jahan were
helpful, they hit a real bonanza in the Mogol tyrant Awrangzeb who was
proactive in reversing the harm done to Mohammedanism by his
great-grandfather and his heathenizing brother Dara Shikoh. In response
to the translation of the dharma-shAstra-s he commissioned the
voluminous work on the shari\`a, the Fatawa-i Jahangiri, which was first
composed in chaste Arabic and then translated into Persian for those who
did not understand the former. This was to become the authoritative
guide for legal decisions in his reign. Yet, even during his reign the
Hinduizing influences as those recorded by Jahangir continued and
Awrangzeb strove to eradicate them. For example:

*“The padishaw, cherisher of Mohammedanism learned that in the provinces
of Thatta, Multan and especially at Benaras, the brAhmaNa infidels used
to teach their false books in their established schools, and their
admirers and students, both Hindu and Muslim, used to come from great
distances to these misguided men in order to acquire their vile
learning. His Majesty, eager to establish Islam, issued orders to the
governors of all the provinces to demolish the schools and temples of
the infidels, and, with the utmost urgency, put down the teaching and
the public practice of the religion of these unbelievers (imperial
decree of 9th April 1669).”*

But by this point the dijnn of extra-military successes of the Hindu
counter-activity, which took hold of the Sultan’s mind during Akbar’s
reign, could not be put back into its lamp. When Awrangzeb reinstated
jizya there was a strong Hindu reaction. We shall quote the Mohammedan
historian S.M. Ikram (“Muslim Civilization in India”) in this matter:

*“The Hindu position was so strong that in some places Aurangzeb’s order
for the collection of jizya was deﬁed. On January 29, 1693, the ofﬁcials
in Malwa sent a soldier to collect jizya from a zamindar called Devi
Singh. When he reached the place, Devi Singh’s men fell upon him, pulled
his beard and hair, and sent him back empty-handed. The emperor
thereupon ordered a reduction in the jagir of Devi Singh. Earlier,
another ofﬁcial had fared much worse. He himself proceeded to the jagir
to collect the tax, but was killed by the Hindu mansabdar. Orders to
destroy newly built temples met with similar opposition. A Muslim ofﬁcer
who \[was\] sent in 1671 CE to destroy temples at the ancient pilgrimage
city of Ujjain was killed in a riot that broke out as he tried to carry
out his orders.”*

Thus, the effects of the earlier extra-military response was now giving
rise to a reasonably effective military response. In conclusion much of
the historical data favors few general points with bearing on the
current Indian secularism:

● Demographic and missionary aggression by Mohammedanism might not have
been sufficient for it to overrun the Hindu dharma. Rather, the former
might have been eventually digested and neutralized by the latter.

● This point was realized clearly by the Shaikhs who hence sought to
prop it up by repeated calls to the Sultans to lend their arms to
enforce Mohammedanism. On several occasions this included calls to
external Mohammedan invaders, e.g. Ghiyat al-Din Tughlaq, Babar, Ahmed
Shah Abdali and his successors or calls to more pious Sultans to punish
the slackers (e.g. Awrangzeb being sought to punish the Hindu-controlled
Qutbshah in gavalakuNDa).

● An important point is that Shaikhs, over a large period of time and
across bhAratavarSha, have been very clear in noting that the spread of
Hindu influences was deleterious to Mohammedanism and that the only way
for Mohammedanism to survive was to keep itself distinct while mustering
sufficient force/demography to destroy the Hindus. The bottom-line is
Mohammedanism needs force to survive in jambudvIpa either in the form of
wars on Hindu powers or in the form of coercion directed at civilians.

● The striving for non-Hinduness might have even lead to internal rifts
within Mohammedanism as each group was trying be more Mohammedan than
the other. For example, Mohammedan historians have correctly (unlike
mlechCha apologists) interpreted the Mahdavi movement as part of the
revitalization movements within the desert cult in India in order to
stem what was clearly seen as the decay arising from Hinduization. This
Mahdavi movement, when it arose in Gujarat, emphasized jihad, which it
ended up launching it on the Muzzafarid Turks who were occupying Gujarat
at the time of its origin. Thus, one should not be confused by
internecine conflicts between various Mohammedan sects as they were
actually competing for space of the ideal Mohammedan shorn of all Hindu
influences. Indeed, this dynamic of competition for the ideal
Mohammedanism is an important issue missed by most Hindus. It implies
that as along as Islam exists as a distinct entity in the subcontinent
there is always going to be a strain that would go for the Hindu’s neck
or foreskin.

● From the viewpoint of the Shaikhs the subcontinent of jambudvIpa is
their rightful property, where Hindus had no place beyond Dhimmis in the
best case scenario. Anything that fuels a distinct Islamic identity in
the subcontinent is going to favor its striving for an identity free of
Hindu influence. Hence, “two-nation theory” is alive in its most primal
form (people should not be confused by the presence of more than 2
physical countries) and is fundamentally incompatible with an Indian
state, secular or Hindu.

● Hence, from the Hindu viewpoint a synthetic existence with
Mohammedanism as a separate entity in their land, jaMbudvIpa, is not
possible. This is not so much because Hindus do not want to live with
them – many of our modern secularists would be delighted to do so,
visiting them for syrupy semolinas or for their meat shops, or even for
an occasional genuflection at a mazar, as it happens so often in
ajayamerupura. However, as the Shaikhs have repeatedly emphasized they
do not brook such a cohabitation and greatly fear the incubus of Hindu
practice that accompanies it. No amount of mollycoddling by the Hindus
or secularists will change this, only the erasure of the Hindu dharma
will.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Akbar lined the highway between ajayamerupura (Ajmer) and
agrevana (Agra) with hundreds of thousands of trophy heads of
artiodactyls and rhinos from hunts sponsored by him in northern India.
Such activities of the Mogol tyrants played a major role in the
extinction of fauna in bhArata.

Footnote 2: Ironically in this period he suffered some serious hunting
accidents when he did go out on occasional hunts. In 1589 CE he was
trying to kill a hyena in Kashmir when he injured his head in a fall and
lost consciousness. After hanging in a precarious condition for a while
he made a remarkable recovery and was back in action within a month. In
1595 CE he was trying to kill a black buck when it pierced him in the
scrotum with its horn. It entered deep into his viscera and he was saved
after 21 days in a life-and-death situation by a Hindu physician
chandrasena who performed a surgery.
