+++
title = "A note on the early expansions of the Indo-Europeans"

+++
There have been a whole lot of developments in ancient human genomics
that have more or less solved key issues pertaining to the early
Indo-European expansions. We would like to discuss these but then it
would need a long article which we are not currently inclined to write
because it would need enormous amount of data to be presented in an
understandable form. Moreover, there are indications via various
channels that, exciting as the current developments are, there are going
to be new ones which will make things even clearer with respect to the
Indian situation. Hence, we were somewhat disinclined to engage in any
long writing on this topic. Nevertheless, we could not control our
temptation to at least say a few words in this regard.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

We sat in front of Agni making the preliminary offering with the ancient
mantra-s, where Agni is described as being that of Bhṛgu, Apnavāna, and
Aurva, our illustrious ancestors. The observant individual would note,
as we had done, that these mantra-s contain a key reference that gives
the identity of the original homeland of the Indo-Iranians, and now
likely all Indo-Europeans. We have never been to that place, but if one
realizes those mantra-s of the Bhṛgu-s, or the Bharadvāja-s or the
Vaiśvāmitra-s one immediately sees the land it corresponds to – the
land where there is fire within water.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

About 21-22 years ago a strange, new aberration in Hindu thought came to
our attention: The Out-of-India-theory (OIT), which posited that the
Indo-Aryans were autochthons of the Indian subcontinent. At first we
brushed it aside as being a mere fantasy of some ill-educated
raconteurs, who might simultaneously see Tipoo Sultan as a freedom
fighter. But as the 1990s came to an end the the 2000s began this stream
of thinking became dominant among the Hindus. So much so that most
politically pro-Hindu individuals also tied themselves to some version
of OIT. Across different fora you would see them thundering as though
they were Parjanya: “The Aryan invasion is a myth.” They started seeing
it as an instrument created by the English or more generally the
Leukosphere to sow dissension among the autochthonous Hindus. We can
provide a long list of prominent Hindus on the internet and associates
of Hindus who were proponents of some form OIT: S. Talageri, S. Kak,
N.S. Rajaram, V. Agrawal, B.B. Lal, S. Kalyanaraman, D. Frawley, R.
Malhotra, M. Danino, K. Elst, N. Kazanas and so on.

However, only a few of those who took a stand against the Aryan invasion
theory (AIT) ever had a clear idea of what form the alternative
hypothesis, i.e. OIT was to take. If we ignore its more nonsensical
manifestations that deny the Indo-European monophyly then we are left
with few clear formulations. OIT’s basic form was explicitly spelled out
by Frawley and Talageri. They held the view that the Indo-Europeans
originated in India and expanded westwards and eastwards from India.
Talageri equated the Indo-Europeans with the Vedic pañcajana: The
Druhyu-s and the Anu-s formed the non-Indian branches of Indo-European,
whereas the Turvaśa-s, the Yadu and the Pūru-s formed the Indo-Aryan
branches. Of them he ascribed Vedic culture purely to the Pūru-s.
Talageri’s confidence in his scheme was so high that he titled his book:
“Rigveda and the Avesta: The Final Evidence”; i.e. final evidence for
OIT – this was after genetics had prepared the coffin for OIT. By 2009
Kazanas had climbed down to propose more confused alternatives: he
proposed either a “continuum” from the Pontic steppes to the
Sapta-Sindhu in India or an invasion around 4500 BCE or before.

Even as OIT was making its way up in India, in the west we had another
such theory, which was likewise rather contrary to the evidence – the
Anatolian homeland theory. Spearheaded by archaeologist Renfrew, this
hypothesis proposed that the Indo-Europeans originated in Anatolia and
as the Neolithicization spread from Anatolia to Europe it carried the IE
languages. In this hypothesis the first farmers who spread out from
Anatolia to Europe were the bearers of the IE languages to Europe.
Renfrew was vague about the Indian side of the problem. He initially
proposed that like the farming wave from Anatolia to the west, there was
a corresponding wave to the East that carried the Indo-Aryan and Iranian
eastwards. He even posited that the Harappan civilization was founded by
these farmers who bore the IA language to India. Then there were a
series of papers published in high profile magazines applying methods
from the study of molecular evolution, like construction of Bayesian
phylogenies, to linguistic data to support Anatolianists’ contention.
However, the use of rather flawed assumptions resulted in these results
being severely criticized. Eventually, at least some of the
Anatolianists climbed down, positing an Anatolian scenario only for the
early phase and part of the European side of things, while for the east
and the later phase they accept the standard model of dispersal of IE
from the steppes.

To those who were not swayed by the delusions of the genie of OIT or
Anatolianism these were largely sideshows that spiced dinner-time or
late night chatting sessions. However, to us at least OIT was a matter
of concern. It hit us that this was not the figment of some unerudite
Hindus but a wrong idea of some potency that was seizing the brains of
otherwise intelligent and discerning people – indeed, we have long
observed that false ideas with a middle-level of complexity have a
seductive effect on the minds of intelligent people (i.e. people with
above-average IQ as a group). Parallel cases are Marxism, liberalism,
and related ideas of occidental vintage, which are ultimately modernized
derivatives of the older Abrahamisms (A testimony of the fact that high
IQ does not translate to proper discernment). On one hand it was
exposing the Hindus “as idiots”, a suspicion or a belief which some
white indologists had privately harbored. On the other, it alarmed us
that if Hindus were unable to understand a theory as AIT with a great
weight of evidence behind it – if they failed to grasp something so
clear-cut then what could one say of the complex droha-s the mlecchas
were hatching on the Hindus.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

In 2004 Cordaux et al published a clear and simple article titled
“Independent Origins of Indian Caste and Tribal Paternal Lineages”
that put the genie of OIT firmly back in the bottle. Yet, the Hindus
including Talageri went on as though nothing had happened. There were
some issues with that old article and it was based only on Y-chromosome
haplogroups, but the wealth of new data on the genome-scale that has
emerged since has only gone on to confirm the AIT and provide several
interesting new details. In the past two years a wealth of ancient DNA
is literally making the skeletons, if not the pots, of the steppe
cultures speak and they are telling us great stories. Much of this work
is done from a Eurocentric viewpoint but it has tremendous implications
for us because we are the “other branch of Indo-European”. So what has
happened?

• **First going really back in time for a global view outside Africa:**
Molecular evidence shows that modern humans coming out of Africa split
up into multiple branches. These included –  
(1)the ancestral “Eurasian branches” situated in inner Eurasia.  
(2) the common ancestor of the Onge of the Andamans and the main-land
proto-Indians (unfortunately called Ancestral South Indians by the
researchers; ASI) which moved through India and into the far east.  
(3) the branch leading to part of the ancestry of the Papuans and the
Australian aborigines, which moved eastwards and mixed with the archaic
Denisovans (the remaining part of Papuan-aborigine ancestry coming from
the Onge-ASI branch). Between 45-36.2 thousand years before present (kyr
BP) the split of the Western Eurasians and East Asians can be clearly
discerned among the “Eurasian” branches. The Western Eurasians spread
from Europe to Central Asia. A northern lineage known as the Ancient
Northern Eurasians (ANE), which is a sister group of the Western
Eurasian branch, is seen at least \~24 kyr BP in the form of the remains
of a Paleolithic hunter-gatherer MA1 from Siberia published by Raghavan
et al. The ANE branch together with the major contribution of the East
Asian branch and a smaller contribution from an Onge-like branch,
constituted the ancestry of the Native Americans.

• **What happened in the Holocene in western Eurasia?** We see many
differentiated populations in Western Eurasia by around 9-7 kyr BP,
which include:  
(1) cline of European hunter-gatherers – Western European
hunter-gatherers (WHG) who sit at one end of the cline, followed by the
Scandinavian hunter-gatherers from Scandinavia (SHG) and the eastern
hunter-gatherers (EHG) from the Middle Volga region who sit at the other
end of the cline. The EHG show clear evidence for a component of
ancestry from the ANE. The report of a \~13.5 kyr BP WHG genome from a
young male with a Cro-magnon type morphology from Switzerland suggests
that the hunter-gatherer cline had differentiated before that time.  
(2) In Anatolia by around 9 Kyr BP we see the emergence of Neolithic
farming and these constitute a group known as Early Farmers (EF).  
(3) In the Caucasus, from at least as early as 13.3 to 9.7 kyr BP (i.e.
late Paleolithic to Mesolithic) we have records of a hunter-gatherer
population the Caucasian hunter-gatherer (CHG). The CHG forms a clade
with EF rather than grouping with the members of the WHG-SHG-EHG cline.

• **How did Neolithicization proceed in Western Eurasia?** Around 8-7.5
kyr we see the Neolithicization of Europe with intrusive farmers
entering and bringing about the transition from hunting and gathering to
Neolithic agriculture. Ancient genomes of the early Neolithic farmers
(8-7.5 kyr) from Europe group tightly with the EF from Anatolia
suggesting that a front of farmers moved out from Neolithic Anatolia
into Europe and replaced the older hunter-gatherer groups. The famous
Iceman is once such EF. In the southern arc across the Mediterranean
these intrusive farmers appear to have largely displaced the older
groups in some places. These migrating EFs constitute the primary
ancestry of the modern day populations like Sardinians, the Spanish, and
Basque. They also moved northwards and westwards via the Danubian system
into Hungary and Germany to overrun the hunter-gatherers. After the
initial overwhelming of the hunter-gatherers it appears that they seem
to have lingered on in marginal zones or also adopted farming and
admixed with the intrusive EFs. Thus, through much of Europe from \~6-5
kyr BP (i.e. Middle Neolithic) we see the resurgence of WHG ancestry in
the farmers. Thus they are now a mixed population with both
hunter-gatherer and EF ancestry as evidenced by ancient genomes from
Germany, Spain, Hungary and Sweden. Thus, ancient genomes have confirmed
the early suspicion from archaeology that the Neolithicization of Europe
was driven by the intrusion of EF from Anatolia. What it further
clarified is that this process involved a massive replacement of
hunter-gathers followed by resurgence of their ancestry resulting in an
admixed European farming population by the middle-Neolithic.

• **What happened in the Eastern side?** Starting at least around the
transition between the late Neolithic and the beginning of the metal age
around 7.2-6 kyr BP ancient genomes from the Middle Volga region
(Samara) show that the EHG were beginning to undergo admixture with the
CHG to give rise to an composite population. By the advent of the bronze
age proper, a well-admixed population (\~EHG (42-52%)-CHG(48-58%) is
clearly in place in the entire arc to the north of the Black Sea and
Caspian lake (Pontic steppes) all the way to the Middle Volga region as
suggested by ancient genomes from \~5 kyr BP from Kalmykia and the
Middle Volga region. This corresponds the archaeologically bronze age
defined Yamnaya culture dated \~5.6-4.3 kyr BP. In the Middle Volga
region the Yamnaya culture is succeeded by the archaeologically defined
Poltavka culture (\~4.9-4.2 kyr); the ancient genomes from Poltavka
culture indicate that it had a genetic composition very close to the
preceding Yamnaya in the region suggesting that there was no genetic
transformation in course of this archaeological succession.

• **The invasion of the Altai region of Asia from the Pontic steppes**.
Between 5.3-5 kyr BP the archaeologically defined Afanasievo culture
suddenly appears in the Altai and appears to show cultural links to the
Yamnaya from the western steppes. Ancient genomes from the Afanasievo
sites in the Altai show no links to the East Asia populations (including
Paleolithic East Asians from the vicinity) but are very close to the
people from the Yamnaya sites. This suggests that the Afanasievo was
founded by a massive invasion from the Pontic steppes across the steppes
of Kazakhstan into the Altai.

• **The invasion of Neolithic Europe from the Pontic steppes.** Around
\~4.9 kyr BP an archaeologically defined culture, the Corded Ware
culture, appeared in central Europe. They were characterized by a
pottery with a distinctive corded appearance and male graves with a
battle axe. By the time the archaeological defined culture is last
observed \~4.3 kyr BP it had reached the Atlantic shores of Europe and
catalyzed a major cultural change across Europe as attested by
archaeology. The recovery of ancient genomes from remains of Corded Ware
people from Germany (\~4.5 kyr BP) showed that they were specifically
related to the Yamnaya populations with little local admixture from the
original WHG and EF ancestry groups. The sudden appearance of Corded
Ware with little initial admixture with the older groups is also
paralleled by considerable disappearance of middle Neolithic European
Y-chromosome and mitochondrial haplogroups suggesting a degree of
population replacement. This showed that the entry of these people was
most likely a massive invasion. The modern Europeans are all admixtures
of this Yamnaya-derived population, at least in part via the Corded Ware
people, with the early mixed population formed by the WHG and the EF.

In conclusion, these results show in a span of 500 years \~5.4-4.9 kyr
BP the Yamnaya type people from the Pontic steppes launched at least two
major invasions, first eastwards into the Altai and then westwards into
Europe.

• **What was the language of architect of these invasions from the
steppes?**  
\-Both philology and linguistics indicate that the ancestral
Indo-Europeans likely practiced an economy that had a major pastoral
component and at least some agriculture. Further they also practiced
honey-harvesting/bee-keeping which had its roots in old hunter-gatherer
tradition. The pastoral component included cattle-rearing with the cow
being an important cultural symbol or a holy animal or a sign of
“wealth”; goat-rearing and sheep-rearing with the latter supplying
wool from which garments were made; horse-rearing, with the horse like
the cow being an important cultural symbol.  
\-The early IE society was familiar with the birch tree and lived in
place with cold winters during which it snowed.  
\-The early IE society can be reconstructed as having a notable element
of mobility with wheeled vehicles. They also possessed an organized
force for warfare, i.e. an army and likely possessed fortified
settlements which were were the focus of military action. This is
consistent with the heroic and warlike elements in all early
attestations of IE traditions.  
\-The earliest attested IE languages show a certain conservative element
and are closely related in vocabulary, grammar and elements of syntax
unlike their modern descendants which have diverged quite a bit. This
points to an explosive radiation from a source to their destinations
rather than a prolonged stay of several thousand years in the
destinations.  
\-In Europe the Indo-European languages show substrata suggesting that
they were intrusive into the region. Moreover, such substratum languages
were historically attested (Etruscan) or still exist (Basque). The
Yamnaya-derived Corded Ware culture’s intrusion into Europe marks a
major population change. The Southern Mediterranean arc of Europe where
the Yamnaya derived ancestry is the least is also where these survivals
of substratum languages was/is more pronounced.  
\-In the East, close to where the Afanasievo culture was once located,
we find historical attestation of IE languages: Turfanian (Tocharian A)
the most archaic of these from the Agni oasis; Kuchean (Tocharian B)
from the Kucha oasis; loan words in the Indo-Aryan Niye Prakrit point to
a third language Kroränian (Tocharian C). Together these constitute a
monophyletic branch of IE, Tocharian.

Considering all these points together we can say that the Yamnaya
culture, from which were staged major population movements into Europe
and the Altai, was most likely comprised of early Indo-European
speakers. The Yamnaya-derived population can accommodate the above
points much better than positing the EF as the bearers of IE languages
to Europe. The fact that they: (1) rapidly expanded over vast distances
in both East and West; (2) replaced significant fractions of the local
population and at least in Europe constitute a major fraction of the
ancestry modern populations, suggests that this population movement is
best termed an invasion with a serious military dimension involving the
conquest of the local populations. Some parallels, though rather
imperfect, might be drawn with the movements of the Huns and Mongols in
recorded history.

• **What can we say about the biology of the early IE people?**  
\-There are two major alleles linked to the transporter genes SLC45A2
and SLC24A5 which are associated with light skin color in Indian and
European populations. The SLC24A5 light skin allele appears to have
undergone selection early on and was likely present at elevated
frequencies or had reached fixation in the common ancestor of the EF and
the CHG. Both these populations show the alleles. In contrast the WHG
and the Onge-ASI clade show the dark skin alleles at both the above
loci. The Neolithic movement of EF into Europe delivered the SLC24A5
allele, which was already fixed in the EF to Europe. The Yamnaya
population had likely acquired the light skin allele from the CHG part
of their ancestry. In contrast the CHG had the dark skin allele for the
SLC45A2 locus. However, in the Yamnaya culture the light skin allele of
SLC45A2 was already present but at only a frequency of around 0.7,
unlike modern Europeans where it had reached fixation (except the modern
Iberian populations where it is still little above 0.8 and higher than
the old steppe frequencies). What this implies is that the Yamnaya and
related steppe populations were fair-skinned but as group were less
fair-skinned than modern Europeans. Modern Europeans received a double
infusion of SLC24A5 fair-skin allele (from EF and Yamnaya-derived
populations) and SLC45A2 (from Yamnaya). Thereafter SLC45A2 fair-skin
allele underwent strong recent selection in the last 4.5 kyr to reach
fixation. Thus, the whitening of the Europeans is a relatively recent
phenomenon and as group are whiter than even the Indo-European steppe
populations that contributed to their ancestry.

\-HERC2/OCA2 allele which affects the expression of the
melanocyte-specific tyrosine transporter OCA2 in the iris and results in
blue eyes appears to have reached fixation in the hunter-gatherers from
western Europe. Whereas it is upto 0.8-0.9 in northern and western
Europeans, in the Yamnaya population it was at maximum at 0.25. Thus,
the Indo-European steppe population contributing to European ancestry
was primarily dark-eyed and unlike their light skin the Europeans got
their light eyes mainly from the old hunter-gatherer populations. It is
also likely that the Yamnaya and related steppe-origin populations as
group had darker hair color than seen in modern Europeans.

\-Using 180 height-associated SNPs Mathieson et al found evidence for
selection for increased height in the Yamnaya and related steppe-origin
populations. This is consistent with the archaeological finding that the
Yamnaya people were taller than average for the time. On the other hand
in as the EF moved into Europe in the Neolithic there was a selection
for reduced height in their descendant populations. This indicates that
the the IE invaders from the steppe were taller than the older Europeans
and contributed the genetics of increased height to modern Europeans.

\-Indians and Europeans acquired lactose tolerance via the same
polymorphism rs4988235 in the LCT gene region and earlier studies had
suggested that it likely first emerged in the vicinity of Caucasus. In
modern Indians from the north of the subcontinent this allele can reach
frequencies as high as 0.33. In modern northern Europe it reaches
frequencies as high as 0.7. The frequency of this allele when imputed in
the Yamnaya population was seen at only around 0.25, about 0.15 in the
Afanasievo population and was no more than 0.1 on an average in bronze
age European populations with Yamnaya ancestry. This suggests that the
tolerance allele at the LCT was not very prevalent in the ancestral
steppe populations and that its rise happened much later under
selection. In both India and Europe there is an element of a north-south
gradient in lactose tolerance with greater frequencies in the north.
This, together with the fact that in India the allele frequency did not
rise much from the ancestral frequency of the steppe population,
suggests that selection for LCT, like light skin color, might have been
at least in part influenced by vitamin D. This is also consistent with
evidence for other genes related to vitamin D levels being under
selection in northern Europeans. This renders unlikely the
Cochran-Harpending hypothesis (which we had discussed before) that the
LCT allele was a potential biological explanation for the success of the
Indo-Europeans relative to the native populations. However, Anthony
points out that the Yamnaya populations showed significantly elevated
bone lesions called porotic hyperostosis (PH) relative to their
predecessor populations or successors like Poltavka. This has been
correlated with iron deficiency which might be associated with
adaptation to increased infection, nutritional stress or problems with
iron absorption. However, most studied Yamnaya skeletons are well-built
and generally healthy with little evidence for any systemic infections.
Hence, it is more likely the elevated PH in Yamnaya is because of
increased milk-products uptake with phosphates in milk reducing iron
intake. Thus, despite the low levels of the LCT resistance allele the
evidence suggests that they were extensively consuming diary products. A
likely possibility is that they were using fermented and processed diary
products like curds, butter and ghee. They were also clearly not
consuming sugar-rich food as they had nearly no dental carries, which
again favors fermented milk-products.

• **What were the subsequent developments in the steppe-land?** Starting
about 4.5 kyr BP the climate in the Eurasian steppes began getting
colder and drier: marshland and forests reduced, and the open grasslands
expanded. As this climatic change started peaking the Poltavka culture,
which was the genetically close successor of the Yamnaya, started giving
way to new archaeologically defined cultures. Earliest by around 4.3 kyr
BP but certainly by 4.1 kyr BP a new set of related cultures were
established: (1) the Sintashta culture in the east in the zone between
the Urals and the Tobol river; (2) the Potapovka culture in the Middle
Volga region in the old Yamnaya-Poltavka heartland; 3) the
Filatovka/Kondrashevka culture in the upper reaches of the Don river.
The best-studied of these is the Sintashta, which is taken as
representative of this complex termed the Sintashta-Potapovka-Filatovka
complex. This complex was characterized by important developments: (1)
Settlements with large-scale industrial technological complexes for
smelting copper, production of bronze (mainly As-bronze), and casting of
metal objects. These were for local use as well as export to the south;
(2) Impressive forts with thick walls, towers, and sometimes protective
V-shaped ditches. These include the Arkaim circular fort with several
compartments. In the Sintashta zone alone more than 20 such were built
within a window of 300 years; (3) Spoke-wheeled chariots of various
sizes; (4) Large-scale use of a wide array of weapons. In addition to
the short swords or daggers, axes, maces and arrows that were shared to
different degrees with the earlier steppe cultures, the Sintashta were
characterized by new type of long spear with a heavy head, and new flint
javelin heads which might have been hurled from chariots. The long
1.2-1.5 meter bows found at the Berezovka site suggest that the warriors
of this complex might used such from chariots too. (5) The artisans of
this complex appear to have been good not only at making utility items
but also rather elaborate jewelry.

Around 4 kyr BP in west Asia horses start becoming prominent. Around
that time an Elamite-Shimashki alliance defeated Ibbi-Sin the king of
Ur. Shortly after his defeat images of chariots with spoked-wheels start
appearing in west Asia on seals. This has led Anthony to suggest that
the effects of the Sintashta military-technological revolution were felt
more widely and that these images might indicate the role of mercenaries
from the Sintashta complex aiding the Elamites in the conquest of Ur.

These archaeological developments characterizing the
Sintashta-Potapovka-Filatovka complex are mirrored in the genetics.
Ancient genomes from both the Potapovka and Sintashta sites indicate
that they have undergone further admixture relative to the earlier
Yamnaya, Afanasievo and Poltavka genomes. If those could be modeled as
near equal admixtures of EHG+CHG, the Potapovka and Sintashta were best
modeled as a 3 population admixture of EF+EHG+CHG. This EF contribution
(\~17%) indicates a further admixture after the Poltavka stage of the
original Yamnaya-type steppe population with a early farmer population
of west Asian origin like the descendants of the Anatolian EF.

• **What were the major developments associated with the emergence of
the Andronovo, Srubnaya and Seima-Turbino phenomenon?** Around 3.9 kyr
there is the controversial Seima-Turbino phenomenon, which is
characterized by the sudden and dramatic spread of distinctive cultural
artifacts from the east Asian steppes in Mongolia all the way to Europe
within a span of few generations. While the reality of this phenomenon
is still debated, the “genuine” Seima-Turbino sites are marked by
sophisticated manufacture of Sn-bronze ware with great aesthetic
accomplishment. The Seima-Turbino sites on one hand show weapons and
anvils with links to the earlier or contemporary Sintashta complex while
on other the daggers with a circular pommel innovated in this horizon
became popular in the later Andronovo. Starting between 3.9-3.8 kyr BP
the Potapovka in the west expands to spawn a successor culture, the
Srubnaya. The Sintashta in the east similarly expands to form the
Andronovo culture. Over the next few centuries these rapidly expand to
set up a culturally similar horizon from the border of China to Europe
and south toward west Asia. These developments were associated with
emergence of Sn-bronze as opposed to As-bronze as the dominant type of
bronze.

In terms of genetics the ancient DNA from the Srubnaya and Andronovo
sites shows that they too like the predecessor
Sintashta-Potapovka-Filatova complex possessed the additional EF type
admixture. A notable phenomenon across these cultures in terms of
genetics is the rise of the the R1a Y chromosome haplogroup. The Yamnaya
Y chromosomes are predominantly R1b and this is a dominant male
haplogroup in Western Europe suggesting that it was brought there by the
Yamnaya-derived invasions. While R1a is seen in the EHG and the
transitional population between at beginning of the metal age in the
Middle Volga region it was clearly not common in the elite of Yamnaya
unlike R1b. While R1b remains the dominant Y chromosome haplogroup of
the Poltavka culture, R1a emerges as one of the other visible types. The
R1a Y chromosome is again seen in the successor Potapovka culture and it
is nearly universal in the Sintashta. In both Srubnaya the successor of
the Potapovka, and Andronovo the successor of Sintashta, R1a is the
dominant or nearly universal Y chromosome haplogroup. Importantly,
starting from the Poltavka, through the Potapovka and Sintashta and
leading to the Srubnaya and Andronovo we see a specific R1a branch, the
R1a-Z93 (R1a1a1b2) which is found primarily in India and Central Asia
but very rare in modern Europeans. This branch is the dominant
haplogroup in the Sintashta, Srubnaya, and Andronovo cultures and
establishes a specific link between the steppe cultures and India. A
corollary to this is that the rise of the R1a marks a distinct expansion
of Indo-Europeans from that marked by the R1b expansion. In particular
the R1a-Z93 branch is a correlate of the expansion of the Indo-Iranians
or a subgroup thereof.

• **What were the later developments in the eastern side of the
steppe-land?** The Afanasievo is succeeded in the vicinity of the Altai
by the Okunevo culture. This culture was archaeologically believed to be
distinct from the preceding Afanasievo and supposed to have ties with
East Asians and non-IE taiga Siberians. Ancient genomes from the Okunevo
culture strongly support this thesis: they show admixture between the
western steppe related population and another population with affinity
to the Siberians and East Asians. In particular they share a component
of ancestry with the native Americans, which is consistent with what was
gleaned earlier from their skeletal anatomy. Subsequently, the Andronovo
intruded in this zone bringing back a western steppe-land population.
They were in turn succeeded by the Karasuk culture towards the end to
the bronze age who again show a major East Asian/Siberian-Native
American type admixture. Consistent with this, the Karasuk males show in
addition to the R1a Y chromosomes of western steppe origin, the Q1a Y
chromosomes a clade which is associated with Mongols, Turks, Siberians,
and Native Americans. This suggests that in the east there were multiple
alternations of Indo-Europeanization and “Altaicization”. This appears
to the have continued through the historical period and is reflected in
the genetics of the modern Uighurs who show the ancestry of the western
steppe populations in their genome in addition to the East Asian
component.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

India has the best linguistic and philological records for any IE
tradition and Old Indo-Aryan plays a major role in our understanding of
the ancestral IE condition. We also have an extensively documented
archaeological record in India. There is currently no published ancient
DNA data from India. However, we do have useful data from modern Indian
populations that helps say quite a few things.

• **What about the philological and linguistic evidence?**  
\-The oldest Indo-Aryan text the Ṛgveda has a unmistakable steppe-land
imprint on it with a dominant role for cow-horse-sheep-centric
pastoralism and some amount of agriculture. Rivers seem more important
than large cities and all evidence is in favor of it being a bronze age
text. Its culture was a heroic and warlike one, with fortified
structures playing a key role. Horse-drawn chariots with spoked-wheels
were central elements of the culture. The burial practice mentioned in
the RV is mirrored in the Kurgan burials from the steppe sites. Grasses
play multiple important roles in the religion, including being the seat
where the gods sit. Without any shadow of doubt Indo-Aryan is related
most closely related to Iranian and the philological evidence from the
oldest Iranian text the Avesta closely matches that from the early Vedic
period of the Indo-Aryans. Thus, Indo-Aryan and Iranian arose in a
common milieu. Further, they share the Soma cult, which distinguishes
them from all other branches of IE, suggesting a phase of shared
development (proto-Indo-Iranian) distinct from other IE groups.

\-In terms of linguistics the Indo-Iranian shows the satem state which
suggests a specific proximity to Baltic and Slavic branches after other
branches of IE had moved away. Early Finno-Ugric shows several loans
specifically from Indo-Iranian. Notably, loans of the word ārya, the
ethnonym of the Indo-Iranians designates a southerner and the
southwestern direction in some Finno-Ugric tongues of the Saami group.
This indicates that early Indo-Iranian was in proximity to Finno-Ugric
and to its south or southwest.

Taken together the above features link the roots of the Indo-Aryans
rather strongly to the steppe-land and to a degree specifically to the
systems archaeologically first seen in the Sintashta-Potapovka-Filatova
complex. Indeed, at the beginning of this complex there are
archaeological remains suggestive of intense regular warfare involving
the IE and Finno-Ugric groups, like the mass grave at Pepkino site.

\-In India the New Indo-Aryan languages show a “Hindi” dialect continuum
of in the north from west to east. The other distinct New Indo-Aryan
language branches are also relatively closely related and relate to the
early dialect continuum seen across the Middle-Indo-Aryan Prakrits. This
points to a relatively rapid expansion of IA over a wide area with
temporal depth very unlikely to go back into the Neolithic. Old
Indo-Aryan shows a clear distinctive Indian substratum (i.e. not shared
with Iranian), which might have also contributed loans to Dravidian.
This substratum suggests that Indo-Aryan was unlikely to be
autochthonous to India but entered an area where agricultural
populations were already established.

• **What about the genomic evidence from modern Indians?**  
\-The work of Cordaux et al indicated that the Indian varṇa populations
are: (1) on an average less diverse than the tribal populations; (2) are
significantly enriched for Y-chromosomes which have clearly affinities
to those from the Central Asian steppe-land. Subsequent work by Reich
and coworkers showed that all Indians could be simply modeled as a
composite of two ancestral populations which the termed the Ancestral
North Indians (ANI) and the ASI who shared an ancestry with the Onge to
the exclusion of the rest. The ANI in contrast showed clear affinities
to the western Eurasian populations. Their work indicated this admixture
between ANI and ASI was a relatively recent event happening most likely
within the last 5 kyr BP. However, they conceded that some Indian groups
might have had more than one admixture with an ANI population while
others just one. Higher ANI ancestry is positively correlated with the
presence of genomic polymorphisms associated with the steppe populations
that were likely IE speakers. In this regard the ANI ancestry for an
Indian group is also correlated with presence of the R1a-Z93 branch that
is seen as early as the Poltavka culture and rises to dominate in
Sintashta, Potapovka, Srubnaya and Andronovo cultures. Finally, the
latest whole ancient genome studies indicated that both modern European
and Indian populations (with a north-south gradient) are on an average
closer to ancient steppe populations than they are to each other. This
would mean that populations related to the ancient steppe populations
them contributed to the ancestry of both the Indians and Europeans via
admixture with unrelated local groups.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-Fh3PRUptpEY/VnIe8kuXpFI/AAAAAAAADZI/yM4u4dYdZKc/s640-Ic42/castebox.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/q_uWhTxFxLxLbGm4l1KcQtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*The
estimate of ANI ancestry with a Caucasian source population using the
ratio of f4 statistics*

These observations together suggest that the ANI ancestry or at least a
notable part thereof originated in the steppes and was transmitted to
India along with the transmission of the IA language.

• **The distinctness of the Indian scenario and the origin of the
Caucasian contribution to Indian ancestry**: Thus far everything which
has been stated is straightforward. However, for India we do not yet
have the luxury of ancient DNA and nor is India an eastern mirror image
of the European scenario. Hence, as we try to work out the details of
the Indian scenario things start to get more complex.

\-First, the Neolithicization of India proceeded very differently. The
earliest Neolithic site in India is believed to be Mehrgarh in the
Northwest, where one can clearly observe the transition between an
aceramic culture to a ceramic culture and the emergence of a settled
agricultural society. This center of agriculture might have emerged as
early as 9-10 kyr BP though the C14 dates are still somewhat in
controversy. If this were indeed its age, then it might have started off
temporally close to the Anatolian Neolithic; however, despite being
situated to the Northwest there is no clear evidence for the Mehrgarh
Neolithic being brought there by EFs from West Asia. The genetic
evidence does not provide any clear support such early admixture of a
West Asian population with the ASI (i.e. the proto-Indian population).
Thus, it is quite possible that the Mehrgarh Neolithic was an
independent Neolithicization, though we cannot rule out some role in its
rise for memetic or temetic transfers from West Asia, even if there was
not any major genetic contribution. A further Neolithic transition to
agriculture has been proposed for the Ganga plains in Uttar Pradesh,
where Neolithic rice farming is believed to have emerged early. However,
the dates for this remain uncertain and in any case there is no evidence
that the Mehrgarh Neolithic or the West Asian one played any role in the
transition on the Ganga plains. It is believed, at least by some, that
the Mehrgarh Neolithic eventually culminated in a chalcolithic that in
turn spawned the Harappan bronze age civilization. Thus, unlike Europe
the weight of the currently available evidence supports the Indian
Neolithicization as being a largely endogenous phenomenon with little or
no role of the West Asian EFs. In a more extreme scenario it is also
possible that these endogenous developments continued all the way to the
bronze age with little external influence.

\-Turning from archaeology back to genomics, Reich and colleagues used
the D-statistic of the form D(Onge, X; YRI, Y) where X is an Indian
population, YRI is the West African Yoruba outgroup, and Y is one
population from a panel of 43 Western Eurasian populations. If the
D-statistic has a more positive value then it points to greater shared
ancestry between X and Y. In this experiment the population with the
highest and 2nd highest D-statistic turned out to be most commonly a
Caucasian population. Further, a bronze age Armenian genome reported by
Allentoft et al displayed a strong relationship to Indians, in
particular those with a higher ANI component. This suggested that the
source of the ANI component was likely a Caucasian population. This
result was resoundingly supported by the sequencing of the ancient CHG
genomes, which indicated that the Mesolithic CHG was the best surrogate
for the ANI. The lowest f3 statistic of the form f3(target; source1,
source2) indicates that for the ‘target’ population the best source
populations for explaining it as an admixture are ‘source1’ and
‘source2’. In this experiment for populations across the
subcontinent the lowest f3  was for f3(India subcontinent population;
Mesolithic CHG, Kharia), where Kharia is a tribal population from Madhya
Pradesh with a predominantly ASI genome. The same CHG ancestry is the
one which contributes roughly half of the Yamnaya ancestry and through
that to the ancestry of modern Europeans. In general it seems that the
Caucasian ancestry is sufficient to account for the ANI in Indian
populations although some middle/upper castes might have some of the
additional EHG-like component as in Yamnaya.

Thus, the CHG component rather than the EHG component appears to be the
common denominator of the spread of the IE into India, Armenia, Greece,
rest of Europe, and Eastern steppes.

• **What would this mean for origin of proto-Indo-Europeans and the
emergence of the Indo-Iranians?**  
\-The finding the that the CHG derived component is the common
denominator would imply that the Yamnaya people were unlikely to be the
proto-Indo-Europeans. The corollary would be that PIE probably arose in
the North Caucasus in a primarily CHG ancestry population close to the
steppe zone. Even today the Caucasus is a region of great linguistic
diversity – there are 3 distinct language families found only in the
Caucasus, then there are several branches of Indo-European, Turkic and
Mongolic branches of Altaic, and the Semitic branch of Afro-Asiatic.
While many of these languages have moved into the region in more recent
times, we suspect that even during the transition from the Neolithic to
the bronze age there was a comparable diversity and Proto-Indo-European
emerged as one of the many languages. Being in the steppe zone of the
Caucasian region it was at the junction between the northern world of
the EHG and the southern world of the EF. Indeed, one culture from the
region Maikop shows signs of straddling the two worlds with clear
material signs of links to both the West Asian cultures on one hand and
the steppes on the other. The Maikop culture had long range trade links
to the south that went as far as the early Harappan civilization of
India, as attested by the presence of cotton, and carnelian and lapis
lazuli beads of likely Indian origin. In the north, in the Dniester and
lower Don steppes we find several kurgans with Maikop-like material such
as ceramics, mace-heads and other tools. On the genetic side the
interaction between the steppe and the North Caucasus is supported by
the incipient admixture of the CHG-type ancestry into the EHG in the
Neolithic-metal age transition. While at this point there is nothing to
say Maikop was a proto-Indo-European culture in entirity, among peoples
involved with this complex of sites were likely to be those who were the
proto-Indo-Europeans

From these PIEans the Hittites separated first and probably moved
southwards with little contact with the rest until millenia later. In
the Maikop culture we see the evidence of a key technology the wheel,
which is seen for the first time in the region in the Starokorsunskaya
kurgan 2 and depicted on a pot at a grave at Evdik. This technology was
key to the mobility of the rest of earliest Indo-Europeans – the words
cakra and ratha in Sanskrit descend from the early IE words for wheel
that was likely shared by the common ancestor of all the remaining
branches except the Hittites. It is possible that this mobility allowed
a branch of the PIEans to actively expand into the northern steppes
mixing thoroughly with the resident EHG to found the Yamnaya culture.
The first to split from this population was Tocharian that utilized the
mobility to move far to the east and never have further contact with
other IE branches till they encountered the Indo-Iranians more than a
millennium later. The next to leave the Yamnaya core were likely the
Germanic, Italic and Celtic groups which likewise pushed westwards. The
Greeks and Armenians shared some developments with the ancestors of
Indo-Iranians and appear to have separated there after. The Baltic and
Slavic probably expanded from a population related to the Yamnaya but
likely remained longer in the region given evidence for their contact
with Indo-Iranians \[the satem development; parjanya among others\]. One
possibility is that the Poltavka was the population from which they
expanded. The genetic support for contact with the Indo-Iranians is
presented by the less-frequent yet present R1a-Z93 Y chromosome of the
Indo-Iranian type in this culture.

After the Poltavka period there is clear change in the genomes of the
region – the greater influx of EF ancestry seen in Sintashta-Potapovka
and their successors. Allentoft tried to explain this EF ancestry as
arising from a back migration from Europe carrying the old Neolithic EF
component from Europe. However, this is unlikely because the Y
chromosome landscape changes to R1a1-Z93 dominance rather than R1b which
would have been prominent if the European population migrated back to
the steppes. Since, the Maikop period there is evidence for the southern
contact with West Asia. Hence, it is quite possible that a more southern
branch of the early Indo-European people in the meantime had acquired
admixtures with the EF and moved further north to mix with the older
populations to found the Sintashta-like cultures.

\-Now how does this square with the origin of the Indo-Iranians? Here is
where things get complex and multiple scenarios present themselves:  
(1) The Sintashta-like cultures were the proto-Indo-Iranians who then
expanded as Andronovo and Srubnaya during which Indo-Aryans and Iranians
split. This is the mainstream model. The advantages it has are:  
\-the spoked-wheel chariot warfare, which is so prominent in
Indo-Iranian is archaeologically first attested here.  
\-the dates would consistent with the attestation of Indo-Aryan in West
Asia in the Mitanni culture.  
\-It brings IA into India after the collapse of the Harappan
civilization, which allows them to fill a vacuum thus explaining the
total dominance of IA over much of the old Harappan zone.  
\-It can easily account for the R1a-Z93 Y chromosomes, a prominent
haplogroup in Indian males.  
\-These populations show a completely consistent relationship to at
least some of the modern Indians with high ANI components.  
\-It is completely consistent with the median dates of admixtures
between ANI and ASI as inferred from linkage disequilibrium \[This is
after a correction is applied to those presented by Reich and colleagues
which seem to represent the lower temporal end of the admixtures
involving ANI-high sources\].

The disadvantages of this scenario are:  
\-While it accounts for R1a-Z93 the rest of the genetics is
less-consistent especially given the lower expected EHGs for most
Indians with ANI components i.e. they are better explained as an
admixture with a population that is predominantly dominant in CHG
ancestry with little EHG component.  
\-The dates of entry into India via the conventional scenario are
inconsistent with the philological evidence for the Sarasvati river and
the most reliable astronomical dates of the Veda.

These disadvantages could be explained away by positing:  
\-The Bactria-Margiana complex (BMAC) was primarily of CHG ancestry. As
the Andronovo-like I-Ir filtered through the BMAC they got enriched in
CHG, which is what we seen in most Indians.  
\-A two invasion scenario with a non-Indo-European population with
primarily CHG ancestry that came first followed by Indo-Europeans. So
only a part of the Indians with ANI have really Indo-Aryan ancestry with
rest of ANI being from a non-Indo-European source. Some whites and their
fellow travelers with a poor understanding of Indian ethnography seem to
like this scenario. However, we hold that this is unlikely because even
given a multiple invasion scenario (which in itself is possible) the
earliest admixtures as calculated by linkage disequilibrium are too
recent for such an imagined non-IE invasion.  
\-Finally the astronomical references are accounted for as being
incorporation of an older textual material into younger texts.

(2) This is a variant of the above scenario, which involves multiple
invasions but all of these are Indo-European, primarily Indo-Iranian.
The idea of ārya-s entering India wave upon wave is an old one. There is
some support for this from philology: the members of the pañcajana and
ikṣvāku seem to be distinct waves with the former playing a major role
in the Ṛgveda but latter being remembered as a notable group but are not
the main patrons of the RV authors. Even in the RV we have others like
Ruṣama Pavīru and Tirindira Parṣava suggestive of a more Iranic wave. In
the later Vedic period there was the likely invasion of yet another
group the Śalva, and in the post-Vedic period of the Pāṇḍava-s who
established themselves in the Kuru-Pañcāla realm. Even in the historical
period we have multiple Iranic waves in the form the Shaka, Pahlava,
Kushana, Huna, and Gurjara-s who founded dynasties in the subcontinent.
That they contributed to the genomes of the Indians is suggested by the
distinctive group, of likely Huna-Gurjara origin, which could be
identified within the Gujarati Indian genomes. These multiple waves
could then account for different types of admixtures with some involving
groups primarily enriched in CHG ancestry and others with more of a
Sintashta or Yamnaya/Afanasievo-like ancestry.

The advantage of this scenario is it being consistent with the evidence
for multiple admixtures recovered by Moorjani et al by getting better
fits by using a sum of exponential decays of linkage disequilibrium than
with a single exponential curve. In principle it could also account for
oddities like the the kentum substratum in Bangani, which might imply
that one of the waves included in it a substantial kentum-language
speaking population.

(3) In this scenario it is proposed that the Sintasha-like complex of
cultures and its Andronovo successor were not the primary set of people
who brought the Indo-Aryan languages to the subcontinent. Instead they
are seen as being the Indo-Iranians who never reached India: primarily
as Iranian or as Iranians along with a non-Indian branch of the
Indo-Aryans. Indeed, there is some evidence from ancient Greek
historians that there was a branch of Indians in the region of the Black
Sea even in the early historical period. Instead, in this scenario
Indo-Aryan languages were borne to India by a distinct branch that
separated early from Sintashta-like cultures (\~4.2 kyr BP) and rapidly
reached the subcontinent. This group was predominantly of CHG ancestry
but might have had a population structure with an elite “brahma-kṣatra”
with more EHG ancestry and a viś of mainly CHG ancestry. However, it
should be noted that the multiple invasion scenario posited above can
also work with this scenario. This group rapidly invaded India probably
via a mechanism similar to that speculated by Anthony regarding the
Sintashta mercenaries playing a role in the defeat of Ur by the Elamite
confederation. The archaeologist Bisht has proposed that the Harappans
were likely involved in fort-based warfare just like the early
Indo-Iranians on the steppes. The steppe Indo-Europeans had long-range
trade interests, especially given the industrial-scale metal production
starting around 4.2 kyr BP. This could have meant that their trade
interests combined with their new military technology got them involved
in Harappan affairs thus establishing them India.

It is commonly claimed by the unerudite OITists that there is no
evidence for any link between Harappans and the steppe-land. This is far
from true. The Chanhu-daro, Pirak and the chalcolithic Ahar-Banas from
Rajasthan show seals with clear relationship to those from the BMAC
system around this time and unlike those typical of the Harappan system.
Rathacakra and kurgan-like graves have been found by Bisht at Dholavira.
Around the same period (\~4.1-4 kyr BP) the rare examples of images of a
horse are seen in sites like Lothal along with horse bones appearing at
Surkotada. This would suggest that the first entry of IA happened in the
mature Harappan period. A much earlier invasion is rendered less likely
by the inferences of decay of linkage disequilibrium based on the data
we have today.

The advantages of this scenario are:  
\-At least it brings the period of entry into India close to the Kṛttikā
period inferred from Vedic astronomical references.  
\-It gives at least \~2 centuries of an active Indian Sarasvati for it
to be embedded in the memory of the Indo-Aryans in the formative phase
of their presence in India.  
\-It gives an explanation for the spike in evidence for contacts with
central Asia ranging from the horse to the Rathacakra kurgans in India.

The disadvantages of this scenario are:  
\-The weight of the evidence suggests a prolonged shared development
with Iranian: this model is less conducive for that.  
\-Especially if the exit of the Indo-Aryans happened via a southern
route as suggested by the CHG predominance, then the shared loans into
and from Finno-Ugric are less easily explained.

In conclusion, we believe that the details about how the invasion(s)
happened remain murky. Ancient DNA could conclusively solve the issue in
the coming years. In the past we were rather skeptical about the late
invasion model favored by the mainstream indologists based on the
astronomical dates from the Veda. However, we must now concede that the
chances for the mainstream indological model look brighter than ever
before. Even with non-mainstream models like 3 we cannot push things
into the remote past. This raises a question as to what about the
astronomical dates? We have to conclude that most probably the Vedic
texts are all composite preserving particular pieces corresponding to
the older dates but as a “saṃhitā” date from a later time – the dates do
not date the whole saṃhitā but merely the ṛk or ākhyāna containing the
old date, that to was probably first composed in an earlier IE dialect
and massaged into an IA form at a later date.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

**Epilog:** This is already rather long. To go into all the
nitty-gritties will make it even longer. As serious readers of these
pages might have noticed our understanding is evolving and things are
going change with new ancient genomes. But broad outlines have never
been as clear.

An important point to note is that, which ever way you dice it, the
early Indo-Europeans created a system of thought centered around a
natural religion that was remarkably stable to all kinds of admixtures
with diverse populations in distant lands be it in northern Europe, the
Mediterranean arc or Iran or India. This suggests that the Indo-European
system of thought was something that people outside of its original
horizon sought to emulate and become an integral part of. We believe
that this memetic complex was more important for their original
expansive spread even more than any technological or biological
advantages they might have possessed relative to other people. It is for
this system our Indo-Aryan ancestors had the words like ṛta and dharma.
Even in far off Bali in the East, even after many, many genetic
admixtures, this system, which had developed in steppe-land, held fast
in those who were soaked in it. But today practitioners of most branches
of this ancient system of thought have ceased to be such – they only
have the languages not the system. The Iranians have been reduced to a
tribe and are on route to extinction – we are to only ones who remain
and some among us still understand its essence in form not far from what
it was on bronze age steppes despite all its evolution over the
millennia. Beyond religion in the narrow sense, in its orthodox and
heterodox forms, this system is at the foundation of everything else
notable across the branches of the Indo-European world like science,
technology, and arts

But it has a dangerous rival – a memetic complex of a pathogenic type
that arose in the Afro-Asiatic milieu of West Asia. This rival is the
one which has extinguished the system across the former IE world and
taken up the riches generated by the IE system as its “secular”
property. Branches of this rival system are now baying for the blood of
the last great bulwark of the old IE system. This is the heart of our
biggest civilizational clash that many in our midst fail to grasp.

₪‡₪‡₪‡₪‡

**Bibliography**  
***Archaeology***  
Anthony DW The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders
from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World.  
Grigoriev S Ancient Indo-Europeans.  
Shinde V, Raczek TP, Possehl GP (editors) Excavations at Gilund: The
Artifacts and Other Studies.  
Shinde V et al Excavations at Gilund 2001–2003:The Seal Impressions and
Other Finds  
Bisht RS How the Harappans Honoured Death at Dholavira?  
Bisht RS Harappans and Rgveda: Points of Convergence.

***Genomic studies***  
Cordaux R et al Independent origins of Indian caste and tribal paternal
lineages. Curr Biol. 2004 Feb 3;14(3):231-5.  
Raghavan M et al Upper Palaeolithic Siberian genome reveals dual
ancestry of Native Americans. Nature. 2014 Jan 2;505(7481):87-91. doi:
10.1038/nature12736.  
Allentoft ME et al Population genomics of Bronze Age Eurasia. Nature.
2015 Jun 11;522(7555):167-72. doi:10.1038/nature14507  
Haak W et al Massive migration from the steppe was a source for
Indo-European languages in Europe. Nature. 2015 Jun 11;522(7555):207-11.
doi: 10.1038/nature14317.  
Lazaridis I et al Ancient human genomes suggest three ancestral
populations for present-day Europeans. Nature. 2014 Sep
18;513(7518):409-13. doi: 10.1038/nature13673  
Moorjani P et al Genetic evidence for recent population mixture in
India. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep 5;93(3):422-38. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.07.006.  
Moorjani P et al Reconstructing Roma history from genome-wide data. PLoS
One. 2013;8(3):e58633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058633.  
Reich D et al Reconstructing Indian population history. Nature. 2009 Sep
24;461(7263):489-94. doi:10.1038/nature08365  
Jones ER et al Upper Palaeolithic genomes reveal deep roots of modern
Eurasians. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 16;6:8912. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9912.  
Basu Mallick C et al The light skin allele of SLC24A5 in South Asians
and Europeans shares identity by descent. PLoS Genet. 2013
Nov;9(11):e1003912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003912.  
Metspalu M et al Shared and unique components of human population
structure and genome-wide signals of positive selection in South Asia.
Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):731-44. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.010.  
Gallego Romero I et al Herders of Indian and European cattle share their
predominant allele for lactase persistence. Mol Biol Evol. 2012
Jan;29(1):249-60. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr190.  
Underhill PA et al Separating the post-Glacial coancestry of European
and Asian Y chromosomes within haplogroup R1a. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010
Apr;18(4):479-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.194.  
Rosenberg NA et al Low levels of genetic divergence across
geographically and linguistically diverse populations from India. PLoS
Genet. 2006 Dec;2(12):e215
