+++
title = "A reiteration regarding the heart of the fundamentalxa0conflict"

+++
We are somewhat zealous in recycling unused bits of writing lending a
certain pleonastic touch to the material presented here. We are placing
herewith a bit of unused writing concerning the topic on which we have
just written a note, namely the provenance of the Indo-Europeans and
location of their original homeland – a problem which fascinates Indians
and Europeans alike for the obvious parochial reasons. In the case of
the Indians it is immensely important because it relates to very the
origins of the Hindu religion including its heterodox offshoots. After
all even the tathāgata termed his discovery as the Āryasaccāni. The
Hindu religion in turn provides basis of their shared identity and the
only non-trivial binding thread beyond peripherals like eating lentils,
which holds the Indian state. It is the common foundation of the Hindu
religion, which even today remains close to its Indo-European precursor,
that unites the people of India. In the case of the Europeans there is a
palpable identity crisis because of the two opposing and incompatible
poles of their modern identity: The tension between Abrahamism, having
it roots in West Asian cults centered on the neuro-atypical behaviors
and experiences of the so called prophets of these cults on one pole,
and the linguistic Indo-European identity on the other pole. Somewhere
in the collective memory of the Europeans there still remains the vague
knowledge that Abrahamism imposed itself via destruction of the old IE
religions related to the Hindu religion. Thus, deep within the European
psyche there is the conflict arising from the uncomfortable truth that
they are almost like a host (the Indo-European linguistic framework)
whose brain has been taken over by a parasite (Abrahamism) – a memetic
equivalent of the *Spinochordodes tellinii*-bush cricket system.

Thus, barring a small minority in the European (Western) world who have
come to the correct realization that the Hindus are a reflection of
their past, a state they need to reacquire with humility, the rest
experience a deep discomfort vis-a-vis the Hindus. Those closer to the
Abrahamistic pole see the Hindus as unfinished agenda. They are baffled
that, despite their vigorous efforts in putting the Greek, Roman,
German, Lithuanian and Slavic religions beneath ground or in museums, a
similar religion persists in India almost as though to mock them. Thus,
following the foot-steps of their vandalistic predecessors they would
like to do the same as they did to the IE religions of Europe to those
of India for they are now automata under the parasite’s control. Those
closer to the Indo-European linguistic pole, lacking the “soul” of an IE
religion are seized with a sub-current sense of jealousy when faced with
the Hindus. They wonder enviously how the Hindus could maintain the
pristine IE tradition when they themselves have been shorn of it. They
vent this jealousy in different ways: 1) by attempting to deny the deep
IE origins/affinities of Hindus. 2) By presenting the IE features of
Hindus as a mere facade which was acquired (memes only with little
genetic transfer) from an ethnically purer strand of peoples closer to
the Europeans. Both these responses may sometimes be accompanied by
their playing up the concept of belonging to a superior biological stock
than the Hindus (e.g. presenting higher IQ, white skin, greater physical
strength, as evidence for this contention).

The Hindu response to this has been weak and in the recent years
characterized by its own pathological delusion. In the years before
independence from the tyrannical English rule they often tacitly
accepted their ancient religio-linguistic ties to the Europeans but
failed to study it on their own terms despite being the last IE
civilization of note still alive. For example we could possible count on
our digits the number of Hindus today who have made a deep study of the
Iguvine Tablets, that remarkable document of IE tradition. After
independence, there has been a slow internalization of the Western
split-identity and the Hindus slipped down further by idiotically
seeking to mirror the same constructs, in their own misinformed way,
within themselves. Thus, we find some of them denying that the common
origin of IE languages and thundering on social media with the heady
brew of their ignorance. Others create a mirror image of the Western
view, where they are the original holders of IE culture, which they then
transferred (typically only memetically) to the west. Yet others deny
the consequences of IE theory, which would entail movement of
Indo-Europeans into India: this is because they have internalized the
discomfort within the Europeans arising from their split identity. Thus,
they think accepting the entry of IE people into India give the Hindus a
split identity too. They are also unable to effectively counter the
corollary to this line of thinking: if IE came from outside into the
Indian subcontinent and we base our identity on it, should we not also
accept the 2nd and 3rd Abrahamisms, which have come from outside into
India as part of our socio-religio-linguistic fabric? In fact the latter
is the line pushed by the enemies of the Hindus to procure the
much-sought-after foothold for the parasites in the Indian system and
the Hindus do not have any response to it beyond claiming autochthonism.
Thorough understanding of this problem is important for the Hindu elite
in formulating their defensive response against ongoing Western assault
against their civilization. However, they have largely failed in this
response due to a priori acceptance of Western categories, rather than
formulate a heathen alternative, which analyzes the situation by
uncompromisingly upholding the heathen structure of thought, which is
what the Hindu religion is founded upon. Thus, we see Hindus talking of
the “Anglo-Saxon” or “Caucasian” world view, when in reality what they
are trying to apprehend is a Christian world view being broadcast by
outer Anglo-Saxon or other leukospheric shells (overt or secularized and
Trojan-horsed into India in the form of the English-inspired “rule of
law”). What the Hindus fail to realize is that this Christian world view
has little to do with what was actually the Anglo-Saxon world view.
Those original Indo-European memes propagating among the old Anglii and
Saxones have been cannibalized and extirpated by the Christian holy
warriors. Thus, at home, the direct consequence of the Hindu elite’s
internalization of the Western discourse and its blind imitation without
even a speck of viveka has spawned the intellectually lazy and the
empirically indefensible “Out of India hypothesis” (OIT). Effectively
OIT will serve the foes as a means to make the the Hindu drop his axe on
his on foot.

Thus, if we still have at least a crumb of robustness left in the next
generation, the future vivekānvita Hindus might look back and realize
how the OIT was yet another diversion arising from biting into a
tasty-looking occidental bait – much like the Shinde and the Holkar’s
blunders might look to us today.
