+++
title = "Chilesaurus"

+++
We have learned emphatically in the past 25 years that morphology is not
the best guide for phylogeny. Yet we currently have no options when it
comes to long dead forms from the Mesozoic. In the least, we can comfort
ourselves that at least broad lines of phylogeny can be still reliably
established using morphology though highly derived forms will continue
to defeat us. Thus, we can be fairly sure of the broad lines of
archosaur phylogeny. The archosaurs are divided into two great lines,
the Pan-Crocodylia, represented today by the crocodiles and the Pan-Aves
represented, today by the birds. Pan-Aves appears first in the fossil
record in the form footprints from the Early Triassic of Poland, a
primitive quadrupedal form from around 249 Mya and a fully bipedal form
from around 246 Mya. Both these sets of footprints have been attributed
to dinosauromorpha suggesting within 3-6 million years of the
catastrophic Permian-Triassic transition the Pan-Aves had already split
into their two great clades, Pterosauromorpha represented by
Scleromochlus and the pterosaurs on one side and Dinosauromorpha on the
other. The Dinosauromorpha rapidly radiated first spawning the basal
lineages like the Lagerptonids (Lagerpeton and Dromomeron) and a
succession of clades closer to the crown dinosaurs, like Marasuchus,
Saltopus and the widely distributed sillesaurids. While what appear to
be the basal-most sillesaurids, like Lewisuchus are carnivorous, the
crown sillesaurids are clearly herbivorous. The dinosaurs themselves can
be divided unequivocally into two major lineages, the ornithischians and
the saurischians. The saurischians in turn can be unambiguously divided
into theropods and sauropodomorphs.

In this broad phylogenetic framework, which is likely to be correct, we
can confidently state that the ancestral dinosauromorph was a
carnivorous animal similar to the ancestral archosauriform that spawned
the great radiation of archosauriformes almost immediately after the
catastrophic Permian-Triassic extinction event. However, in the
dinosauromorph lineage there were several independent acquisitions of
the herbivory. As noted above the sillesaurids probably mark the the
first such transition known to us and had already taken place before 242
Mya as indicated by Asilisaurus from the Manda beds of Tanzania. With
the origin of dinosaurs there were more such transitions. Whereas the
earliest sauropodomorphs like Eoraptor and Pangphagia were probably
omnivores in the least, the complete transition to herbivory happened
rapidly within sauropodmorpha. In the case of the ornithischians, we do
not know of mode of nutrition of the basal-most form Pisanosaurus, but
the heterodontosaurids had already transitioned at least partially to
herbivory.

For long, the understanding had been that the transition to herbivory in
theropods happened only within ornithomimosaurs, birds and perhaps
oviraptorosaurs. There was one more enigmatic clade of theropods, the
therizinosaurs, that looked like possible herbivores – they were so
aberrant that early workers saw them as a distinct clade of dinosaurs or
even a transitional group between basal sauropods and ornithischians in
a clade termed phytodinosauria or a monophyletic group of herbivorous
dinosaurs. However, more recent studies have firmly placed them inside
coelurosauria, along with the other herbivore-containing clades like
birds, ornithomimosaurs, and oviraptorosaurs. A recent analysis by Zanno
and Makovicky confirmed the pervasive herbivory in these clades and also
suggested that the troodontid Jinfengopteryx might be a herbivore. Based
on their results, they suggested that the crown-ward coelurosaurians,
after the separation of the tyrannosaurs and compsognathids were
predominantly herbivorous with hyper-carnivory only secondarily evolving
in the deinonychosaurs. While, the secondary evolution of
hyper-carnivory of the deinonychosaurs may be questioned, it is clear
that the crown-ward coelurosauria had a propensity for repeatedly
evolving herbivory.

In contrast, the more basal theropods were, to date, considered to be
largely hyper-carnivorous with very rare emergence of herbivory as seen
in the case of the ceratosaur Limusaurus (and likely the related
Elaphrosaurus). But a new twist to the story has emerged with the
publication of a preliminary description of Chilesaurus from the Upper
Jurassic Toqui Formation, Chile, of the Tithonian age. It occurs in a
late Jurassic fauna along side basal crocodiles and sauropods of the
diplodocid and titanosaurian clades as indicated by fragmentary remains.
This is one of the most remarkable dinosaurs I have ever come across and
displays a striking chimera of features described by Novas et al:  
● A short deep premaxilla with a rugosity indicative of a covering by a
keratinous beak over the upper jaw is vaguely reminiscent of an
ornithischian rather than a theropod.  
● A short deep dentary, with a down-turned symphyseal region, which is
typical of herbivorous saurischians.  
● The teeth are rod-like and blunt, typical of herbivores, and
reminiscent of sauropodomorph teeth.  
● The limb bones are stout, as in sauropodomorphs.  
● The hands are like theropods with digits I and II being fully
functional with terminal unguals. However, digit III is degenerate with
only a slender metatarsal and a single minute phalanx. Thus, Chilesaurus
appears to have been convergently two-fingered like Tyrannosaurus and
its close relatives.  
● The pubis is fully retroverted like in ornithischians, therizinosaurs
and dromeosaurs.  
● The trunk is long and reminiscent in a general way of the ceratosaurs
Elaphrosaurus or Limusaurus.  
● The tarsus resembles basal saurischians.  
● The foot approaches the tetradactyl condition of early
sauropodomorphs, ornithischians and derived therizinosaurs.  
● The cervical and anterior dorsal vertebrae have pneumatic fossae
suggesting that these vertebra were associated with diverticula of the
cervical airsacs and the lungs, suggesting an airsac layout typical of
saurischians.

[![Chilesaurus](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/chilesaurus.jpg?w=453&h=709)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/chilesaurus.jpg)

Novas et al performed several phylogenetic analysis with different data
matrices and all of them indicated that this bizarre dinosaur was nested
inside Theropoda; their preferred position is that of Chilesaurus as a
basal tetanuran. This suggests that right at the base of a clade
considered to be primitively hyper-carnivorous we have a herbivorous
form. The unusual morphology of Chilesaurus raises the question if this
phylogenetic position might be right. Indeed, if it were not for an
articulated skeleton the individual elements would have looked like
coming from distantly related dinosaurs. The recovery of Chilesaurus
inside Theropoda with different datasets generally suggests that the
theropod position is likely, though within Neotheropoda there could
still be room for some doubt. Interestingly, it appears to be convergent
with respect to the therizinosaurs and a genuine close relationship to
them appears to be very unlikely. Importantly, it brings back focus on
the fragmentary Chinese form, Eshanosaurus, which the authors do not
address. Eshanosaurus was reported to be an early Jurassic
therizinosaur. While this affinity has been questioned, even the
conservative and regressive English paleontologist, Barrett, who
performed a very thorough analysis of Eshanosaurus, concluded that it
might be a therizinosaur after all. Now with the discovery of forms like
Chilesaurus with features generally reminiscent of therizinosaurs we
know with certainty that there was an early clade of potential basal
tetanurans that possessed therizinosaur-like features. Could
Eshanosaurus be a member of this clade or yet another theropod
converging on to such an anatomy? It does look rather plausible.

In ecological terms, Chilesaurus comes from a time when dinosaur faunas
are considered to be rather uniform throughout the world, with the small
to medium sized herbivore guilds dominated by ornithischians. However,
in the South American Toqui Formation we see Chilesaurus to be the
dominant herbivore in the lower size range as indicated by its relative
abundance in the fossil record from this stratum. Thus, it brings home
how little we really know of dinosaur evolution and biogeography.
Importantly, it shows how much more frequent the switch to herbivory was
in dinosauromorpha, including basal theropods.
