+++
title = "A geopolitical round up: last week of Nov 2015"

+++
Many turns of the sun ago, when we were still a kid in school, we had
some classmates who had an unbridled admiration and enthusiasm for the
Anglosphere and a rather deep-seated self-identification with it. While
their English had little in it to commend itself, they felt more
American than Indian. From New York to San Francisco they would know of
all places great and small in the leader nation of the Anglosphere and
imagine themselves as part of its existence – living out a vicarious
American life via the medium of movies, cartoons, picture-books, and
dime novels. We, in contrast, held the view that the Anglosphere was to
be much feared and excluded from the cultural, politico-theoretical, and
self-definitional landscape of the Hindu to the maximum extent possible.
While not denying the fact that its language has become the dominant
language of expression in the world, we believed it is should seen as a
vyāvahārika bhāṣā rather than something more visceral, where one is more
at home with Shakespeare or Twain rather than the itihāsa-purāṇa.

Some of our classmates came to adopt our views, albeit with a lack of
self-study, much like several scientists these days find it expedient to
copy our findings and pass them as their own without a deeper
understanding. This latter set of classmates needed a strong pole of
attraction to counter that of the Anglosphere, which they could not find
in the Hindu dharma because of their deracination. Hence, over the
matter of an year or two they gravitated towards the Rus. Similar was
the situation of udraśmikeśa, that giant among men, who felt torn
between his in absentia Americanness and his patriotic urges, which were
placed in the Rus rather than his own nation. We had our own soft corner
for the Rus because they provided us with unparalleled educational
material in the sciences and mathematics, which the Anglosphere
intentionally tried to keep out of the Hindu’s hands in India by virtue
of its exorbitant pricing. But increasingly we realized that the Rus
would be defeated by the Anglosphere and there was no point putting our
lot with that of the Rus – it could sink us with them. We greatly feared
this event because we realized that without the Rus weaponry the Hindus
were pretty weak for we were rather incapable of making astra-s,
nālikā-s, varma-ratha-s and vimāna-s for ourselves. At the same time,
unlike our classmates, we feared that Hindus attaching themselves to the
Anglosphere could do them even greater harm. Indeed, it came to pass and
the Rus empire collapsed at the end of 1991.

While we survived the collapse of the Rus, we cannot be sure that we are
doing too well for we are quite vulnerable to the Anglosphere and the
marūnmattas, and they are going to get serious with us quite soon.
Because we have developed āṇavāstra-s they act as a deterrent for a
direct strike on us. However, the ekarākṣasavādin-s have perfected the
art of getting us by other means. It is against this background that the
fall of the Rus interested us – the same methods which the mleccha-s
perfected against the Rus are deployed against us. Seeing the fall of
the Rus empire and the sneaking in of Yeltsin, we realized that the
mlecchas had put in place long-term measures to completely finish off
the Rus and make them geopolitically insignificant. When Putin revived
the Rus, some said the Rus had found their feet again. But we felt that
Putin might not be able to stem the slide. Rather, he would only
incite the western mleccha-s headed by the Anglosphere to deploy the
next round of action against the Rus. This indeed came in the form of
Georgia and Ukraine. But Putin’s resolute action in both places
minimized the damage. At least on the Georgian front the Rus seem to be
making good advance. But we always suspected that a much older
fault-line would be revived.

Rolling back the reel of history we may place ourselves in the 1800s.
The English were at the height of their power. In 1814 they had burned
down Washington DC sending the message to their American cousins as to
who was the boss in the Anglosphere. In 1815 the English lead a mleccha
alliance to rout the French and interred Napoleon in an island in the
middle of the Atlantic. Between 1818-1821 they completed the conquest of
India. Flushed with triumph they played their age old card of the
śava-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi, which they had been doing from the days of
Suleyman kānūni the Osman Sultan or Moulay Ismail the Bloodthirsty of
Morocco. Now the English used the Osman Turks as a front end to limit
Rus westward ambitions. As the Rus smashed the Turk navy at Sinop the
English entered the war together with the French on the side of the
Mohammedan Khalifa to attack the Rus. Several Rus towns in Crimea were
taken by the English and French by the end of the war in 1856 despite
strong action of the Rus generals. The Rus even eventually lost Russian
America (Alaska) because they feared its conquest by the English in the
aftermath of this war. However, the notable point in the war was that in
total France lost much more men than the English and Austria also
suffered major losses from the war despite its marginal involvement.
This is something the Anglosphere perfected – their enthusiatic allies
end up losing much more than themselves in any conflict which
Anglosphere engineers. It also illustrated how the Anglosphere in
particular and more generally the western mleccha-s could effectively
use the marūnmatta-s to multiply the force against their rivals (Just as
in India both the French and the English tried to use the Mohammedans as
a glove to punch the Hindus). Reeling forward we come to 1939 when the
wily English, who had built up Poland into considering itself bigger
than its real strength, nudged Germany into war on the continent. The
French hoped that the Turks might turn against Germany. Hence, they let
things slide when the Turks held a false referendum in the
French-controlled Hatay province of Syria and annexed it. Since then it
has been an integral part of Turkey though claimed by Syria.

Against this backdrop we come to the current era. Seeing their action
against the Rus as being inconclusive in Georgia and Ukraine due to
Putin’s resolute action, the Anglosphere decided to up the ante. They
had earlier facilitated the rise of the new Islamic Khalifa and other al
Qaeda affiliates in Syria to overthrow al Assad probably to help their
ally and civilizational guide the agravātula-s, and their dear friends
from the hellhole of Saud. They hoped that the Rus fearing the loss of
Syria, their conduit to West Asia, would intervene. Their objective was
to catch the Rus in a quagmire with the marūnmatta-s and destroy them,
even as they had done in the Afghan war. The Rus indeed responded and
their swift action seemed to put both the Khalifa and other Mohammedan
terrorists backed by the Anglosphere on the retreat. But the Anglosphere
aided by the agravātula-s kept backing them hoping to make it hot for
the Rus. First, we cannot put it above the Anglosphere that their
devices ultimately helped the Khalifa’s forces to knock the Rus
passenger jet out of the sky – it is interesting that they announced
that the Khalifa had knocked out the Rus airplane even before the Rus
themselves. Seeing that this was only increasing the Rus resolution to
knock the wind out of the marūnmatta-s, they brought to play the Crimean
war game yet again. Using Turkey as the front end they delivered a
humiliating punch to the Rus by having the Turks down their Su-24
followed by jihād and A-O-A-yelling ghāzīs performing qatl of one of the
Rus airmen. This was immediately followed by a downing of one of the Rus
rescue helicopters with the help of their Turkoman terrorist allies and
the killing of one more of their soldiers. This attack on the Rus was
followed by the Anglosphere along with their vassals (the NATO) firmly
backing the Turks against the Rus even as in the Crimean war. To add
insult to injury, even as the Anglosphere and its vassals do to us when
we are episodically slapped by the Mohammedans, they asked the Rus to
show restraint. Thus, if Rus has to save face it will have to be able to
fight the Anglosphere with its vassals. With this the Anglosphere has
pulled off a big one against the Rus. We suspect that this move could
well be the turning where the Rus are drawn into what the Anglosphere
has been waiting for all this time – a situation where they could use
marūnmatta-s and assorted vassals as a glove to punch the Rus into
oblivion. Would this be the outcome? We feel this time it might not be
so straightforward. Nor are things going to be easy for the Rus for they
have not really proven themselves in offensive wars. The experiences of
Napoleonic France and Nazi Germany have taught the Anglosphere that it
is unwise to pursue to Rus into their backyard but drawing them into a
distant conflict especially in the west Asian quarter could still prove
a useful strategy to defeat them.

Why should we be bothered about all this? Let us not fool ourselves: the
Anglosphere is the primary obstacle for the existence of an independent,
expansive, powerful Hindu state. First and foremost, they have installed
Mohammedan gloves in the form of the terrorist states of Pakistan and
Bangladesh in the subcontinent to be used while punching us. Second,
they send out and support kravyasādhaka-s to undermine Hindus within the
boundaries of residual India. Third, they export bad ideas which befool
Hindus and foment trouble in the Indian state via their first
responders. Some of these are methods that they have perfected against
the Rus in some form. It should be kept in mind that this is all just
the beginning. The torrid time they are giving the Lāṭeśvara’s
government is part of the Anglosphere’s action to prevent even a quarter
resolute government from taking root in India. What they want is a
mūḍha, like the substance-addled Rahula Mlecchikāputra, who can
continue the tradition of the Indian Yeltsin, installed earlier in the
form of the bald Sikh. We strongly suspect that in the coming days we
will see the marūnmatta-s being deployed against against India. In the
future if the Hindus perchance grew a spine and decided to put
ekarākṣasavādin-s in place in Bhārata then we will have the
Anglosphere come to their aid even as they are now standing behind
Turkey.
