+++
title = "The testosterone tradeoff"

+++
In numerous jawed vertebrates testosterone appears to play an important
role in courtship, aggression, and territorial defense, particularly by
males. It is very likely that last common ancestor of jawed vertebrates
already used testosterone in such capacity. The jawless vertebrates do
not seem to use testosterone as their primary male hormone but they
might use related steroids like androstenedione in a similar capacity.
However, there have been some suggestions that testosterone might act as
a pheromone in some lampreys. Whatever the case, the fixation of this
steroid and the basic behavioral pattern regulated by it appear to have
emerged after the split of the jawed and jawless vertebrates from their
common ancestor, though related steroids might have functioned in the
vertebrate common ancestor itself in a similar capacity. The expression
of male ornaments and behaviors targeted to elicit female interest are
under the control of testosterone across vertebrates – horns, bright
colors, songs are all induced by testosterone secreted from the testes.
Given that sexual selection by female choosiness tends to act on these
manifestations one question is would there be selection for males with
increasing testosterone levels. Studies by Ketterson et al using the
sparrow-like bird the junco have thrown light on various tradeoffs
imposed by testosterone.

***Testosterone, polygyny and cuckoldry***  
A classic tactical fork faced by a male vertebrate like a junco with
territorial behavior and parental care is whether to form a long term
pairing with a single female or whether to attempt to inseminate many
females. At first sight the latter tactic might seem the obvious winner.
Among birds, species with persistently high levels of testosterone
throughout the mating season tend to sing more and mate with multiple
females. However, juncos, like other examples across the vertebrate
tree, are nominally monogamous, with biparental care, though not without
extra-pair copulations. It would hence, appear that some tradeoff might
be involved. The effects of exogenous testosterone implantation in male
juncos was used to assess the role of the possible tradeoffs involved.
The males with testosterone implantation, as opposed to those with
control null implantation, flew around a wider swath of territory, sang
more and attempted courtships with more females. However, they unlike
the controls did not provide much help in chick-rearing to their
females. This responsibility landed mostly on the females unlike in
natural situation were both parents are involved. However, measures of
female fecundity showed no significant decreases from the
non-participation of their males. This meant that the tradeoff in the
case of juncos was not coming from any lowering of fitness from lack of
paternal contribution to chick-rearing. It was also observed that the
male with implanted testosterone tended more frequently to father chicks
on females of males from adjacent territories. Thus, they were indeed
accruing more fitness from extra-pair copulations than the control
birds. However, it was also observed that they themselves were getting
cuckolded more often by other males unlike the control birds. It was
noted that the fitness gained from extra-pair copulations was balanced
by the fitness lost due to cuckolding.

***Testosterone and immunity***  
Several experiments have shown that elevating testosterone by extrinsic
administration tends to suppress the humoral and cell mediated acquired
immune responses that are typical of jawed vertebrates. This
relationship between testosterone and immunity is relevant to a widely
studied and well-known hypothesis in animal biology known as the
immunocompetence handicap hypothesis (IHH). This derives from the
signaling theory that posits that signals, which are used by males to
indicate their quality to females, should be costly to ensure honesty.
If this were not the case they can also be displayed by low quality
males, which lack the wherewithal for such signals, there by defeating
their very purpose. Thus, the signals of the male have to come with an
associated handicap that only a good quality male would have the
wherewithal to overcome and still show the signal. As per the IHH the
elevated testosterone levels that are need to express the sexual
ornaments and behaviors come at the cost of lowering immunity. This
could lead to increased susceptibility to infections – thus testosterone
cuts both ways. Hence, a poor quality male would not be able to cheat by
merely elevating testosterone because it will also knockdown his
immunity, render him prone to infection, and thereby make him unable to
sustain the higher grade ornaments or aggression displays. In contrast,
only a genuinely good quality male will be able to tide over the
testosterone immunity handicap and still show his ornaments or
aggressive displays.

In another set of experiments using the junco model the levels of
endogenous testosterone through the mating season were measured and
compared with the endogenous concentration of complement and
total immunoglobulin IgG concentration in blood. The latter two were
seen as proxies of innate immunity, which represents the readily
available immune capacity to neutralize pathogens. It was observed that
there was a good negative correlation in the male birds between
testosterone and the two proxies of innate immunity. Other experiments
on the junco had also shown that injections of testosterone in males
resulted in lowered humoral and cell-mediated acquired immunity
suggesting that effect of testosterone probably affects all arms of the
immune response. Thus, birds with higher testosterone had a lower
immunity – given this situation only a male with really good quality
would be able to sustain a high testosterone mating season because a
lower quality male would succumb to the ravages of infection.
Importantly, it was found that both the above measures of innate
immunity were positively correlated with the mass of the male bird.
Thus, lighter males had weaker immunity and elevation of testosterone on
this background could weaken it even more, making it difficult for him
to falsely signal his quality before falling to infection. Hence, in
line with the IHH the immunity cost imposed by testosterone allows for
honest signaling.

***Testosterone and female choosiness***  
When sexual selection operates on high testosterone induced traits there
will be tendency for the genetics of female choosiness to get linked to
the genetics to the sexually selected traits in the male. Given that the
genetic control of testosterone levels might be generic, selection for
its elevation in males of the species would hence lead to elevation in
the females. This could potential constrain sexual selection for
testosterone associated traits in the male if elevated testosterone
starts having negative effects on the females. In the junco model it was
observed that implantation of testosterone into the females to elevate
their levels resulted in them becoming less choosy between males with
elevated or normal testosterone level. Thus, if sexual selection of
traits associated with elevated testosterone were to occur it would be
nullified by the loss of female choosiness with increasing testosterone.

In conclusion the junco experiments suggest that the elevation of
testosterone potentially comes with multiple tradeoffs – elevated risk
of cuckoldry, lowered immunity, and unintended side-effect in the form
of reduced female choosiness. Thus, the junco has probably converged to
an optimum, elevation beyond which is deleterious. Given certain
similarities in the mating system of the junco with modern humans, and
the conservation of the testosterone system in jawed vertebrates, some
these observations are indeed relevant to us. Of course we are a social
ape with a long history of such sociality in the primate tree and breed
throughout the year. This adds additional factors but some of basic
responses remain very much the same. It is common to believe that
tendencies towards monogamy in humans result from selection for shared
parental care. This is not entirely supported because in most mammals
the female provides the bulk of the parental care, with male, if
involved at all, playing a primarily protective role against rival males
who may kill his offspring. The possibility that risk of cuckoldry as in
the case of the junco could be a major factor favoring tendencies of
monogamy in extant *Homo* should be considered. In this regard, one may
also ponder over the effects of modern Anglospheric social engineering
and the kind of males and females they are favoring.
