+++
title = "Some thoughts on Shridhar Ketkar and other Hindu responders to Abrahamism in the past twoxa0centuries"

+++
[A version of this article was published originally at India
Facts](http://indiafacts.co.in/historical-hindu-responses-abrahamism/)

The Hindu encounter with Abrahamism began with the initial expansions of
the second (Christ cult) and third (Mohammedanism) versions. Hindus
figured among the early victims of the second Abrahamism in the holy war
of Gregory in the region of Armenia, which had a Hindu colony and rulers
of Hindu descent in the early part of the 300s of the common era.
However, being far away from the West Asian epicenter of Abrahamism,
India remained by and large secure from Abrahamistic depredations until
Mohammedanism arrived with a bang at the inception of the Arab Jihads on
India. Despite debacles in the Sindh and what is today northern
Afghanistan and Tajikistan, the battle of Rajasthan kept India largely
safe until the Turks became the spear-head of the Army of Islam’s
assault on India with the invasions of Mahmud Ghaznavi that took place a
millennium ago. Since then the Hindus have been involved in a
life-and-death struggle with the third Abrahamism. With the Portuguese
aggression under Vasco da Gama in the late 1400s, Mohammedanism was
joined by the cult of Jesus in the assault on India. This is rather
appropriate since a hadithic prophesy claims that the final Jihad on
India will also involve a resurrected Jesus joining the war (Ghazwa al
Hind). By the early 1800s the second Abrahamism was to become a bigger
challenge than the third one, which had been dealt several defeats by
the resurgent Hindu empire of the Marāṭhā-s. While the Marāṭhā response
modulated the threat from the Portuguese and the French, it ultimately
failed against the English who became the primary spear-head of the
Christ cult in India. Things came to head with the first war of
independence in 1857 CE where the Indian army faced a catastrophic
defeat against the English and their Indian supporters. While the
Indians lost the war, they had at least made the English to be wary of
directly imposing the Jesus cult on them. Nevertheless, the English
covertly pursued this objective to undermine the sanātana-dharma.

Right from the early days of English entrenchment in India there were
number of responses to their attempts to foster the Christ cult in the
Indian population. Given that the Hindu struggle with Abrahamism is
still underway, we believe it is of some importance to study these early
responses, both for their positives as well as for their failings.
Unfortunately, Hindus have often unthinkingly adopted bad occidental
ideas to replace their own robust constructs. Hence, it is necessary pay
special attention in understanding the failings as we could end up
repeating them even today. Before the first war of independence one
response was that of Raja Ram Mohan Roy, who was heavily influenced by
both Islam and Christianity. As a result he sought to remodel Indian
religion on the lines of the Abrahamisms adopting their anti-iconic and
monotheistic traits.  
For instance this is exemplified in this statement:

“In conformity with the Precepts of our ancient religion, contained in
the holy Vedanta, though disregarded by the generality of moderns, we
look up to One Being as the animating and regulating principle of the
whole collective body of the universe, and as the origin of all
individual souls which in a manner somewhat similar, vivify and govern
their particular bodies; and we reject Idolatry in every form and under
whatever veil of sophistry it may be practised, either in adoration of
an artificial, a natural, or an imaginary object, The divine homage
which we offer, consists solely in the practice of the Daya or
benevolence towards each other, and not in a fanciful faith or certain
motions of the feet, legs, arms, head, tongue or other bodily organs, in
pulpit or before a temple.”

This had negative consequences in softening the stance of sections of
the Bengali elite towards the Abrahamisms. In contrast to Roy, others,
like the Vaṅga scholar Tarkapañcānana, correctly saw the encouragement
of Christianity as an ideological assault on the Hindus. Hence, they
focused on polemics, attacking the Christ and his cult to make them look
less appealing to the Hindus being enticed into conversion.

Roy and other Hindu responders also focused on reform within the dharma;
however, unlike Roy, reformers like Mahadev G Ranade and the jaina
Virchand Gandhi sought to make the dharma more resistant to attacks via
reform rather remodel in the Abrahamistic mold. MG Ranade additionally
focused on work to set right the Hindu historical narrative which had
been usurped by the English for their own agenda. Then there was
Dayananda Sarasvati, the founder of the Arya Samaj, who correctly
realized the importance of the Vedic roots of Hindu civilization and the
need to reconnect to the Veda-s for reinvigorating the Hindus. On the
downside he brushed aside the vast Hindu tradition that had accumulated
since the Veda-s and sought to show that all knowledge lay in the Vedic
corpus. Rather mistakenly, like some others he too turned against iconic
worship, which is an important binding force in Hindu society. The great
patriot Lokamanya Tilak also studied our Vedic roots but on a more
philologically grounded basis and sought to obtain evidence for the
antiquity of Hindu thought. He also endeavored to position Hindu thought
as a capable player in the arena of modern philosophical discourse,
which had been animated in Europe by the upheavals of Arthur
Schopenhauer, John Herschel, Herbert Spencer, Charles Darwin, and
Friedrich Nietzsche.

Finally, some took the attack back to the West projecting a cosmopolitan
form of the sanātana-dharma that was to eventually absorb all religions
and cults within it. Most prominent among these was the charismatic and
energetic svamin Vivekananda who conceived an expansive sanātana-dharma
based on his understanding of Vedānta. He saw a manifestation of Vedānta
that was capable to absorbing other religions:

“Ours is the universal religion. It is inclusive enough, it is broad
enough to include all ideals. All the ideals of religion that already
exist in the world can be immediately included, and we patiently wait
for all ideals to come in the future to be taken in the same fashion,
embraced in the infinite arms of the religion of the Vedanta.”

He posited that, long before the second and third Abrahamisms, the
bauddha dharma had spread as a universal religion. Thus, there were
comprehensive, older, and more uplifting missionary religions, which
were in turn were just sects of a much greater whole, the
sanātana-dharma. While the problems in svamin Vivekananda’s
understanding of the structure and the breadth of Hindu knowledge are
correctly brought up by traditional Hindus scholars, no Hindu doubts his
patriotic service or role in defense of the dharma, especially at a time
when it was girt by life-threatening attacks. His role in the Hindu
resurgence was the inspiration for many a Hindu in during the struggle
against the English and remains so for many in our era. Importantly, he
restored the spirit in the Hindus that they could again positively
influence the world as they had done in the past, and made them believe
that their eclipse under the British was merely a transient phase. Thus
he said: “The only condition of national life, of awakened and vigorous
national life, is the conquest of the world by Indian thought.”

While svamin Vivekananda is widely known for his contributions today,
some years after his death arose another remarkable Hindu responder,
Shridhar Venkatesh Ketkar, who is hardly known outside of Maharashtra.
His approach was perhaps the most distinctive one, that of a
sociological researcher and social theorist. Since, his work presents a
rather unique response, perhaps one of the earliest in the modern
academic mold, it is certainly worthy of more detailed consideration.
This is particularly relevant given the continuing assistance rendered,
overtly or covertly, to the assault on the sanātana-dharma by the
western academia and its followers. Ketkar belonged to the cittapāvana
brāhmaṇa sect whose roots lay in coastal Maharashtra. Early in his life
he was influenced by the Savarkar brothers and espoused ideas of a
violent struggle against the English tyranny. As a result he neglected
his studies for a while and came under British surveillance. However, in
due course he was drawn towards more academic pursuits and sought the
blessing and advice of Tilak. Inspired by his discussions with Tilak he
sought to pursue a PhD at the Cornell University, USA. To this end he
was partly funded by king Sayajirao Gaikwad of Baroda but had to
supplement his income in USA by working as a doorman at a hotel and a
traveling salesman to make do in the cold wastes of central New York. In
course of his PhD he studied history of caste in India which became the
subjection of his dissertation. Subsequently, on his way back to India,
he spent some time in England and wrote a follow up book titled “An
essay on Hinduism, its formation and future”. During this period he
befriended an intellectually inclined German-speaking Jewish woman of
the Kohen lineage who helped him with his research. Eventually, he
married her, bringing her into the Hindu fold as Shilavati.

On returning to India he became a prolific writer of both fiction, and
historical, economic and legal research. He traveled to south India and
Sri Lanka, where he gave several talks in Sanskrit on the topic of local
language education. As result of discussions with Andhran activists he
became committed to the cause of religionalism and linguistic
re-division of Indian into states. This in turn inspired him to devote
his efforts to a unique project in modern Indian literature, i.e.
creating a 23 volume encyclopedia, jṅāna koṣa, in the Marāṭhī language,
to encapsulate as much of human knowledge as he could. Tilak saw this as
a venture of great value, which could then be duplicated in other major
Indian regional languages to provide Indians with access to information.
Tilak had earlier noted that lack of access to knowledge was a major
impediment holding back the Hindus and stunting their response to the
English. He pledged support to Ketkar, and even hoped to write articles
for the jṅāna koṣa. However, Tilak died shortly thereafter before he
could contribute to it. Nevertheless, Ketkar labored with extraordinary
energy publishing the first volume in 1921 and finishing the 23 volumes
by 1927. He devoted one of the volumes to Vedic texts, knowledge in the
Vedic corpus, and the era of the old Indo-Aryans, topics which were of
much interest to both him and Tilak. One other volume was completely
devoted to the history of science, which he worked on with help from his
wife on German sources. He then decided to duplicate the encyclopedia
effort in the Gujarātī language and managed to produce one volume. He
had been critical of Mohandas K Gandhi’s handling of the nationalist
freedom movement \[Footnote 1\]. In turn Gandhi opposed Ketkar’s
Gujarātī encyclopedia effort. Disappointed with this Ketkar gave up on
the big plan of translation into other Indian languages; however, he did
visit and interact with the Andhran scholar Lakshmipati, who attempted a
comparable but not entirely complete effort in the Telugu language. His
restless labors were accompanied by declining health and he died from an
infectious complication arising from diabetes in 1937. In the years just
before his death he completed a history of the Sātavāhana-s (the
Andhra-s) and a work visualizing India as a successful nation and
civilization (“Victorious India”).

It is in his essay on Hinduism that we see the clearest exposition of
his response, which we shall consider in greater detail:

• He felt that by adopting the occidental term religion the Hindus were
constraining themselves to the narrow bounds within which the
Abrahamistic west operated. Hence, he felt that Hindus should return to
their own nuanced terminology using the terms dharma, mārga, sādhana,
mata saṃpradāya, and sādhya for which he tried to give rigorous
definitions based on Hindu tradition.

• After analyzing Christianity he emphasized that “Hindus do not accept
the interdependence of theology and morality” as the
Christian-conditioned occidental people do. Then he went on the contrast
the Ārya dharma, which he explicitly stated as being the Hindu-dharma
and the mleccha dharma to which the Christ cult belongs. At the end of
this analysis he concluded that Christianity can be regarded only as a
tribal tradition and thus cannot lay claims to universality which is
rather the domain of the Hindu dharma. He argued that while people might
state that the Hindu theory lacks a sense of a specific Hindu community,
it operates under the view of a world community and is thus truly
universal – he termed that the mānava consciousness.

• He presented a view summarized in this statement:  
“Hindu were developing not Hinduism \[i.e. a limited tribal theophratry
of Hindu people\], but a cosmopolitanism, a dharma for Humanity, but
were prevented by two heresies of Semitic origin.” The explanation of
how he intended the term Hinduism to be understood in this context in
the brackets is mine. Thus, despite adopting a completely different
socio-historical approach he converged on a view rather comparable to
svamin Vivekananda, namely that of the Hindu system being a universal
one. This, convergence in two thinkers independently of each other is
widely echoed in the thought of many Hindus who see their system as a
cosmopolitan one and strive to establish it in that form (often using
the quote “vasudhaiva kutuṃbakam: the whole world is verily a family” to
make this point).

• However, he did admit that Hindus had to a develop a consciousness of
separateness upon their encounter with the cults of Mohammad and Jesus
as they were were irreconcilable with the Hindu universalism.

• He pointed out the importance of brāhmaṇa-s as the natural leaders of
Hindu society because, to quote him: “The brāhmaṇa-s represented the
sciences, and the knowledge of dharma depended on the knowledge of the
sciences.” He hence suggested that the intentions of the brāhmaṇa-s had
been strongly maligned by the Christians with the purpose of undermining
the dharma of all Hindus. In this regard, also argued that adhikāra to
śruti recitation was not a significant issue as the adhikāra to
itihāsa-purāṇa was available to all Hindus and thereby provided them
with knowledge contained in the śruti , which was otherwise difficult to
access directly.

• Despite being cosmopolitan in outlook he believed that the dharma had
the power to unite a nations, even those which were not Hindus original.
In this regard he considered the case of Japan. After presenting a brief
history of the Japanese people and alluding to their old Kami religion
Ketkar states:  
“The Japanese did not accept the Chinese civilization in wholesale, but
accepted it in such a manner as to suit their needs. The Chinese thought
was accepted in the main and was used to systematize the local
traditions. The different legends of various growths were retold with
some principle as the basis. The old legends and traditions were not
annihilated, as is usual in the migration of “religions” but preserved…
The influence of the Chinese philosophy helped Japan to unify its cults
to some extent, but the influence of Indian thought and method was
greater in this direction. Japan was thoroughly changed by the influence
of Buddhism. But the Buddhism which influenced Japan was entirely
different from what was preached by Gautama. It was infact Hinduism
which was carried to Japan under the name of Buddha…In the year 552 AD
priests and images migrated to Japan but the foreign cult instead of
destroying the pre-existing cult absorbed it… Shinto was not deserted,
but was turned to account by Buddhism. Thus the Indian system became the
authorized interpreter of the old. The Indian system simply gave them
new knowledge and thus united all the various pre-existing cults. I say
that it was Hinduism which united the worships of Japan because the
doctrines which bound Japan together are the very things which Gautama
opposed. All that had been exorcised came back again.”

• In the above he saw the model for the global spread of the Hindu
dharma and saw this as the future. He wrote India’s contributions to the
world had not ended she had more to offer. He believed that future
belonged, not to Mohammedanism or Christianity, but to a cosmopolitan
variant of the Hindu dharma, which would unify India with the west in
addition to their shared Indo-European roots. Here too while adopting a
different approach he had converged to views not very different from
that of svamin Vivekananda. In his optimism regarding the success of
Indian civilization and the Hindu religion he might be compared to the
Greek thinker Georgios Gemistos Plethon who made a valiant attempt to
revive Hellenistic heathenism in the 13-1400s \[Footnote 2\].

The allure of Hindu cosmopolitanism expressed by these early thinkers is
still very much alive. Only recently the prime minister Narendra Modi
managed to institute the “International yoga day” on June 21st,the
summer solstice, a holy day for the heathens around the world. In his
speech to the UN the prime minister stated: “Yoga is an invaluable gift
of India’s ancient tradition. This tradition is 5000 years old. It
embodies unity of mind and body; thought and action; restraint and
fulfillment; harmony between man and nature; a holistic approach to
health and well-being. It is not about exercise but to discover the
sense of oneness with yourself, the world and the nature. By changing
our lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can help us deal with
climate change. Let us work towards adopting an International Yoga Day.”

In this speech, one cannot but catch a whiff of the same spirit
expressed by svamin Vivekananda and Ketkar of the Hindu dharma
contributing to the welfare of world. Indeed, this view is justified
because globalized yoga and globalized neo-vedānta (both pioneered by
svamin Vivekananda; and the latter also advocated by Ketkar as the
future cosmopolitan religiosity; \[Footnote 3\]) have widely contributed
to global health and the modern philosophy of consciousness. Both these
contributions have faced immense opposition from the cults of Jesus and
Mohammad – for example one might simply look up the controversies
created to tar something as innocuous as the yoga day. This notably
substantiates Ketkar’s view that the global spread of the dharma is a
natural consequence, which is only being prevented by these Abrahamistic
cults.

Armed with the advantage of hindsight and wider knowledge, how should we
evaluate these ideas today? First, we do agree that there is scope and
perhaps even necessity for the sanātana dharma to position itself as a
cosmopolitan tradition. However, this if done unthinkingly might only
end up harming the dharma. For instance, the exuberant tendency to see
Hindu signatures everywhere (e.g. the deriving California from
kapilāraṇya as was done by śrī Candraśekarendra sarasvati of Kanchi)
should be tempered with a more realistic approach to history. This is
indeed on positive message to be taken from the efforts of Ketkar.
Indeed, the Japanese example brought up by Ketkar should be given more
careful consideration. While there might be streams of the sanātana
dharma that are adopted more widely beyond the current Hindu circles
(there are already several examples of such, irrespective of what
traditional Hindus might think of them), it would be more apposite for
Hindus to instead be leaders and catalysts of heathen-world, encouraging
the revival and restoration of local heathen traditions, serving more as
a model, meta-template, and in some cases the “glue” rather than being
transmitters of their own practice as is. Unlike the old thinkers
discussed above, it is important to realize that the metaphysics of
neo-vedānta or yoga are pretty useless by themselves in serving as a
globalized version of the dharma. Rather the emphasis should be on
rituals, which will become rites and festivals of the state at large as
wellas local provinces, both in India and elsewhere.

However, on the downside we do hold that the earlier thinkers were
rather optimistic. The second and third Abrahamism and their secular
derivatives like Marxism, new atheism and liberalism have the quality of
being pathogenic meme complexes, which will not cease from harming the
dharma without an effective immune response. Given that: 1) the
Abrahamists might possess greater relative fitness, 2) large swaths of
infected territory are being lost, and 3) schemes like ghar vāpasī only
cure a limited number of people, it is important that attempts are made
to improve Hindu demographics to simply keep up in the struggle for
survival. Whether Hindus would succeed in this regard remains rather
uncertain due to various operational issues. Finally, like in any
pathogen-host or prey-predator system the Hindus are locked in an arms
race with these pathogenic memes. The party not innovating new
“weaponry” or evolving “resistance” to keep up in such a struggle
will eventually become extinct. Hence, just a demographic edge may not
be sufficient in the long run. Thus, even within India the vision of
attenuating and absorbing the Abrahamistic cults will remain
unattainable, unless the sanātana dharma re-acquires its aggressive
sword-arm. However, this “weaponry” or “resistance” is not just physical
but also memetic. It in this regard that neither the earlier thinkers
nor most modern Hindus give much thought. Hence, we posit that greater
attention to and development of new strategies for survival in the arms
race will be critical for Hindu survival, let alone global spread, in
the coming years.

::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1:  
Ketkar felt that Gandhi was a conduit for English manipulation of the
Indian freedom movement. He wrote:  
“He \[MKG\] began to praise Christ, and they \[Christian missionaries\]
began to praise him. He began to appropriate his conduct to missionary
expectations, and the desire of receiving their praise so much
influenced his life that he became what he became by that. The poison of
the praise of strangers affected his life to the detriment of his
people. He became, therefore, a dishonest leader of the Indian people,
the writer meaning, by dishonesty, having a desire in one’s mind other
than that of the success of the task one has undertaken. Even if a
person has a desire of maintaining the friendship, and earning the good
opinion, of the people he is contending against, he becomes dishonest to
his charge. Gandhi’s desire of being dubbed as a saint has spoiled the
cause which he espoused several times, although he temporarily got
praise from a section of the adversary community. Gandhi, in his South
African political work, was a complete failure, and the people in South
Africa say that he made the condition of Indians worse than before.
Inasmuch as Gandhi was helped a great deal in his work by the Government
of India, he had a good opinion about the British Government, and he
even explained to one Governor of Bombay the difference of that
character between him and Mr. Tilak.”

Footnote 2:  
A brief sketch of Plethon’s contributions might be found here:
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/02/10/the-end-of-the-heathens/>

Footnote 3:  
By neo-vedānta I mean the teaching of vedānta principles to non-Hindus
outside the traditional set up of the Vedic education or the monastic
education by maṭha-s (e.g. those founded by Śaṃkara, Rāmānuja and
Madhava among others).
