+++
title = "Lifting the veil of the megafaunal extinctions: South American nativexa0ungulates"

+++
Some memories are simultaneously pleasant and sad: One such is of the
many afternoons spent reading about the discovery and then the osteology
of South American mammals. It was then that we read with some awe of the
great deeds of Florentino Ameghino on the discovery of the mammalian
fauna of South America. The pleasantness of those memories comes from
being inspired, even a bit awed, by Ameghino’s meteoric and prolific
contribution to paleontology, which uncovered a genuinely lost Cenozoic
world, full of such unfamiliar mammals and dinosaurs attempting a
comeback that the northerner is simply left stunned by their
strangeness. Ameghino was the successor of Charles Darwin in South
America and the first to really understand the evolutionary theory in
Argentina. He came from a low class family and became a self-taught
biologist without any formal education while exploring the wilds and
collecting fossils as a child in Argentina. Upon reading Darwin’s works
he immediately realized its profound significance and wrote that biology
had finally become an exact science as he foresaw the role for
mathematical methodology in reconstruction of evolutionary histories.
While he was widely admired in his country as a brilliant man, even a
hero, the heavy hand of the the corpse-cult resulted in him never being
fully understood or followed by capable immediate successors. Indeed,
many in his country held the view that the evolutionary theory presented
by Darwin had “villainous consequences” upheld by the “laughable pride”
of his follower Ameghino. In course of his life of 56 years he published
24 volumes of papers, covering over 18000 pages, on fossil vertebrates
from Argentina. Among these was his magnum opus “Mammalian Fossils in
the Argentine Republic”, the first detailed work on the extraordinary
mammalian world of South America of over 1000 pages. Being isolated in
the southern hemisphere, with little direct understanding of the
northern faunas, he came up with some strange ideas like the origin of
humans in South America from a fossil primate, which in reality was an
ancestral New World monkey. Nevertheless, Ameghino’s study of humans in
South America led to one of the widely debated ideas in archaeology –
namely the human hand in the extinction of the megafauna of South
America (and more generally in all parts of the world where humans event
spread out of Africa).

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-fSq7G-DZeiA/VRegtfhvmCI/AAAAAAAADR8/JckOtLGub2Y/s800/megafaunal_extinction.JPG)  
From Sandom et al *Note that the territorial boundaries of India are
wrongly depicted by the white abettors of Mohammedan terrorism*;  
](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/o7ecDDp2x0F1_ufg3A34udMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

This dramatic event first discovered by Ameghino may be described
thus:  
● Around the Pleistocene-Holocene boundary 100% of the mammals 1000 kg
or greater in mass abruptly became extinct  
● 80% of large mammal species with mass over 44 kg became extinction  
● Only a small number of mammals below that threshold and no notable set
of plants became extinct.

Interestingly, certain plants adapted to the megafauna continue to
linger on as before: the Osage-orange tree with it is giant fruit which
were once dispersed by extinct elephants feeding on them; the Cassia
grandis tree whose fruits were consumed both by extinct giant sloths and
elephants; the honeylocust tree which has large spines high above the
ground to deter extinct elephants; the avocados whose fruits were
consumed by sloths and thus dispersed – this plant has found a second
life with human cultivation.

Thus, this extinction was unlike the other mass extinctions – while the
great extinctions like the K-Pg transition was marked by the death of
all dinosaurs above a certain mass, it also had mass-independent effects
with several small sized vertebrates, plants, mollusks and even
microbial eukaryotes taking a noticeable hit. This peculiar pattern of
the megafaunal extinction played out in all other parts of the world
with the spread of the hominids. The effects were particularly severe
outside of Africa and Asia where Homo appeared abruptly. Today the
weight of the evidence delivers what to us is a clear verdict: “Homo
stands accused in the mass extinction of megafauna.”

One could debate if the extreme form of the hypothesis, sometimes called
the “Blitzkrieg” version played a role but the evidence from the
Americas does point to relationship between emergence of particular
hunting tactics and megafaunal extinction. Genomic evidence suggests
that the first, and most prominent thrust of humans in to America was by
the group called the First Americans who entered via the Bering land
bridge from Northeastern Asia. With the exception of the Eskimos and
Na-dene groups, the majority of native Americans have entirely descended
from these First Americans. The recent sequencing of the genome of the
Anzick-1 boy from 12.7-12.5 kya (belonging to the first archaeologically
prominent human culture of North America, the Clovis culture) and
comparisons with other native Americans suggests that there was some
already diversification of among the First Americans descendants by this
time. This suggests that the First Americans might have entered North
America around 15 Kya or a little before that. Their descendants rapidly
advanced through the two American continents and appear to have been
hunter-gathers pursuing a wide range of foraging tactics, which involved
some hunting of megafauna coupled with exploitation of marine food along
the coast and plant-based subsistence. Among the descendants of the
First Americans the Clovis culture emerged in North America around 13
kya. This was marked by the development of a very distinctive type of
stone points, the Clovis points, that were hafted onto projectile
javelins. The emergence of this culture was accompanied by a major push
towards megafaunal hunting and was followed by complete extinction of
the megafauna by 10.37 Ky in North America. The influence of the Clovis
culture (either through diffusion of technology or the people) rapidly
entered Central and South America, where its presence is marked by the
emergence of the related Fishtail point that was similarly hafted on
projectile javelins. Like their North American Clovis counterparts, the
Fishtail hunters clearly targeted megafauna. Not unlike North America,
the emergence of the Fishtail point marked the beginning of the end of
the South American megafauna. Three items of note might be gleaned from
what is currently known regarding the emergence of these cultures: 1)
The emergence of the above hunting technologies are archaeologically
correlated with a deliberate targeting of large animals by the
Paleoamericans in both the northern and southern continents. 2) The
Clovis points are typically earlier than their southern Fishtail
counterparts. 3) The megafaunal extinction occurs first in the northern
and then in the southern continent, but in both cases is preceded by the
emergence of the distinctive hafted missile. Thus, irrespective of
whether it is considered a Blitzkrieg or not, the emergence of a
particular hunting technology and associated tactics, specifically
targeting large animals, was a major factor in their extinction in a
circumscribed temporal window. Some of these megafauna like the
carnivorans and sloths were capable of defending themselves at close
quarters – recently there was a report of how a hunter in Brazil was
killed by an anteater using its claws – their extinct relatives, the
large sloths could have similarly used their claws. However, the use of
projectile javelins along with fire by specialist hunters could have
over come these defenses. Finally, the rapid depletion of the megafauna
might have had a feedback effect on the Paleoamericans with the unified
Clovis/Fishtail system breaking up and giving way to a wide diversity of
local cultures with not much gene flow between them.

The casualties of the First American invasion of the continents spanned
a wide range of mammalian lineages. In the north there were:
[xenarthrans](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/03/03/some-musings-on-xenarthran-and-mammalian-evolution/)
including several lineages of giant sloths, glyptodonts and armadillos;
afrotherians including lineages of elephants (Cuvieronious, Mammut and
Mammuthus), perissodactyls including horses and tapirs; Artiodactyls
including camels, llamas, cattle, bisons, Ovibos, peccaries, several
deer and peccaries; cats including Homotherium, Smilodon, American
cheetah and American lion; dog-bears including dire wolves, the short
faced bear, and varieties of spectacled bears; giant rodents including
the capybaras – Neochoerus and Hydrochoerus. In the southern continent
some of the above such as peccaries, certain llamas, the spectacled
bear, tapirs, and one capybara survived the onslaught at least in
certain localities; however 50-60 species were lost in South America as
opposed to the estimated 30-40 in North American. Among these were a
huge chunk of xenarthran diversity including several lineages of sloths,
glyptodonts and armadillos; elephants like Stegomastodon and
Cuvieronious; perissodactyls including horses; some llamas, the deer
Morenelaphus and Antiger; similar carnivorans took a hit as the north,
including the gigantic short-faced bear Arctotherium; some capybaras;
the large New World monkey Protopithecus brasiliensis; most dramatically
the South American native ungulates (SANU) represented by forms like
Toxodon, Mixotoxodon, Xenorhinotherium, Macrauchenia, Hemiauchenia
completely vanished without trace. While many of the extinct megafauna
of South America descended from the northern animals, or have at least a
few living representatives (the xenarthrans) the SANU have no
identifiable relatives, living or extinct, elsewhere in the world. This
was the cause of sadness – a veil over the knowledge of their true
affinities – their anatomical uniqueness only making things worse.

South America was home to much strangeness over the Cenozoic: The
aftermath of the tumultuous closure of the Mesozoic left the marsupials
in [possession of much of the
continent](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/09/28/the-mystery-of-marsupials/ "The mystery of marsupials").
There they greatly diversified giving rise to several forms among which
chiefly, the sparassodonts occupied the carnivore guilds. These included
the early tree-climbing carnivore Mayulestes from Bolivia and the
related Allqokirus. They were followed by more advanced forms like the
Brazilian Patene from the end of Palaeocene emerge, and in the Eocene
the borhyaenoid sparassodonts spawned several massive forms such as
Callistoe, Arminiheringia and Proborhyaena which was larger than a
grizzly bear. By the Miocene these marsupials had diversified into a
range of carnivore niches: otter-like Cladosictis, a marten-like
Prothylacinus, a peculiar long-snouted ambush predator Lycopsis,
mongoose-like hathlyacynids, leopard-like Borhyaena, saber-toothed
Thylacosmilus resembling the saber-toothed cats and the probably
bear-like Pharsophorus. The Pliocene however saw their ultimate decline
and extinction. Interestingly, despite their diversity they were never
solely in possession of the carnivore niche. They were accompanied by
the theropods attempting a come back in the form of the [phorusrhacid
birds](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/02/the-affinities-of-the-phorusrhacids-and-the-second-attempt-of-the-dinosaurs/ "The affinities of the phorusrhacids and the second attempt of the dinosaurs")
and [sebecid
crocodiles](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/12/19/crocodiles-in-the-shadow-of-the-dinosaurs/ "Crocodiles in the shadow of the dinosaurs").
The rest of the South American mammalian radiations were those of
placentals. Of these the
[xenarthrans](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/03/03/some-musings-on-xenarthran-and-mammalian-evolution/)
were an exclusively South American clade, which from early on (i.e. the
glyptodonts) as though responding to the predation from the phorusrhacid
birds developed armor and even spiked tail clubs, thus converging to
strategies of the Mesozoic ankylosaurs against bipedal theropod
predators (also mirrored by [meiolaniid
turtles](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/03/01/meiolaniid-turtles/ "Meiolaniid turtles")).
Some placentals reached South America from the Old World, probably
floating across the paleo-Atlantic from Africa. These included the two
related clades the rodents and the primates. The rodents, while
typically small animals on other continents, appear to have undergone a
major ecological release in South America giving rise to gigantic forms
like Josephoartigasia (\~3 meters; 800 kg or more), Phoberomys (\~3
meters; \~700 kg), Telicomys (\~2.5 meters; 600 kg) and Chapalmatherium
(1.7 m; 200 kg). They appear to have taken the place, in part, of the
ungulate herbivores in several South American ecosystems. However, along
side them were the SANU which were ecologically indistinguishable from
the ungulates of the Old World and North American ecosystems.

Five major lineages of SANU have been recognized: Notoungulata,
Litopterna, Astrapotheria, Pyrotheria and Xenungulata. Their fossils
were first identified by Darwin but the real extent of their remarkable
radiation in South America became apparent only due to the prolific
studies of Ameghino who had a penchant for naming his discoveries after
scientists with both the first and the last names. Among these, was
Carolodarwinia, a notoungulate. More recent studies have shown that the
earliest ungulates that appear in South America are the members of a
clade known as the Mioclaenids, which are represented by the early
Paleocene Tiuclaenus from Bolivia, known from a lower jaw and fragments
of the upper jaw. These could very well be the stem members of the SANU
(as proposed by the famous mammalogists Muizon and Cifelli) appearing
shortly after then end of the Cretaceous.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-9r9zzJMp5oc/VRegsTo7n4I/AAAAAAAADRs/ii6ygFfvZFY/s800/Notoungulates.JPG)  
a Toxodon (Toxodontidae); b Typotheriopsis (Mesotheriidae); c
Paedotherium (Hegetotheriidae); d Nesodon (Toxodontidae); e
Protypotherium (Interatheriidae); f Homalodotherium (Homalodotheriidae);
g Scarrittia (Leontiniidae); h Rhynchippus (Notohippidae); i
Thomashuxleya (Isotemnidae); From Patterson and Pascual  
](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/QH56oFU4o_gkjl6qFclIZtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The notoungulates were the most speciose of the SANU and radiated into
an astoundingly wide range of clades namely: \[1) Henricosborniidae\];
\[2) Notostylopidae\]; \[3) Isotemnidae; 4) Homalodotheriidae; 5)
Leontiniidae; 6) Notohippidae; 7) Toxodontidae\];\[ 8)
Oldfieldthomasiidae; 9) Interatheriidae; 10) Archaeopithecidae; 11)
Mesotheriidae; 12) Archaeohyracidae; 13) Hegetotheriidae\]  
The square brackets indicate what have been recovered as monophyletic
higher order clades by the morphologists. Of these the first two are
basal lineages and are seen in the Paleocene deposits from Brazil about
10 Mys after the cataclysmic close of the Mesozoic. By around 35 Mys in
the Eocene they had radiated into at least nine of the above clades
suggesting a notable diversification over the Eocene. By this time they
had achieved considerable morphological diversity taking the ecological
niches occupied by perissodactyls and artiodactyls in the Old World. On
one end of the spectrum, forms like Toxodon converged on to a rhino-like
morphology. Related forms even convergently acquired horns: Adinotherium
a small one and Trigodon a large one. On the other end, interestingly,
the Hegetotheriids (e.g. Pachyrukhos) converged onto a rabbit-like
morphology acquiring both large gliriform incisors and long hind legs
which allowed them a saltatory mode of locomotion. Others like the
Homalodotheriid (Homalodotherium) converged on to an Old World
chalicothere-like morphology with a partially bipedal stance with clawed
fore-feet.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-HGAUSlIe4K0/VRegsc6Fe1I/AAAAAAAADRw/jbG5BdpRgVQ/s800/Litopterns.JPG)  
a Macruchenia (Macraucheniidae); b Astrapotherium ( Astrapotheria); c
Thoatherium (Proterotheriidae); d Theosodon (Macraucheniidae); e
Pyrotherium (Pyrotheria); From Patterson and Pascual  
](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/bWWyhK1LG3WPPCn4KiVXOtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The litopterns diversified into at least five distinct clades the 1)
Protolipternidae; 2) Notonychopidae; 3) Proterotheriidae; 4)
Macraucheniidae; 5) Adianthidae. They are first recorded in the form of
fragmentary remains from the Paleocene. The fragmentary Paleocene
Didolodontids also show dental and ankle features very similar to the
Protolitopternids suggesting that they might be another early clade of
litopterns. By the Eocene they had reached Antarctica as shown by the
fragmentary remains of Victorlemoinea but there is no evidence that they
ever reached Australia. This suggests that they probably extended into
Antarctica later than the marsupials. All litoptern ankles show evidence
for adaptation towards fast running. However, the Proterotheriids
evolved a morphology converging closely on horses with Thoatherium
evolving a single hoofed state just like their Laurasian counterparts.
The Macraucheniids were litopterns that convergently evolved a
camel-like morphology but with a proboscis. The last of these were the
victims of the megafaunal carnage with the coming of Homo. There were
also small litopterns represented by the Adianthids which might have
been fast-running forms generally horse-like in body plan.

The astrapotheres also appear in the Paleocene but became extinct at the
end of Miocene. During the Eocene they also invaded the Antarctica, but
like the litopterns never reached Australia, suggesting that they were
part of the same later extension of South American mammals into
Australia. The astrapotheres lost their upper incisors and probably had
a horny pad against which the lower incisors operated. The upper canines
evolved into tusks and the last two molars were enormous in size as
grinding teeth. The late Eocene astrapotheriids were relative small,
like the Scaglia a sheep-sized form and Albertogaudrya reaching the size
of a small tapir. By the Oligocene they were represented by the large 3
m long Astrapotherium with large tusks and a proboscis. They might have
been predominantly amphibious their lifestyle.

The pyrotheres were large SANUs which converged onto an elephant-like
morphology: They lost their canines but in their case the two upper and
one lower incisors on either side developed into tusks, while the six
grinding molariform teeth resemble those of the early elephants. They
appear first in the Middle Eocene represented by Colombitherium from of
Colombia which was about the size of a tapir. By the early Oligocene we
see the gigantic Pyrotherium with a skull of about a meter in length.
The pyrotheres share unusual features of their ear morphology with the
notoungulates suggesting that they might have been derived from the
latter.

The xenungulates are relatively obscure SANU that did not make it past
the Paleocene. They are currently, primarily known from two forms,
Etayoa and Carodnia. Etayoa shows similarities in teeth morphology to
the basal astrapotheriids suggesting a possible link between them.

While the monophyly of the individual higher order SANU groups shows
reasonable morphological support the relationships between them have
been debated by morphologists. Currently, one may say that none of the
proposed features strongly negate or support their monophyly into the
monophyletic clade Meridiungulata. Their relationships to the other
mammalian groups have also been debated. Some have proposed a
relationship with the Afrotherians, which have indeed independently
spawned the ungulate morphology in the form of the elephants and their
probable sister group Embrithopoda. Others have tried to link the
monophyletic Meridiungulata to the other great monophyletic clade of
South American mammals the
[Xenarthrans](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/03/03/some-musings-on-xenarthran-and-mammalian-evolution/).
Yet others, have seen the Meridiungulata as non-monophyletic but with
different groups related to various other mammalian groups – for
instance pyrotheriids and xenungulates have been linked to the
Dinocerata, another group of mysterious extinct ungulates from the
northern continents.

Against this backdrop a remarkable paper was published by Welker et al,
who used liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry to determine the
protein sequences of the two type I collagen subunits COL1α1 and COL1α2
from the bones of the notoungulate Toxodon and the litoptern
Macrauchenia. Strikingly, they managed to recover a good part of the
concatenated protein sequence (Macrauchenia: 89.4%; Toxodon: 91.0%),
which could then be used for direct estimation of phylogeny. Radiocarbon
dating of these bones showed that the Toxodon was around 12 Kys in age
while the Macrauchenia was radiocarbon dead suggesting that it was much
older. Based on the deamidation of glutamine they estimated the age of
the Macrauchenia specimen as being up to 200-300 Ky old. Their studies
also suggest that under such conditions collagen is likely to survive
maximum for about 4 Mys, indicating that the earlier reported
Tyrannosaurus rex collagen was an artefact. We had reached the same
conclusion based on the observation that the reported peptides of
Tyrannosaurus collagen could not be statistically distinguished from
bacterial low complexity proteins making their collagen status most
unlikely.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-BA5RcXa1n1c/VRegsYAOWnI/AAAAAAAADR0/gRjcGIaA_b8/s800/Collagen_tree.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/C4CJ14mdPU_RzGLfoZZCRNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Interestingly, despite collagens being low complexity proteins the
sequence obtained by the authors covering approximately 2,100 residues
produced a good mammalian tree. We were able to reproduce this ourselves
using their sequences and accordingly conclude that their results are
entirely believable and pretty robust. The verdict is rather
jaw-dropping: The litopterns and notoungulates are monophyletic, and in
turn are a sister group of extant perissodactyls: ((Litopterna,
Notoungulata),((tapirs,rhinos), horses)). They also sequenced the
collagens of an extinct South American horse from Tapalque, Argentina,
which vanished as a part of the megafauna extinction. This decisively
rules out any possibility of contamination of the Toxodon and
Macrauchenia remains by later perissodactyl collagen. Thus, molecular
methods have finally lifted the veil of the mystery of the affinities of
Litopterna and Notoungulata, dramatically indicating their membership to
the greater perissodactyl clade – a relationship that to our knowledge
was entirely unknown from morphological studies. Thus, it again
underscores how much of phylogeny we really have no clue about given the
inability of morphology-only methods resolve tree topologies obscured by
evolutionary convergence and extreme divergence.

The implications of this discovery are many – we do not intend to
discuss all of them here but briefly touch upon some of those:  
● The presence of Litopterna and Notoungulata in the Paleocene suggests
that their common ancestor was close to the Cretaceous-Paleogene
boundary. Given that these two SANU unite into clade at the base of
Perissodactyla, it implies that the stem perissodactyl had diverged from
its closest sister group in the Cretaceous itself. This in turn
overturns the theory of the O’Leary et al that the mammalian orders like
Perissodactyla emerged first as part of a radiation that occurred after
the great extinction at the K-Pg boundary around 66 Mya. Perissodactyla
is united with Cetartiodactyla (the second great clade of extant
ungulates and whales), Ferae (Carnivora+Pholidota; carnivorans and
pangolins), Chiroptera (bats) and Eulipotyphla (hedgehogs, moles and
shrews) into the higher order clade Laurasiatheria. This in turn means
that the primary radiation of Laurasiatheria happened in the late
Cretaceous. Thus, it brings the estimated time of this radiation with
the range of multiple estimates from molecular data which place it
typically in the 80-66 Mys window.

● However, it raises an interesting issue: While the monophyly of
Laurasiatheria is not in question, certain relationships within have
proven difficult to resolve even using molecular data. Within
Laurasiatheria, the molecular studies unequivocally place the
“insectivoran” clade of tiny mammals, the Eulipotyphla as the
basal-most radiation but the relationships between the remaining groups
Ferae, Chiroptera, Perissodactyla and Cetartiodactyla has been in a
state of flux. One early study united Ferae, Chiroptera and
Perissodactyla into Pegasoferae to the exclusion of Cetartiodactyla.
There is some support for this based on the insertion sites of the L1
retroposon. With large sequence sets other studies recovered Chiroptera
as an outgroup to Ferungulata (Ferae+Euungulata), and Euungulata uniting
the two ungulate clades – this is the tree recovered in some analysis of
Welker et al’s collagen data. Another study with 3733 protein-coding
genes recovered Perissodactyla as a sister-group of Ferae, and
Cetartiodactyla grouping with Chiroptera. This uncertainty, even with
massive amounts of molecular data, suggests that the radiation of crown
Laurasiatheria comprised of the above four groups was an explosive
phenomenon which occurred very rapidly with branching events happening
in quick succession. This kind of rapid cladogenesis would fit the
post-Cretaceous radiation of placentals following the “ecological
release” with the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs. However, the
above inference pointing to a pre-Cretaceous basal radiation of
Laurasiatheria giving rise to the above clades is at odds with this
scenario.

Furthermore, the anatomy of the potential basal-most Laurasiatherians
seen after the K-Pg boundary is not exactly consistent with them having
already occupied the niches typical of their extant representatives. We
would interpret many of the primitive Laurasiatherians as having
incipient, but not entirely developed, characteristics of the extant
forms. Thus, the basal ungulates (“condylarths”) seen shortly after the
K-Pg boundary depict some interesting features. The arctocyonids, while
ungulates, show dental features clearly related to carnivory – this
perhaps is an atavistic retention of features from their ancestor shared
with Ferae. Indeed, some of the carnivorous “condylarths” were the first
to occupy the large carnivore niche among the mammals. On the other
hand, some arctocyonids were not just carnivorous but also lightly built
and arboreal, making good candidates for the precursors of the
chiropterans. The basal Ferae were small carnivores, not unlike some of
the basal “condylarths”, in general body plan, except that they were not
hoofed. This suggests that the pre-Cretaceous explosive radiation of the
Laurasiatheres was unrelated to ecological release or even extensive
morphological diversification in response to occupation of distinct
niches. Rather it was more likely a radiation of small mammals without
any particular accompanying morphological specializations corresponding
to diverse niches. Even after the K-Pg boundary many of them appear to
have retained a mix of primitive features and their cladogenesis did not
necessarily go hand-in-hand with adaptations typical of their extant
representatives. Thus, among the primitive “condylarths” there is
probably a wealth of incorrectly understood affinities corresponding to
the ancestors of the extant groups.

● By establishing the monophyly of Litopterna and Notoungulata, the two
largest groups of SANUs, the collagen data raises the possibility of the
monophyly of the SANU as Meridiungulata. The three other groups show a
web of morphological features linking them one and other or to
Litopterna and Notoungulata. This, with the relatively limited presence,
suggests that they might after all be simply highly derived versions of
a monophyletic Meridiungulata. The linkage of SANU with Perissodactyla
indicates that they were derived from within Laurasiatheria after they
had undergone their basal radiation in the Cretaceous. When exactly did
this happen and how did they reach South America? A clue for this
emerges from the observation that the titanosaurian sauropod dinosaur,
Alamosaurus, of the largest ever land animals, reached North America
from South America. Likewise, certain hadrosaurs and enantiornithine
birds might have also been exchanged in the late Cretaceous between
North and South America. This suggests that there was period of brief
faunal exchange between the two continents in the late Cretaceous. We
suspect that the ancestor of Litopterna and Notoungulata reached the
South America in the same period, probably along with the ancestor of
the southern marsupials and some dinosaurs. This might indirectly
support the monophyly of Meridiungulata, given the limited opportunities
for reaching the otherwise isolated South America. This also implies
that the mioclaenids and didolodontids were indeed basal SANU, which
retained the general “condylarth” morphology of their northern
counterparts. We do not know for how long such exchanges took place and
if there were any back migrations. Some workers have proposed that the
northern Arctostylopids, with a general hyrax-like body plan, might have
been back migrating Paleocene notoungulates. However, this needs to be
viewed with circumspection.

1\) Global late Quaternary megafauna extinctions linked to humans, not
climate change; Christopher Sandom, Søren Faurby, Brody Sandel,
Jens-Christian Svenning; Proceedings B  
2\) Ancient proteins resolve the evolutionary history of Darwin’s South
American ungulates; Welker et al; Nature  
3\) The fossil mammal fauna of South America; Patterson and Pascual; The
Quarterly Review of Biology  
4\) The Placental Mammal Ancestor and the Post–K-Pg Radiation of
Placentals; O’Leary et al Science
