+++
title = "The dream motif"

+++
Vidrum was nearing the road to his house. Instinctively, he felt his
backpack and found it to be unzipped. Then to his utter disappointment
he found that his box containing geometric instruments was missing.
Anxious to get it back he started retracing his path to the school. He
finally reached the road where his intuition told him that it might have
fallen off. So he got off his bike, parked it, and started slowly
walking along the footpath scanning the side of the street. Just as his
hopes were fading he heard a girl call out to him in a vaguely familiar
voice: “Are you looking for something?” He looked up and saw two
charming girls riding their bikes towards him. One of them he recognized
as the new girl in his class who had just joined the school. The other
one was a bit shorter but resembled the first one in her features.
Looking at them he said: “Yes, I have lost my geometry box. It seems to
have fallen out of my bag, may be somewhere on this road.” They gave him
the box saying: “Here it is. We found it further up the street even as
we were riding along.” Then the elder one said: “I am sorry I don’t know
your name but I believe that you are in my class.” Vidrum knew her name
as she was clearly well-endowed in her appearance and had also made
herself rather prominent in class by being the only girl who would solve
rather difficult problems in mathematics and physics, which even
challenged most of the guys. Vidrum: “My name is Vidrum; indeed I am
your classmate” and feeling a certain excitement in their presence
tinged with coyness and relief over getting back his box did not know
what more to say. The elder girl assuming that he might similarly not
know her name introduced herself: “I am Lootika and this is my sister
Vrishchika who is also in our school but two standards our junior.”
Before Vidrum could respond they bade him good bye and darted away at
top speed on their bikes down the road. Vidrum, still feeling the
pleasantness, ambled back to where he parked his bike. To his
stomach-churning horror it was missing. He realized just then that he
had forgotten to lock it and someone had stolen it as he was looking for
his box. The relief at getting back his box turned into even a far
greater despair of losing his bike.

From then on with no bike to ride Vidrum had a long walk to and fro from
school. It was a real drudgery – he arrived just in time for school and
had to leave early to reach home in time – no longer could he enjoy the
hangouts with his friends before and after school. Every now and then in
the days following the theft of his bike, as Vidrum was on the long trek
back home, he would see Lootika and Vrishchika whiz past him on the
road, weaving their way through the traffic at top speed. He would wave
out to them and Lootika would often wave back but the girls would never
stop to talk to him let alone even acknowledge his presence beyond that
split second. He remarked to himself: “These girls seem very prone to
speeding; hopefully they don’t hurt themselves or someone.” One of those
days as Vidrum walked back he saw that the girls had parked their bikes
just beside an open plot of land not far from their school and had
wandered into it. He saw that Vrishchika was collecting *Datura* pods
while Lootika was collecting some small insects. He remarked to himself:
“It appears that these girls are not exactly the innocent and studious
type I thought them to be. They seem to be into drugs. Why else would
she be putting those weed pods into her backpack.” Then feeling a sense
of duty Vidrum called out to them and said: “Hey that plant is poisonous
don’t try it out.” Vrishchika shot back: “Of course I know that; that is
why I am collecting it.” Vidrum persisted saying: “You could harm
yourself by eating those.”  
Vrishchika: “Why do you think we don’t know about this? We know exactly
what we are doing. Do you know anything about tropanes?”  
Vidrum thought to himself: “This girl is in the class where they have
chemistry as a subject for the first time. You are introduced to
elements for the first time and she is already talking about substances
that I have never heard of. She seems much like her sister. May be I
should just let them be.”

Shutting the pillbox with the insects in Lootika came back to her bike
with Vrishchika following her. Lootika looked at Vidrum and asked: “Why
are you walking these days. Did you not have a bike?”  
Vidrum: “To my great misfortune, that day when I was searching for my
geometry box, which you recovered, I had forgotten to lock my bike and
it was stolen by the time I returned to it.”  
Lootika: “That is very sad indeed\! Did you register a case with the
cops?”  
Vidrum: “My father took me to the cops but they laughed at us and said
everyday cycles are stolen by the dozen and they had bigger crimes to
deal with.”  
Lootika: “That is indeed very apathetic. We sincerely hope you find your
bike.”  
Vidrum: “Why are you picking the *Datura* pods and those insects?”  
Lootika: “We wish to do some analysis of the tropane diversity in Indian
Daturas. We believe there might be some interesting things going on
there. As for the insects they are staphylinid beetles. I am trying to
find which of them have interesting symbiotic bacteria. On some evenings
and weekends I work along with some researchers at the university to
extract these bacteria and try identify any interesting compounds they
might produce. Later in the year I hope to extract DNA from them and
identify proteins that might be of interest or involved in the synthesis
of the interesting compounds.”

That was a lot for Vidrum. He did not exactly understand the meaning of
what Lootika had just told him. But some of the key words reminded him
of his friend Somakhya. He said: “Do you know our classmate Somakhya?”  
Lootika: “Not really, but I believe he was the guy who was showing those
interesting protozoa in the biology lab last week?”  
Vidrum: “I was really not paying attention to what he was showing but he
does a lot of such things and has a little lab in his house. He says
things that sound like what you just said, though I must confess I did
not fully understand what you are trying to do. You must talk to him.”  
Lootika: “Very well, may be you should introduce him to me.”  
Before Vidrum could say anything the sisters bade him good bye got on
their bikes and sped away.

◊◊◊◊

The next day at school Vidrum found himself alone with Somakhya for a
moment. Vidrum: “Somakhya, you must talk to that new girl Lootika”  
Somakhya: “Why would you want me to do that?”  
Vidrum: “I am sure you would like her and it would bring you some relief
from the boredom you experience with us.”  
Somakhya: “Her eagerness in class suggests that she is one who perhaps
wants to show off how much she knows. She might indeed be smart and
given that she is pretty too, I suspect she might be quite the type who
never gets of her high-horse. Why would you want me to fall into that
Lootika’s jāla?”  
Vidrum: “Yes, it does seem like she might not be get along well with
many, but I feel she is a nice girl. Listen to me, I have this intuition
that you will really have a great conversation with her. She is all into
insects, DNA, proteins and all that stuff you like.”  
Somakhya: “I am not sure about your intuition but what you say about her
is very interesting… If true may be I should talk to her after all when
the chance presents itself.”  
Vidrum, noticing that Somakhya was not exactly rushing for an
introduction, thought it better to let the matter remain at that.

It was a weekend within a fortnight of that conversation. Somakhya
headed out from his home on his bike towards pair of basaltic hills that
lay several kilometers away from his house. Normally Vidrum would have
accompanied him on such journeys. Since, Vidrum’s bike was stolen,
Somakhya had to head out alone. Some distance into the lonely ride
Somakhya’s mind was filled with frustration. He thought to himself: “If
only those rocks were not drab black basalts but Mesozoic sedimentary
outcrops how much more interesting life would have been.” Just then his
eyes caught sight of a large ball-bearing on the side of the street. He
stopped his bike and pocketed it with much joy. That sort of lifted up
his mood. Just then he arrived at a desolate spot where an ancient icon
of Padmāvatī, damaged by the Mohammedans, was housed in a little shrine.
He thought it was an opportune moment to propitiate Padmāvatī as had
been ordained by the vipra Gobhila in the days of yore. Having mentally
uttered a stuti to the snake-decked Padmāvatī, he decided to do a
pradakṣiṇa of the shrine. While doing so, and as he was about to turn
a corner he was startled by someone jumping at him with a with a cloth
as though to cover his face. He reacted instinctively putting his leg
forward in a defensive pose to trip the accoster and with his right hand
drew out his knife half way. Just then, to his horror he realized that
his “assailant” was none other than his new classmate Lootika. Utterly,
embarrassed he helped her regain herself and introducing himself as her
classmate worriedly asked if he had hurt her. Nervously giggling,
Lootika, adjusted her uttara-vastra, which she had used to startle
Somakhya, and brushed aside his concerns: “Since you were not quick
enough to knife me I believe I am fine. I was amused by the strange
coincidence of meeting you here and thought I should give you a bit of
surprise…”

Somakhya: “What brings you here of all places?”  
Lootika: “This patch of fallow land around the shrine has multiple
interesting species of staphylinid beetles…”  
Somakhya: “Ah staphylinids; so you interest yourself in beetles.”  
Lootika: “The crazed old German, Nietzsche, had remarked – *I followed
after the living thing, I went upon the broadest and narrowest paths
that I might know its nature*. So too all branches of the tree of life
interest me.”  
Somakhya: “Wonderful; could you show me your catch of staphylinids?”  
Lootika taking out her pillboxes showed them remarking: “Look at this
one with a green iridescence and this one with blue-purple iridescence –
these are beauties you only find in this patch of vegetation near the
temple\!”  
Somakhya looking at them closely: “Wonder if they have toxins of
note”.  
Lootika: “It is interesting you say so; that is what I am seeking to
find out more about. More precisely, if they have any symbiotic bacteria
what might be the genetic determinants they carry for producing such
toxins.”  
Somakhya with a pleased chuckle said: “Good to know you are getting
right to the bottom of it. What kinds of toxins are you expecting?”  
Lootika: “Both low molecular weight ones and perhaps toxic proteins made
by the bacterial symbionts.”  
Somakhya: “That is good thinking. How do you intend to detect them?” In
response Lootika gave an account of her work at the university and her
clever plan to clone the genes and identify determinants using assay
systems that two graduate students at the university were developing for
the toxins.  
Somakhya: “Your expression strategy with different vectors spread across
the bacterial tree based on rRNA analysis of the symbiont bacteria is
interesting. However, I think I have a way of cleanly getting to many if
not all of them even more quickly using a computational approach. So
before you do any cloning just sequence the genomes of the bacteria and
get them to me. Then I can do some sequence analysis to get to the
candidates.”

Lootika was excited to hear of Somakhya’s plan wanted to know more of
it, but she paused for moment and looked at the object in Somakhya’s
hand – while conversing with her he had been rolling the ball-bearing he
had found between his fingers. Lootika’s eyes widened and she asked if
she could hold the ball-bearing. She admiringly rolled it around on her
palm and somewhat coyly said: “Somakhya this is a nice ball-bearing;
could I take the liberty of asking you if you might be willing to give
it to me?” Somakhya: “So you too like ball-bearings?”  
Lootika: “I have a collection of them ranging from those extracted from
fine-tip pens to a fairly large one from a truck. I can bring them to
school next week and show them to you when nobody is looking.”  
Somakhya smiling said: “It is nice to hear that someone else shares this
fascination for ball-bearings.”  
Lootika suddenly realizing the brazenness of her request said: “I am
really sorry. I thought you guys used these for playing marbles. That is
why I so carelessly asked you for it.”  
Somakhya: “In the rare joy of meeting a fellow enthusiast I will let you
keep it, though I would certainly like to see your collection.”
Lootika’s face lit up as she put into a box in her backpack and she
said: “Sure, I’ll see if I can trade something for this one from my
collection. By the way, it seems it might have an familial pattern in my
case because my youngest sister Jhilleeka has the same love for them and
competitively keeps her own collection. Now coming back to the bacteria
genomes could you please tell me more of your plans of analyzing
them.”  
Somakhya: “Sure we can talk about them; but why don’t you come along
with me to where I was headed and I will show you some staphylinids
which have established a cohabitation relationship with ants. I suggest
you add them to your survey for there is lot of interesting biology
there\!”  
Lootika: “Old Darwin had said – *Whenever I hear of the capture of rare
beetles, I feel like an old warhorse at the sound of a trumpet* – I feel
the same hearing your words.”  
Somakhya: “Then hop on to your horse and let’s be going.”

◊◊◊◊

While on the way to the hills Somakhya and Lootika had been excitedly
talking, on their way back that evening both went silent. Each was
absorbed in their own thoughts about the delightful time they had spent
at the hills – each was thinking about the Formica ants and the
staphylinid beetle that was making them its hosts – each wondering about
the experiments they wished to do. As they neared Lootika’s house, she
remarked: “Somakhya – I had never given much thought to these drabber
staphylinids. I believe one could spend a lifetime studying them.”
Somakhya: “Certainly you can. But there are many other interesting
problems; so we should get to the bottom of the things we find most
interesting and then move on to other organisms. May be some day we will
find students who can make this their life’s pursuit.” Just then they
reached the road on which Vidrum’s house was situated. Somakhya:
“Lootika, I am thinking of giving our classmate Vidrum a shout. If you
don’t wish to stop to see him you may go ahead to your house.” Lootika:
“I don’t mind hanging along for a brief while.”

Vidrum on being called ran down to the corner of the street to meet
Somakhya. He was surprised to see Lootika with him.  
Vidrum: “That is a surprise. Didn’t expect to see you both. So what were
you guys up to?”  
Somakhya: “Had an interesting day studying insects in the woods between
the two hills.”  
Vidrum: “Did I not tell you all that you two will find much of common
interest.” Somakhya and Lootika merely smiled.  
Somakhya: “It is really sorry to see you in the ranks of the
aratha-s.”  
Vidrum wistfully said: “I wonder when I will own a bike again. Luckily,
there was a match on TV to occupy me for the day.”  
Lootika: “The crazed old German Nietzsche had said – *Alles geht, Alles
kommt zurück; ewig rollt das Rad des Seins.* \[Everything goes,
everything comes back; eternally rolls the wheel of being.\] Likewise,
may be the day will come when you will get your Rad back.”  
Vidrum: “I suppose das Rad also means a bike in German?”  
Somakhya: “Indeed, it is a cognate of ratha, which similarly underwent
an earlier semantic shift in the Indo-Iranian branch of Indo-European to
mean a wheeled vehicle. I believe that it was my use of aratha that
triggered the response from Lootika.”  
Vidrum: “May be she is just reading too much of that crazed old German
guy she mentioned.”  
Lootika coyly smiled but did not say anything. Then they bade Vidrum
good bye and went their way to their respective houses.

◊◊◊◊

Lootika joined her sisters and showed them her beetles and placed the
box with the ball-bearing she had been gifted by Somakhya on table
beside which her sister Varoli was doing her first experiments. Later
that night Lootika and her sister Vrishchika spread out their mats to
sleep. Lying on their mats the two always talked a bit before falling
asleep. Lootika told Vrishchika of the rove beetles and ants. Vrishchika
in turn asked Lootika to clarify to her the mechanism of action of
different acetylcholine receptors which she had just read about. Thus,
conversing they lapsed into the realm of Hypnos.

In her hypnagogic state Lootika saw a woman dressed in vestures from a
bygone era. As her image became clearer it struck Lootika that she would
probably look exactly like that woman when she grew up. Seamlessly,
Lootika’s own sense of identity merged into that woman. She knew her
actual name was Devasomā. She was in the kitchen compartment of her
makeshift dwelling finishing up the cooking and packing the food into
containers for the next day’s journey. Once she was done with that she
laid herself beside her husband Skandaśakti Somayājin who had already
fallen asleep. The next day they were to move from Kapiṣṭhala to
Sthaniśvara, where once the ancient river Sarasvati had flowed. As
Devasomā waited for sleep to overtake her, she saw a spider by the
moon’s light which was streaming in. The concentric circles with the
radial threads of the web it put forth reminded Devasomā of the words of
the śruti: the substratum of existence was the lūtikā from which the
universe was emitted and expanded forth like the concentric circles of
the web the arachnid puts forth. Finally once’s its job is done it is
reabsorbed by the lūtikā. The orb of the web in its full glory,
glimmering in the moonlight, reminded Devasomā of the wheel on which the
brahman stands while singing the song of the victorious horses of the
ārya-s even as the adhvaryu turns it thrice in the great Vājapeya
ritual. As she fell asleep she remarked to herself indeed this is the
wheel of the cakravartin, which is verily as ephemeral as the lūtikā’s
web.

A couple of days later they arrived at Sthaniśvara and Skandaśakti
Somayājin performed a ritual at the tīrtha of the god Kumāra, which in
the long past days lay on the banks of the Sarasvati, as narrated by the
Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya. After that he and Devasomā set up their makeshift
dwelling at a convenient spot near the tīrtha. Over the day Skandaśakti
was busy with visitors from Kāngrā with whom he was discussing his
commentary on the rasavaiśeṣika-sūtra-s of Bhadanta Nāgārjuna and with
another local visitor his new work on the dhūmaketu-s. Later that
evening he was visited by the vaṇij Kuberadatta and after he left,
Skandaśakti went back inside his house for dinner.

Devasomā: “ārya, you seemed rather agitated at dinner. Is anything
amiss?”  
Skandaśakti: “Our journey ends here. We must head to Kāshi to see our
sons and then back to Dakṣiṇāpatha.”  
Devasomā: “What? How could we end our journey without reaching the holy
Kaumārakṣetra of Lambakapura and glorious Oḍḍiyāna high in
Uttarāpatha?”  
Skandaśakti: “priye, the horrors of the downward turn of the kali are
upon us. The well-spring of the tantra-s has been defiled. The head of
Bhārata has been pierced and the wheel of the cakravartin has been
stolen\!”  
Devasomā: “That sounds awful\! could you please tell me more?”  
Skandaśakti: “I wonder if you really want to hear more – it is a tale of
great horror and savagery, which is probably just the beginning for the
kali age is supposed to be long and dark.”  
Devasomā: “I would certainly wish to know since it sounds like the
vartana of the yugacakra is under way.”

◊◊◊◊

Thus was Skandaśakti’s narrative of the events he had heard from the
vaṇij Kuberadatta to Devasomā: We were to join the caravan of the
wealthy Kuberadatta to journey across the Pañcanada to first reach
Lavapura and then advance to Puṣpapura and from there to Lambakapura.
There we were to join the caravan of Kuberadatta’s friend Vasumān to
advance to Oḍḍiyāna but all this was not to be as he received terrible
news.

Vasumān was headed with his usual caravan towards Bāhlika when his agent
brought him the news that it was better if he called off the journey to
city and instead went to the fortified city of Aśmakūla. He had obtained
intelligence that a tribe of dreadful barbarians known as the followers
of Mahāmada who were no different from rākṣasa-s had taken the city,
slain most of its inhabitants and destroyed all its shrines. Vasumān was
shocked to hear the news. He had issued several credit cards to the
sthavira-s of Navavihāra at Bāhlika. He knew that all that money was
gone. He had also already committed to the journey at the receipt of a
monetary assurance with goods to be sold to the Iranian merchants of
Bāhlika. He knew that it would all be lost. At that moment he quickly
decided that the best course for him was to go to Aśmakūla. He reasoned
that Aśmakūla was heavily fortified and given that the Khan Suluk had
issued him a trading permit to set shop in its market place, it would be
his best option to sell off the goods to possibly recover his costs. He
also thought that he could sell off the precious stones he was carrying
for Navavihāra to the Iranic chief Kārzāng who governed the city, given
that he had previously been fair in his dealings.

That evening as they were about to pitch their camps they saw a band of
about 50 armed men on horseback approach his caravan. He ordered his
personal army to move into a defensive position and prepare to fire
arrows at the signal. But the approaching horsemen halted at some
distance and put up white flags. One of them rode forth then to meet
with Vasumān. He showed a letter and seal of Turk Buri-Tegin, the
governor of Bhagāgāra, whom Vasumān had known well as one his customers.
He had also helped Vasumān with the renovation of the Rudra temple at
Surkh Kotal complex, which had been built by the emperor Kaniṣka. The
letter stated that there was great danger in the environs due to the
irruption of the men of Mahāmada; hence, Buri-Tegin decided to send a
force to ensure that all merchant caravans passing through his regions
would be safe-guarded. Convinced by the seal of Buri-Tegin, and
realizing that his personal army might not be enough to defend himself
against the enemies who were said to be rākṣasa-s not men, Vasumān
accepted the offer of the horsemen to join his ranks. However, as a
precaution he had them ride in front of him rather than behind him.
Thus, he reached Aśmakūla and his retinue was let in by Kārzāng’s guards
once he produced the necessary documents. However, they objected to the
other horsemen entering for they were not part of the documentation of
Vasumān. They were quick to produce documents certified by Buri-Tegin
and they too were let in as Buri-Tegin was recognized as a major protege
of Khan Suluk. Vasumān quickly headed to his favorite guesthouse and
sent for his Turkic paramour to visit him right away.

Vasumān’s local woman informed him that the ācarya of the vihāra she
patronized was interested in purchasing some gemstones for the icon of
Mañjuśrī. Vasumān accordingly agreed to accompany her to the vihāra
along with his assistant. When they reached there the famous
Pramukhācarya was giving a lecture. Vasumān heard him say: “There are
many cakravartin’s who believed that they have conquered this world. But
the true conqueror and chakravartin is the arihant. For him this whole
world is just like a mere bead.” Saying so Pramukhācarya held up a
spherical metal bead and continued: “It is a small thing for him like
this little bead – he is the master of the universe. Just then a wave of
agitation passed through the hall and three karmachārin-s ran in and
told Pramukhācarya something. He looked alarmed and announced abruptly
that the congregation was dismissed. Surprised, Vasumān asked one of the
karmachārin-s what the issue was. He told Vasumān that the city was
under attack and that the nearby temple of Śiva was being ransacked.
Vasumān righteous wrath was inflamed and he immediately asked his
assistant to mobilize his private army. In a short while, fully armed,
they advanced towards the famous śaivamaṭha of Paromūjavant, which to
their shock was set ablaze. They saw bearded men leading the attack, who
by then were also ravaging Pramukhācarya’s vihāra and the famous Iranic
Atash-kadag. Vasumān just then received the news from one of his agents
that Kārzāng had been slain in the fierce fighting near the city center.
He asked that agent to try to escape the city right away and inform Khan
Suluk. Even as he was doing so he saw his Turkic woman being captured
and taken away as booty by the attackers.

He realized he was outnumbered by the attackers but decided he would not
let the assault on the great śaivamaṭha go unavenged. So with his men he
proceeded to the maṭha and decided drive off the attackers. There he was
joined by Vāmaśaṃbhu deśika in the great battle against the attackers.
Taking cover behind an arch the brave vaṇij showered arrows and deftly
jumping down when a bearded attacker passed by he struck down the
attacker with his sword. After an hour or so they felt they had repulsed
the beards, when to their horror more of them poured in with their black
flags waving in the afternoon sun. However, he decided to keep fighting
till the end. Through an interpreter the attackers announced that they
would stop their assault if the Hindis converted to the religion of
Mahāmada. Vāmaśaṃbhu sent the reply that they may die but not convert
to the religion of madmen, bhasad-cumba-s and liṅgachedi-s. On receiving
that reply the Mahāmada-s resumed a fierce assault. Soon, Vāmaśaṃbhu was
struck by an arrow. The attackers horribly mutilated him limb-by-limb
and slashed him all over until he expired. Then they placed his
disfigured head on a pole and waved it around. Vasumān and his assistant
swooned after being wounded in the the close hand-to-hand combat that
ensued. Thus, they were captured by the Mahāmada-s and taken to be sold
as slaves. After a long and arduous march they reached Merv with many of
them dying on the way. In course of their journey they noticed that
Pramukhācarya accepted the evil religion of the Mahāmada-s and started
dressing and behaving like an Arab. At the market they witnessed sellers
shouting out their prices. The Turkic paramour of Vasumān was sold out
first in an auction for 15 dirhams. Then they said that Vasumān’s
assistant was a black Hindi and hence his minimum price was 2 dirhams,
whereas Vasumān being a fair Hindi was worth 10 dirhams. Vasumān was
soon purchased and led away, while his assistant fainted in the sun. He
was taken for dead and dumped in the near by midden. He eventually
regained consciousness, when Pramukhācarya, now going by the name al
Baramak, gave him some food and water, and revived him. Al Baramak then
knowingly let him escape and after an almost miraculous journey he made
it back to the Pañcanada to tell this tale of horror. The horror did not
end there and is indeed coming our way – on the way back, the assistant
of Vasumān saw that Bhagāgāra was being sacked by roving bands of
Mahāmada. There the great king Trivikramasena, after repulsing the
hūṇa-s had erected the cakra of the cakravartin – a golden cakra
mounted on a rustless iron pillar. The cakra had been venerated as that
of Viṣṇu by the āstika-s, as that of the dharma by the tāthāgata-s, and
the symbol of Zurvan by the Iranians. That was taken away as the booty
of conquest by the marūnmatta-s when the city fell.

◊◊◊◊

It was a Saturday morning. Lootika was dejected with the way the day had
started. Varoli had put the ball-bearing Somakhya had gifted Lootika
into a tube with HCl and she was delightedly watching it effervescing
away. To lift her mood she went to the museum near her house which would
be open till noon. She intended look up the papers, which Somakhya had
recommended, on staphylinids and ants from the early 1900s by a certain
Ramakrishnan of Tanjavur. In those old papers she read that the
staphylinids they had observed lay their eggs in the vicinity of the the
*Formica* nest. Apparently guided by an olfactory cue the worker ants
bring those eggs into the nest. Once inside, the ants attend to them
like their own and the beetle larvae eventually hatch out. They are then
fed by the ants until they reach a certain size when they start eating
the ant larvae and as well as their own kin. Eventually, those that
successfully make it come out and fly away as adults. Apparently, given
that the staphylinids practice cannibalism their numbers never run away
so as to cause a collapse of the ant colony. At the same time Lootika
wondered if the cannibalism actually helped the fittest among them make
it to the next generation. Lootika then thought of her vivid dream and
of a subhāṣitam Somakhya had quoted from the wise Viṣṇuśarman:

iśvarāṇām idaṃ tantraṃ prāyeṇautsukyam āvahet |  
yatas tiraścāṃ caritair nītimārgaḥ pradarśyate ||

This text of the gods might appear puzzling due to its teachings;  
However it intends illustrating by actions of animals the path of right
politics.
