+++
title = "Incomplete men"

+++
This article was first published on Feb 18, 2006. However, we thought it
was apposite to re-publish it with some additions give the recent attack
on the Hindus by the mlechCha propaganda arm.

Liberals are a putrid and noxious bunch. Sadly, as we discussed before,
they are pretty widespread in academia. Liberal is merely another more
dignified name for communist or leftist. The liberals live in a
paradoxical world. Some profess to viscerally hate religion, whereas in
reality they end up mouthing a secular version of their dominant meme:
exclusivist Abrahamism. This is not surprising because following the
footsteps of the Hindu intellectuals Shri Ram Swarup and Sitaram Goel,
and later the prolix Balagangadhara of Ghent (though we disagree on
several issues with him) we realized that the socialism or communism
were but secularized versions of the basic Abrahamistic meme. We find
that liberals of very different hues showing this dogma at different
levels of discourse. Let us consider a diverse set of examples to
illustrate this:

1\) Jared Diamond- kalashajA and me had discussed his 2nd book after
reading it with some eagerness (biased positively by the first one). We
soon realized that this book was not universalist history but a
politically biased affair that prevented him from making proper
scientific inferences. Due to his hidden socialist disposition (coming
from a deeper Abrahamistic belief of “equal before G-d”) he thought that
geographical contingency directs human history without altering the
human biology at a genetic level. He is resoundingly proven wrong by the
most recent studies that the differences between human races is indeed
due natural selection.

2\) Stephen Gould and Dick Lewontin- Both were respectable evolutionary
theorists with a decent understanding of aspects of the heart of
biology. Yet both were communists (cloaked as liberals) which prevented
them from understanding the significance of the evolutionary theory for
human diversity. Their politics made them oppose science even though it
stared on their face and they tried to hide behind statistical smoke
screens to provide a false respectability to their positions. So they
sang the song all humans are equal and the environment makes them
different.

3\) Richard Dawkins- A great popularizer of the evolutionary theory and
the proposer of the meme concept is a closet leftist . This again made
him ignore many aspects of intra-human differentiation and support
Mohammedans\! In his case the loss of a religious identity has been
replaced by a fanatic atheism where he literally worships a new
crypto-Abrahamistic entity “humanism” with a convert’s zeal. In the year
2015 he started tilting against Hindus in support of a compatriot
puMshchalI who is engaged in a smear campaign against the Hindus. The
puMshchalI herself was supported by the puMshchalI-grAhin mlechChesha’s
strI who earlier was seeking to support the Mohammedans in lATa and
Anarta.

His tweets presented below are sufficient to illustrate what Dick
Dawkins really stands
for:[![DickD1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2006/02/dickd1.jpg?w=407&h=231)![DickD2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2006/02/dickd2.jpg?w=404&h=125)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2006/02/dickd2.jpg)One
can see he is no different from an Abrahamist from the past \[Update
from 2015\].

4\) PZ Myers- a minor scientist and major pamphleteer, but I hear from
aurvasheyI that he is almost as popular as the others on the web. Lately
he has been taking anti-Hindu stances. We wonder if he can take a
similar stance against Judaism- I doubt he would last long. His stuff is
another blind anti-religious blather similar to Daniel Dennett, whose
ignorance prevents him from understanding some really commonsense stuff
about things like consciousness. Myers profound blindness is a good
example of the liberal’s missionary zeal where in he literally shows the
zeal of an Abrahamist only transferred to a new religion dubbed as
“science”.

In conclusion liberalism has made otherwise intelligent scientists
incomplete men. It also speaks rather badly of these scientists because
it shows that they are actually unable to pursue scientific thought to
its conclusion because of their inability to give up their political
figments. These incomplete men are victims of the Abrahmisitic meme. The
meme had imprisoned their ancestors and kept them in a state of
intellectual servitude for a millennium or more. Then science disrupted
this meme and showed it puerility. But these mlechChas having no
philosophical or cultural scaffold larger than Abrahamistic delusions,
felt rudderless upon its collapse. As a result they needed something to
take its place and give them a “Weltanschauung”. Sure enough the
Abrahamism returned in a secular form- communism or leftism- that
provided them with the needful pillar for support. Thus, unable to
percieve, leave alone understand, the philosophy of life they wander
around spreading hate like walking graveyards.
