+++
title = "upakathā of previous: śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam-2"

+++
[upakathā of previous:
śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam-1](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/04/14/upakatha-of-previous-sulapuru%e1%b9%a3a-catvarakam/ "upakathā of previous: śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam")

It was a Saturday afternoon. The caturbhaginī-s had returned from their
weekly visit to the museum library and were in a huddle at their home.
Lootika was seated on the floor and was classifying and labeling the
insect photos in her computer placed on the low desk in front of her.
Little Jhilleeka lay on the floor with her head on Lootika’s lap facing
Vrishchika, who was reading a fat volume from her grandfather’s time.
Lootika occasionally caressingly tousled Jhilleeka’s locks but was
otherwise busy with her work and was not paying attention to the rest.
Jhilleeka asked Vrishchika: “That Mahābhārata looks like a rather prolix
tome Vrishchika. It did not seem like such a giant story from what
Lootika told me. What is it that makes the book so big?” For some reason
this statement caught Lootika’s attention and she remarked, perhaps
meaning it only for herself: “I am reminded of a statement of the crazed
old German Nietzsche – ‘*Something said briefly can be the fruit of much
long thought: but the reader who is a novice in this field, and has as
yet reflected on it not at all, sees in everything said briefly
something embryonic, not without censuring the author for having served
him up such immature and unripened fare.*‘ Though very young, Jhilleeka,
intelligent as her sisters, got the drift and remarked with a smile of
mischief, as though to needle Lootika: “Sis, if that was supposed to be
for me, I am not censuring the author of the text here, but the person
who narrated it to me.” Lootika half smiled and tickled Jhilleeka as
though to get back at her.

Vrishchika: “Jhilleeka, what you have heard from our agrajā is only the
skeleton of our national epic; it is replete with many more stories and
narrations that you are not yet aware of or might need to grow up a
little more to grasp them. There are other parts there which would take
all of us a long time to understand. Those would need a much more
detailed study. Lootika, I am sure you have something from the unmatta
śūlapuruṣa of old to say on such a study of a text.”

Lootika looked up something on her computer and read it out: “Here –
‘*An aphorism, properly stamped and moulded, has not been ‘deciphered’
when it has simply been read; one has then rather to begin its exegesis,
for which is required an art of exegesis. \[…\] To be sure, to practise
reading as an art in this fashion one thing above all is needed,
precisely the thing which has nowadays been most thoroughly unlearned –
and that is why it will be some time before my writings are ‘readable’ –
a thing for which one must be almost a cow and in any event not a
‘modern man’: rumination…’*”

Lootika then continued: “While the pramatta-śūlapuruṣa says this of his
own writings, it does more generally apply to any literature ensuing
from a serious author. Unfortunately, this is not a custom cultivated by
many in the modern age. Dear Jhilleeka that is why you must be careful
at school not to adopt such ill habits from your plebeian friends.”  
Jhilleeka: “The Bhārata has been fascinating to me but I have not put in
such cow-like introspection you talk about.”  
Vrishchika: “You will have the chance for that as you grow older but you
have to begin young like our agrajā showed the way.”  
Jhilleeka: “For now could you please tell me some narrative I may not
have heard of.”

Vrishchika: “Why not: here is one which would make you think. I am not
endeavoring to reproduce the exact words of the great sage Kṛṣṇa
Dvaipāyana but I will put it in my own words trying to keep fairly
close to the original. When your competence in the daivi-vāk reaches a
sufficient degree you may read it on your own, little one. The narration
goes thus – After the great war, Dhṛtarāṣṭro Vaicitravīrya, who has been
described as an evil king in the śruti, was distraught at the death of
his century of sons. While attending to their final rites he repeatedly
sought consolation from his half-brother the kṣattṛ Vidura. In one of
his many consolatory statements Vidura told him the following: There was
once a brāhmaṇa, who was lost in a great forest, difficult to traverse.
\[Such forests indeed used to characterize our country when our Ārya
ancestors had first settled in it.\] It abounded in voracious lions,
tigers, and animals having a form like an elephant.”

Lootika distracted by Vrishchika’s narrative interjected: “May be those
elephant-like animals were the supposed relict populations of Stegodons
that apparently persisted in Asia into the Holocene.”

Vrishchika continued: “Perhaps\! The said brāhmaṇa became exceedingly
agitated and his hair stood on end. He panicked and wandered about
hoping to find someone who might help him. To his horror he saw that the
forest was surrounded by a net that blocked his escape and he also saw a
large, frightful woman lying in wait with her arms stretched out, along
with many broad-hooded cobras. Everywhere there were trees that seemed
so tall that they were touching the sky. In their midst was a deep
waterhole, which was obscured by a dense overgrowth of grass and
entwined creepers. Not seeing it the brāhmaṇa fell headlong into the
mouth of that waterhole. But he got enmeshed in the vines lining the
wall of the waterhole and was suspended there even as the giant fruit of
a jack-tree is attached to its trunk. Thus, he did not fall into the
hole but remained stuck in an upside down position. Trapped thus, he saw
a huge python eyeing him from the depths of the waterhole. At the rim of
the waterhole he saw the giant-elephant-like animal gradually approach,
which looked to him like the [dreadful elephant of Kumāra with six
heads](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/06/24/kaumara-gaja-graha/ "kaumAra gaja graha").
There were branches of trees that extended out into the waterhole. On
those were many large beehives of diverse forms, buzzing with angry bees
gathering honey.

Honey dripped in streams from those hives and the suspended brāhmaṇa
sustained himself by licking that honey. However, in that distressed
state he could not satiate himself satisfactorily with that honey and
tried to lick more of it. Then he saw white and black rodents gnawing
away the roots of the tree on which the hive was situated. Thus, he
remained suspended from the wall of the waterhole fearing the snake
beneath, the elephant-like animal above, the angry bees, and the fear of
the tree coming crashing down upon its roots being cut away by the
rodents. Even if he did make it out, he still had the snakes in the
forest and the dreadful woman and the net to fear. Despite this he tried
his best to enjoy as much sweetness of the honey as he could and
continued to hope that he would live on.

That is it, Jhilleeka. It is a narrative with no ending but one that you
should think about.”

Jhilleeka: “It is indeed a dark narrative. It seems frightening to think
about. Could it mean that is how life is supposed to be?”

Lootika chimed in: “That is correct Jhilleeka. It is not impossible that
such is the condition of any of our lives in the future. We may be of
high brāhmaṇa birth but it does not take much to fail to adhere to the
path ordained for those in the head of the puruṣa and fall headlong into
ignominy, even as king Triśaṇku was hurled down by the deva-s. Then,
even if one did adhere to the high path there is no guarantee that our
individual biology will match up. We could thus fall prey to defective
genetics or disease and be reduced to the state of the fallen brāhmaṇa
in the narrative. Or ill-luck, which manifests as genetic drift in the
evolution of organisms, could reduce one. That is why when population
sizes are small the fittest may not make it and deleterious genetics
persists in the population.”

Vrishchika: “Now this narrative from the great epic reminds one of the
very life of Nietzsche. Indeed, our agrajā told me the said śūlapuruṣa
as consequence of being unable to control his urges contracted a
dreadful disease and continually suffered from it. Finally, he became
mentally ill and thereafter lapsed into the condition of a human
vegetable. Such indeed could be ones fate even upon the acquisition of
discernment.”

Lootika: “Perhaps, when one is confronted with such misfortune, some
people might acquire a meta-insight into the human condition as
Nietzsche did in a brief flash before the disease took him out. Whereas
others, like the fallen brāhmaṇa in the itihāsa, even in dire straits
might merely try to get a transient pleasurable experience, like his
attempt to lick some more honey, but they never get any satisfaction
from this and it goes on till their end comes. From the viewpoint of the
individual both fates might be the same, but because we are an
eu(?)social organism the former path is of great value for we might
benefit our group thereby.”

Just then Varoli joined her sisters and showed Lootika and Vrischika a
tube with a blue solution and said: “I believe that the basaltic
eminence where we hang out occasionally has two types of nodules. This
nodule seems to have copper in it.” Lootika: “That is good, kanīyasī. I
am pleased that you did the whole qualitative analysis properly from
merely our oral instructions. But don’t tell our parents about your
success in detailed terms for I don’t want them to know that I let you
use the concentrated nitric acid.”  
Lootika realized that it was time for her to go to the university lab
where she worked on weekends and some evenings to do her research on the
catalytic activities of insect toxins and biosynthesis of certain
secondary metabolites. She had a few overnight reactions to set up, so
she got up and left saying: “Varoli, I will get you some more minerals
to analyze later this evening.”

◊◊◊◊

On her way back from the lab, Lootika met Somakhya at the base of the
hill of Vṛścikodarī and they ran up the hill. After a quick visit to the
shrine they climbed further up until the reached a plateau with a henge
of stones from the megalithic period. There they wandered in silence on
the plateau till the sun hit the horizon. Lootika occasionally picked up
some stones and put them into her bag, while Somakhya was silent and
deep in thought. But at one point he paused and kept staring at a rock.
Lootika broke his reverie: “Somakhya, I see that you are looking at the
lichen – anything of interest there?”  
Somakhya: “I noted that a couple of minutes ago you were staring at this
mass of Asteracean plants spreading before us.”  
Lootika: “They were not here a month ago.”  
Somakhya: “Yes, but I measured the lichen on this rock 3 years ago and
in that time it has hardly added a centimeter to its diameter in that
time. That aster and this lichen are close to the two poles of the
spectrum of growth strategies.”  
Lootika: “This suggests to me a possible fallacy in a statement of the
pramatta-śūlapuruṣa that I read- ‘*It can be shown most clearly for
every living thing, that it does everything, not in order to preserve
itself, but to become more.*‘ He saw this formulation as a improvement
of Darwin’s ‘*survival of the fittest’*. When we see a male praying
mantis sacrifice himself to his mate to achieve reproductive success we
can see that survival does not matter all to him but he is rather doing
all it takes to ‘become more’. In contrast this lichen here seems to be
devoting most of its efforts to preserving itself and has hardly a
centimeter to show in terms of becoming more in all this time. What is
the unifying siddhānta here Somakhya?”

As they started climbing down back towards the bastard poon tree and the
Indian ghost tree in whose shade they had chained their bikes, Somakhya
responded: “It seems the śūlapuruṣa was keen to distinguish himself from
and show that he was going beyond his primary influences like the
āngalika Darwin and the other śūlapuruṣa Schopenhauer. However, in the
case of old Charles, Nietzsche had heard of him only second hand from
his compatriots. His situation was similar to that of the great patriot
of our nation, Lokamanya Tilak, who was similarly inspired regarding the
slave-making ants among other things by learning of Darwin’s work via
the lens of Spencer and the early śūlapuruṣa Darwinians. Consequently,
whatever Nietzsche thought as being an improvement of Darwin was already
there in old Charles’s work or was a consequence of the śūlapuruṣa’s
insufficient knowledge of biology. Nietzsche thought that when Darwin
talked of fitness it was merely physical strength but Darwin clearly
meant ‘most capable of reproduction’ when he talked of the term fittest.
Again, it seems he took survival to mean preservation of the organism,
whereas Darwin meant what remains behind, i.e. “survives” the struggle
is that which was reproductively more successful, irrespective of what
happened to the organism’s body itself. So, effectively we may take the
statement, which you cited, as being merely a restatement of the essence
of the principle realized by Darwin – thus, Nietzsche and Darwin
actually converged.

But indeed in that “improvement” of Darwin by the śūlapuruṣa there is
indeed an implicit fingering of a key biological principle. I believe,
that is what you saw as a fallacy. All cellular organisms, viruses or
even genomic parasites like transposons ultimately face a basic
trade-off between a strategy investing in reproduction and one in
investing in their own physical survival (which includes effectiveness
in conflicts with other organisms). Both strategies can be viable: The
dandelions are making more of themselves as fast as they can and invest
little in weaponry for conflicts. The lichen in contrast is literally
living off rock, air and light – something which few others can do; so
it can afford to go slow on its reproduction and also you cannot really
go fast in making more of yourself when living off such measly fare.
However, it needs to invest much more on its own preservation to sustain
this life-style – both in terms of surviving the climatic insults like
drying and cold as also other organisms that might try to feed on them.
For such organisms preserving themselves occupies more of their
investment than ‘making more’. But then we could say that every time an
organism preserves itself there is no other purpose to it than to more
effectively make more of itself. Thus, the śūlapuruṣa could stake a
claim to correct apprehension after all.

However, when we view this in terms of the actual evolutionary changes
in organisms it appears that much of it is what allows an organism to
hang in there, i.e. survive, rather than confer a direct reproductive
advantage. Most often the evolutionary adaptations in organisms come at
a cost to what can be invested in reproduction, but without those
adaptations the organism will not live to reproduce another day (i.e.
become extinct). That, is why our immune systems are complex,
potentially dangerous to our own selves and impose a major cost on
resources that could have gone towards reproduction – because without it
we would not make it to the point of making more of ourselves. This is
what manifests in paleontology as the famous ‘*Law of Extinction*‘,
which states that the background rates of extinction (i.e. leaving out
catastrophic mass extinctions) for any group of related organisms is
constant. A corollary is that organisms need to continually adapt
primarily to avoid extinction from competition with others in face of an
environment changing over time. Thus, the history of life is inherently
a constant 0-sum game; hence, the only victory here is survival. Thus,
the siddhānta is that the organism which leaves behind more of itself is
the one that persists, but to do so it needs adaptations that allow it
to survive the competition it continually faces.”

By then Somakhya and Lootika had reached their bikes. They patted the
trunks of the huge bastard poon tree and the Indian ghost tree, each
mentally taking in the remarkable coincidence of the two trees growing
beside each other. Lootika then remarked: “It does appear that the
pramatta-śūlapuruṣa in his urge to show himself as better and distinct
from Darwin wound up restating Darwinian corollaries on multiple
occasions. I remember one more interesting one that I would like to
bring to your attention.” Somakhya: “Pray proceed.”

Lootika then pulled out her computer and read out the following: “He
says – *‘Man as a species does not represent any progress compared with
any other animal. The whole animal kingdom does not evolve from the
lower to the higher – but all at the same time, in utter disorder, over
and against each other. The richest and most complex forms – for the
expression “higher type” means no more than this – perish more easily:
only the lowest preserve an apparent indestructibility.’*”

She then continued: “This statement suggests that he arrived at a
conclusion that one can reach with a proper knowledge of the
evolutionary process as enunciated by old Charles. Ironically, many
people who with an air of knowing proclaim to study biology today lack
this basic understanding – we see words like “higher organisms”, “higher
vertebrates”, “ greater complexity of humans compared to fishes” and
such other verbiage in their papers acclaimed by other equally ignorant
souls. We have ample examples that drive home this point today –
myxozoans have degenerated to a protozoan like state from ancestral
animals that once had a nervous system. Likewise, the sister group of
vertebrates the tunicates exhibit a degenerate anatomy as adults without
a notochord – thus in evolution they have regressed relative the state
exhibited by the more primitive amphioxus. On the other hand they have
evolved this unusual ability to concentrate vanadium, tantalum, and
niobium using sulfuric acid long before any humans isolated these
metals. Similarly, from the genomes we can infer that in many ways the
nematodes have degenerated relative to the more primitive cnidarians.
Regarding the ‘apparent indestructibility’, we can now infer that
bacteria and archaea have retained forms and genes today like they did
for at least 3.5 billion years and probably are older than the earth
itself. But there are no eurypterids around today…”

Somakhya: “Touche. The failure on part of numerous modern scientists to
grasp the totality of Darwin is an example of the larger problem, which
we may term as ‘the damping of the message of the greater promulgator’.
The original teachings of Darwin were in large part not properly
understood in the initial period by scientists and thinkers despite
being proximal to him. Even the man closest to him, the brilliant
Wallace, stumbled while applying the principles of Darwin and his own to
the animal called man. Yet others who did do so, applied it in wrong
ways though the path was clearly shown by Darwin himself. Then there
were people like Owen who despite a lifetime of study and a mountain of
evidence they had amassed before their own eyes notably failed to grasp
the message of Darwin. Such a damping happened to the early
manifestations of such teachings in our midst, namely those of
Yājñavalkya and Vasiṣṭha preserved in the Mahābhārata. So also the
same thing happened in the midst of the yavanas with Empedocles and
among the romākas with the teachings of Lucretius Carus. Against this
background, it is notable that with an imperfect transmission Nietzsche
managed to rediscover key facets of it in his philosophy. Perhaps
another factor behind this was his other great influence, the other
śūlapuruṣa Schopenhauer, from whom he actively sought to distinguish
himself, who too had converged on Darwinian ideas before Darwin. After
all Schopenhauer correctly saw the struggle between organisms as being
part of the evolutionary process in what he termed the ‘will’ something
used by Nietzsche too.”

Lootika: “Somakhya, your bringing up the ancient ārya-s, yavana-s and
romākas leads me to that zone where it is hard to tell where science has
ended and philosophy has begun. Most scientists, especially those who
have modeled themselves after the idiom of the wicked mleccha-s, do not
venture there. Most philosophers are insufficiently educated in the
technical aspects of doing science as well as the fundamental
constraints that science places. But there exist in that zone several
wonderful and even mysterious avenues for exploration that contribute to
the completeness of our knowledge and throw light on matters that might
defeat a good scientist. As Hindus we subscribe to and practice the
totality of that knowledge, since it is a heathen thing. Of the
śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam, Gauss did not achieve that totality of
knowledge despite his supreme mental capacity because of incompleteness
on the philosophical front caused by the pretamata. Schopenhauer had
experience with actual science as part of his research on color vision
and his extensive study of the works of biologists. However,
importantly, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, accessed glimpses of the
heathen past, thought not of their own but of the yavana-romākau and the
ārya-s. As a result they were able to access aspects of the completeness
of knowledge and perhaps that allowed them to channel part of it into
scientific insight. Let me read out another statement of the pramatta,
which reveals that heathen inspiration with respect to  his theory of
the totality of aesthetic understanding, but may also be more generally
true of knowledge –

‘*I have kept my gaze fixed on those two artistic deities of the Greeks,
Apollo and Dionysos, in whom I discern the living and visible
representatives of two art-worlds which differ in their deepest essence
and highest goals. Apollo stands before me as the transfiguring genius
of the principium individuationis \[principle of individuation\],
through whom alone release and redemption in semblance can truly be
attained, whereas under the mystical, jubilant shout of Dionysos the
spell of individuation is broken, and the path to the Mothers of Being,
to the innermost core of things, is laid open.*‘

As Hindus we can identify with that one – ironically, in our case those
two deities are unified in one Rudra but the dichotomy is maintained
between the ūrdhva-srotas (Apollonian) and the four directional srotāmsi
(Dionysian). However, would I be right in saying that while Hindus have
remained heathens, they need a reamination by reconnecting to their
ancient past equipped with fresh understanding to complete their sphere
of knowledge?”

Somakhya: “Doubtless; the renewal of philosophical insight among the
śūlapuruṣa-s and earlier science itself in the greater mleccha world
was via reamination with heathen knowledge. But in response, an
important reaction occurred in the world of the mlecchas, which was a
major factor in ‘the damping of the message of the greater
promulgators’. We must not forget that the mleccha power structure as
it continues to this date was established after destruction of heathens
by the pretavādin-s (rākṣasavādino vadanti: eko rākṣaso .anyā devā na
vartante). At the heart of this power structure lies the scaffolding of
rākṣasavāda and it was threatened seriously by the insights of
Schopenhauer, Darwin and Nietzsche – the preta literally was in danger
of being dead once and for all. This caused an upheaval that had the
potential to shake the mleccha world. A similar thing had happened much
earlier with the other eka-rākṣasavāda, namely marūnmāda, when
encountering the heathen knowledge of the yavana-s and Hindus. There it
was eventually smothered by the marūnmatta-s so firmly that it had, and
will have, no opportunity of raising its head again. The age was
different when it did raise its head this time around among the
mlecchas, and its earlier assaults had already weakened the ability of
the mlecchas to smother it in the fashion of the marūnmatta-s before
them. However, the meme of rākṣasavāda was not to be defeated by such
upheavals. It instead remodeled itself in the form of the secular idiom
of the mlecchas, which is after all pracchana-rākṣasavāda. In this
pracchana-rūpa it invaded the masses of the Hindus when we were
conquered by the vile mleccha and our dharma is drowning due to it. Even
in the mleccha world it set off a great internal conflict when the
śūlapuruṣa-s realizing their servility to the ekarākṣasavāda attempted
to shake it off, but due their own insufficiency of understanding, and
defeat by their cousins they were forced to submit to it in its open or
hidden forms. We too will face such a moment of reckoning where we will
have to fight a combined assault of ekarākṣasavāda in its various
manifestations to preserve our heathendom or perish in an attempt.

The momentous challenge to the rākṣasonmāda-s and the philosophical
renewal in the mleccha lands had its ripples in our midst too. However,
our being far away from the action and enslaved by the mleccha tyrants
resulted in us to not having our own reanimation. We were of course
better placed to achieve it being heathens but did not go too far. Among
those responding to the ripples were few men of note: Lokamanya Tilak
recognized the importance of Darwin and saw the congruence of the
evolutionary process with that seen in sāmkhya. The svāmin Vivekananda
and Krishnaverma were deeply influenced by Spencer but never got to a
proper understanding of the essence of Darwin who lay at the core of the
doctrine. By then, for a long time the Hindus had been rather smug with
the insights of uttara mīmāṃsa in its various evolutes and
manifestations. In the process they had turned their back in large part
on their deeper genius ensuing both from the original śruti and that of
ancient sāmkhya in the great epic, Āryabhaṭa, Caraka, Suśruta, Kaṇāda
and Akṣapāda. Even though Annambhaṭṭa had emphasized that Pāṇinīyam and
Kāṇādam should be combined and form the basis of knowledge there were
few listeners. As a result, we were left we few who could surf on the
ripples from the mleccha lands to facilitate a reanimation with our own
past – in all this only the vaṇga Brajendranath Seal made a solitary but
commendable attempt. Hence, as you say such a reanimation is still
necessary if a larger Hindu system of knowledge were to rise again.

With the fight back by the ekarākṣasavāda the Dionysian and the
Apollonian ceased to coexist. Among those smoldering ruins of the
revolution in the mleccha lands arose the fourth of the śūlapuruṣa-s you
have studied and he saw their course far into future with few scattered
fragments of the Apollonian and Dionysian peppering that path. That
future will tumultuously collide with our own, which only few like you
and me see, that too very hazily. But as it is already dark we may talk
about that another day O Jālikā.”

Then Somakhya and Lootika collected some caṇaka herbs and went towards a
nyagrodha tree under which sat an old woman with a goat. They gave the
herbs to the goat, for it is an offering to the great god Kumāra in his
manifestation as Bhadraśākha. Thereafter they rode away in opposite
directions. Half way to her house Lootika passed a hedge where through
the corner of her eye she saw her classmate Meghana scowling at her
accompanied by three boys whom she did not recognize. To her right an
elephant was ambling on the road. Even as Lootika passed them, one of
the boys jabbed at her back wheel with a long, stout stick attempting to
pass it between the spokes. But the scowl of Meghana had triggered her
instincts and she had veered to the right evading his jab. She nearly
collided with the elephant but extending her right hand she pushed
against the elephant’s fore limb to deflect herself ahead with added
speed from the reaction. She remarked to herself: “By Varuṇa that was a
narrow one but the wheel rolls on.”

In the future there will be a concluding part relating Oswald Spengler.
