+++
title = "A rambling expatiation instigated by the self-interview of Robert Burnham,xa0Jr"

+++
When we were young, the normally taciturn vaiśya-jyotiṣa once asked us
to participate in a peculiar weekly assembly of amateur astronomers that
was apparently inspired by none other than the great Lokamānya Ṭilak and
was housed in a memorial of his. Other than the vaiśya-jyotiṣa, his
vaiśya sidekick, originally from the grocer community, and I, the rest
of the participants in that assembly were stuffy, elderly Mahārāṣṭrī
gentlemen who almost appeared as though they had jumped right out of
Ṭilak’s era. They were amateur jyotiṣa-s whose primary interests lay
in our solar system, with some passing interest in the older Hindu
astronomy of Sūryasiddhānta, Varāhamihira, Āryabhaṭṭa. They discussed
these matters a sauntering pace even as they viewed both me and the two
vaiśya-s with a bit of quizzical but perplexed attitude. They wondered
why we respectively interested ourselves so much in variable stars and
globular clusters. When I told them of my sighting of BH Crucis near its
maximum through my homemade telescope they all wondered with a slight
murmur as to why such an out of the way star might seem interesting. One
of them then slowly remarked that sighting omicron Ceti reach its
maximum was sufficient for him. We would not disagree that it was a
great sight. However, our main purpose of attending that assembly was
because it was the only place where we could access the vanishingly rare
copies of the astronomy magazine, the Sky and Telescope. It would be
passed around the table in the cavernous little room where we assembled
and we would each take a look at, with older copies available for
borrowing. Beyond that the only memorable things about these meetings
were the discussions we had on occasions on whether Sirius was once red,
the star map of the Sūryasiddhānta, and the visits by noted astronomers
from abroad which the old Mahārāṣṭrī gentlemen somehow managed to
organize.

It was there that we learned, via Sky and Telescope, of the three volume
work of Robert Burnham, “Burnham’s celestial handbook: an observer’s
guide to the universe beyond the solar system”. Eventually, the assembly
purchased those volumes at great expense and difficulty for Hindus were
a poor people shorn of their wealth by the barbarous mleccha-s. It used
to be kept under double-lock and keys, and could be accessed only if the
secretary and treasurer both put in their keys to open the cabinet in
which it was safely stowed away. Despite all this ado, its primary
readers were the vaiśya’s lackey and I; the vaiśya-jyotiṣa himself had
procured his own copy by virtue of his enormous riches as would befit a
Lāṭānarta merchant. We found something very deep about Burnham’s
mahāsaṃhitā: It was like no other text we had ever seen and after all
these years still regard it as having a near magical quality. While we
merely possessed a homemade 75mm refractor and a 50 mm Russian refractor
with spectacular optics (the Rus made some great stuff then, which we
never get anymore among the mleccha-s for all their technological
prowess), Burnham spurred us to explore the utter limits of our
instruments – can there ever be a feeling like being under pitā dyauḥ
peering into the depths of the universe? That connection to the depths
of the universe comes out brilliantly in Burnham’s work. Over the years,
living in a place where our glimpses of the sky have become very few and
far between due to cold and pollution, some of that connection from the
long past days has receded into the background. But recently our friend
pointed us to Burnham’s self interview, which prodded us to write
something about the thoughts arising from reading the mysterious
author’s thoughts beyond those found in his mahāsaṃhitā.

We learned that Burnham’s life began much like the comet he discovered
with his own home-made telescope, which led him to a position at the
Flagstaff’s Lowell Observatory without any formal higher education. For
years he lived the life of the reclusive self-made scientist operating a
home-lab. Once that position was closed he was offered a janitor’s job
at the same place, which he refused. His life had an unfortunate
conclusion. Though a military veteran on losing his position at the
observatory he lived a destitute life selling his own paintings in a
park for a living. Unable to afford medical treatment he died at the age
of 61 in 1993 from various dreadful ailments which had caught up with
him. When he was a poor peddler of paintings in the park, astronomers
did not even believe that he was the same Burnham of the handbook fame
if he mentioned that fact to them. Thus, even as his book was becoming a
household name among amateur astronomers he dropped into anonymity and
then died. His case is an example of how many great contributors to
human expression are often ignored by society to die unsung in the
dumpster, especially if they take an unconventional path that does not
receive institutional recognition. This is particularly so in certain
nations like the USA where medical care is difficult for the man of
average means and typically of low-quality except for the very
well-endowed or connected. Below we cull some of the interesting points
from his interview with occasional remarks of ours indicated by bullet
points.

◊◊◊◊

*Interviewer: Your Handbook demonstrates that philosophy very clearly, I
think. A number of readers have commented on the amount of space you
devote to ancient mythology, Chinese poetry, oriental folklore, Roman
coins — things like that. If you had omitted all this, do you think you
might have reduced the book to a more practical size?*

Not by very much. None of this adds that much to the page count. And I
think it gives the work a certain sort of unique personality.

● Burnham was an example of what you don’t encounter that often in
science these days: A sort of an all-rounder with wide cultural and
historical interests.

◊◊◊◊

*Interviewer: Do you feel the same about interstellar communication?*

We may eventually exchange messages with inhabitants of nearby star
systems; Tau Ceti, for example, if it has inhabited planets. But
anything vastly more remote than that doesn’t look very practical. It
isn’t communication if the answer to your message won’t arrive until a
few centuries after your entire civilization has become extinct.

*Interviewer: So you don’t believe that man will ever achieve the
conquest of space?*

That phrase is really one of the silliest ever invented. Here are two
ants – perched on a leaf in the middle of the Amazon, and after enormous
effort and incredible expense they finally manage to get across to the
next leaf. So they claim they’ve “conquered the forest.”

● He had a particularly dim view of the physical conquest of deep space.
We may view this in light of some recent discoveries: 1) Earth-like
planets have been discovered around ancient stars suggesting that they
formed much earlier than expected. 2) They appear to be more common than
has been previously expected

Hence, Fermi’s paradox seems to be a reality: “Why have we not heard
from or been visited by aliens yet?” This appears to be one of the
fundamental lessons we are in the process of learning from Kepler and
other exo-planet discoveries. We speculate in light of these
observations affirming Fermi’s paradox that technology is fundamentally
maladaptive. The kind of advanced technological existence needed to
achieve moderately fast space travel most likely comes at the cost of
fertility of the (super)organism, which generates such technology.
Hence, such systems necessarily collapse before escaping the home star
successfully. Moreover such (super)organisms are likely to be infected
memetically by memoviruses, like the religions of peace and love, which
enhance relative fertility of anti-technological groups hastening the
collapse of technological civilization to a lower level that can never
escape the home star. Thus, astronomy appears to have given us an
important glimpse of the possibility that the technological overdrive we
are pursuing might not be a stable strategy at all and sooner or later a
collapse is eminent. On the other hand we posit that the societies of
social insects re fundamentally more stable and there will a convergence
towards such planet-bound social structures. In contrast, based on our
empirical genomic studies we have held that real intra-stellar travel is
done by structurally less differentiated life in the form of bacteria
and archaea like entities.

Burnham should have lived to see this age of discovery in astronomy that
has come for the first time since the great leap of Herschel and his
contemporaries. This is due to great technological achievement on part
of the United States. Our knowledge is likely to advance even more for a
while as much greater successors of the Kepler mission are launched. We
may even detect the chemical signatures indicating the existence of
exo-life in the coming years, but that is different from the actual
contact with the aliens, which should have happened. However, we suspect
this will be very ironic in a sense because it might ultimately inform
us clearly about the limits of our technology. Hence, finding some
convergences with the thoughts of Burnham in this regard is interesting.

Just as we were deciding to make this note public, an interlocutor on
Twitter brought back thoughts regarding the German intellectual Oswald
Spengler. We recalled that the last two chapters of the mahāsaṃhitā have
thoughts therein which seem to echo with the sentiment raised above. It
would be too much to unpack all of it here. But it would suffice to say
that it Hindus would be benefited if one among them takes up the task
writing a narrative of this order from the Hindu perspective \[Footnote
1\]. It would obviously differ in words from that of Spengler but there
might be some conclusions that ultimately converge. For now we will
leave the reader with that concluding quote from Spengler, which we
could immediately recognize as one of a realized man:

“*Money is overthrown and abolished only by blood. Life is alpha and
omega, the cosmic onflow in microcosmic form. It is the fact of facts
within the world-as-history. Before the irresistible rhythm of the
generation-sequence, everything built up by the waking-consciousness in
its intellectual world vanishes at the last. Ever in History it is life
and life only — race-quality, the triumph of the will-to-power — and not
the victory of truths, discoveries, or money that signifies.
World-history is the world court, and it has ever decided in favour of
the stronger, fuller, and more self-assured life —decreed to it, namely,
the right to exist, regardless of whether its right would hold before a
tribunal of waking-consciousness. Always it has sacrificed truth and
justice to might and race, and passed doom of death upon men and peoples
in whom truth was more than deeds, and justice than power. And so the
drama of a high Culture — that wondrous world of deities, arts,
thoughts, battles, cities — closes with the return of the pristine facts
of the blood eternal that is one and the same as the ever-circling
cosmic flow*.”

◊◊◊◊

*Interviewer: Probably because the organized religions have made the
whole idea so…*

Cranky? Primitive? Yes. Well, that’s the old “guilt-by-association”
syndrome again. A lot of scientists won’t touch ESP research for the
same reason. They don’t want to be identified with cranks. But this
situation is chiefly limited to the western cultures. Consider the
difference in artistic traditions, for example. Suppose an American or
European collector offers to show you a “religious” picture. You know
what you will see. A Madonna. A nativity scene. A crucifixion. The
martyrdom of some saint, perhaps. Always a conventionally religious
theme. Now, let a cultivated Chinese gentleman show you his religious
picture. High peaks looming though mist. A gnarled pine tree on a windy
cliff. A mountain chasm at dawn. Yes, there may be a hermit or a holy
man somewhere in all this, but you have to really hunt for him. Where’s
the religion? Well, the oriental is experiencing the presence of the
intelligence of the universe. In the world of nature.

*Interviewer: Religious leaders claim to have a divine revelation which
cannot be questioned.*

Yes. But if neither reason nor science nor evidence nor human testimony
can be trusted, how can you possibly know you have a divine revelation?
Since you admit you are fallible human being, how can you be sure that
you would recognize a divine revelation if you saw one? That’s a pretty
arrogant claim to make, isn’t it?

*Interviewer: Religious authorities will say that the whole history of
the last two thousand years proves the truth of their claims.*

Oh sure. The Inquisition, for example? The witchcraft mania? Centuries
of cruel persecutions and intolerance and bigotry? How does it happen
that this divinely revealed faith has by far the worst history of any of
the great religions of the world, and has everywhere been the major
cause of barbarism, strife and war? ***The whole history of Christian
Europe reads like one long nightmare.*** Well, let’s suppose that none
of these things had ever happened. Let’s close our eyes and pretend that
the history of religion in the western world was all perfect sweetness
and light, as many simple folk fondly imagine. The validity of their
claims would still depend upon human reasoning. All theological
statements are human statements; all theological writings are human
writings; all religious concepts were developed by human beings.
Obviously. There are people who imagine that they have something more,
since their whole creed depends upon that idea. And where do they go to
prove this? Right back to human reasoning\! You can find entire books –
hundreds of them – devoted to proving some theological doctrine or
other. Using step by step human logic.

● It appears that Burnham had seen through the nature of the preta-mata.
Indeed, elsewhere he mentions a certain attraction towards flavors of
the Dao and the Tathāgata cults. However, it is unlikely he had any
close understanding of these systems. This brings us to a more general
issue of westerners who have outgrown the preta-mata . They typically
come in a few standard flavors: 1) Those who have realized its futility
but have limited horizons hence continue to remain within it in some
non-practicing sense. They might term themselves as being non-practicing
but having belief in its values. They resemble the common urban Hindu of
India who has become deracinated and has never studied any śāstra that
matters. 2) They see through the evils of the preta-mata but believe
that all religiosity is the same as that of eka-rākṣasa-vāda. They
bother not to more closely analyze the differences between systems or
the biological foundations of the phenomenon of religion in apes. Hence,
they become the kind who are well-known as the new atheists. But as we
have discussed before they are, sometimes perhaps unwittingly, a mirror
image of the eka-rākṣasa-vāda having arisen from societies infused with
this ideology. They have imitators among the Hindus but this is again a
reflection of Hindu deracination with resultant replacement of their
endogenous memes with western ones. Thus, they react just like the
mleccha-s though it is not relevant to their situation. 3) Those like
Burnham who have outgrown it, understand the spirit of the alternatives,
and even feel attracted towards them. However, they usually can never
complete the circle because of incomplete understanding of the
alternatives. Indeed, as we had discussed before, the Eklund survey
suggested that many mleccha scientists, who describe themselves as
atheists, might have an incipient potential in this direction. 4) Those
who do adopt the alternatives whole scale irrespective of their actual
understanding of it. These are the western converts to nāstika or āstika
or other heathen systems. However, despite their conversion, they might
retain the structures of their old eka-rākṣasa-vāda; thus, upon
conversion they merely transfer their allegiance to the heathen systems
and operate within it. For example, Devakīputra might replace the preta
but they approach him similarly. Hence, they might also translate their
confusions from the past to their interpretation of the heathen system.
Thus, we have seen some western worshipers of Devakīputra become the
spokesmen for Hindu intelligent design and anti-evolutionism. This too
might be taken up by born Hindus due to their deracination. Thus, we
have seen a pamphlet made by a well-known internet Hindu activist with
some trite anti-evolutionist vociferations which are drawn from their
western counterparts.

In the end, many mleccha-s adopting alternative systems face the issue
of those systems ultimately “belonging” to alien cultures – a cultural
difference exacerbated by the eka-rākṣasa-vāda. These, clash with a
sense of superiority rooted in their psyche (even if subcurrent) coming
from the influence of version 2 and 3 of eka-rākṣasa-vāda – a drive to
save others even if it might mean killing them. This, along with
political pressures of the mleccha lands can ultimately lead to the
famous Malhotran U-turn in many.

::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: The following is quite possibly a statement ensuing from
false pride: We have long fancied ourselves as being able to do this in
principle due to our penetration of certain domains of knowledge and
things which we see clearly in our mind’s eye. However, as the realities
of life impinge on you, the realization dawns that such a feat is likely
to be out of reach for it is almost as if the gods come in the way when
the mere martya has apprehended certain things. Surely there were many
Khans on the steppes who never became Chingiz Khan. Such are the times
when you wish for a capable successor to whom you can transmit your
vidyā-s in toto, as Mahārāṇā Pratāpa wished there was no gap between
him and Mahārāṇā Saṃgā.
