+++
title = "Ramblings on sitters and foragers, multiplicity of males, caste, and transnationality"

+++
***To sit or to rove: the tale of maggots***  
The gene coding for cGMP-dependent kinase (PKG) in *Drosophila
melanogaster*, whose kinase activity is activated by binding of the
second messenger cGMP by its two cNMP-binding domains, is characterized
by two allelic variants for-s and for-R. The for-s flies make less PKG
while the for-R flies make more PKG. The for-s flies are sitters. When
food is abundant, in their youth as maggots they move less and feed only
from a localized patch of food source. In contrast, the for-R flies are
rovers. When food is abundant they rove around widely and feed less but
sample a distant patches of food. They also have a higher rate of
glucose absorption from food. When food is limiting both for-s and for-R
maggots have a common level of food intake and movement. As adults for-R
flies lick sucrose more often with their proboscis while for-s flies
turn more frequently after feeding on sucrose. The for-R flies learn
faster but show poorer long term memory, while it is exactly the
opposite for the for-s flies. The short-term memory of for-R flies is
resilient to sleep deprivation while that of for-s flies is disrupted.
In contrast, short-term memory of for-R flies is disrupted by overnight
starvation while that of for-s flies are resilient to the same. Most of
these differences are consistent with advantage under opposite
environmental conditions for the two genotypes. Thus, when food is
plentiful the sitter maggots appear to be at an advantage as they eat
more food, waste less of the consumed nutrition in generating energy for
moving around, and thus grow more. However, when food is limiting,
because the two converge to a common level of food intake and rapid
movement, the higher rate of glucose absorption of the rover maggots
gives them an advantage. Similarly, the behavioral and cognitive
differences between the rovers and sitters would also be helpful under
opposite sets of conditions. Thus, if the environment fluctuated often
enough between the alternate states favoring one or other of the
phenotypes, such that neither of them is taken to fixation by natural
selection, then the allelic polymorphism at the locus would be the norm.
This balancing, oppositely aligned environmental effect on advantage of
the two forms is supported by the fact that the two alleles occur as a
natural, stable polymorphism in fly populations.

Our own studies from some years back suggested that such dichotomy in
strategies is pervasive aspect of biology. Even the genes in the genome
of an organism might be partitioned into alternative strategies when it
comes to a particular responses, such as dealing with deleterious
chemicals: some are part of a strongly evolutionarily conserved strategy
which which does not show much noisiness in gene-expression (sitter),
whereas others are part of a rapidly evolving, exploratory strategy with
noisy gene-expression (rover).

***To stay at the natal home or fly away: dimorphic males of fig
wasps***

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-ioKd4TFILUY/VQZ_OIaOUvI/AAAAAAAADRM/lLrXXSJxuSk/s800/dimorphism.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/J6625_RR8PDfzdbYyrJ4KdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

This dimorphism in the tactics of PKG allelic variants in the fly is
reminiscent of the male dimorphism in fig wasps. The fig wasps come in
three major life-style categories: 1) the pollinators which necessarily
enter the fig through its opening and pollinate the flowers inside it;
2) the non-pollinators which might rarely enter the fig along with the
pollinators or more frequently bore into the fig using their ovipositor
from outside and lay their eggs within. Inside the fig their offspring
might form a gall, inside which they develop. 3) the parasitoids that
use their ovipositor to drill into the gall formed in the fig by the
above and lay their egg as a parasite on the above’s larvae. Among the
non-pollinators at least 10% of the species are characterized by
dimorphism in males, where the two basic versions are winged or
wingless. The winged males are like the females which are always winged
and typically bore their way out of the fig and fly away to mate with a
female elsewhere. The wingless males in contrast usually remain in the
fig of their birth and mate right there. The wingless males display
alternative mating strategies. One of these seen in the wasp
*Pseudidarnes minerva* where the wingless morph is a dwarf, thus uses
much lesser energy, but has mandibles that allow it to bite its way into
the gall of the virgin female and mate right there even before she
emerges out. Now wings are costly both in terms of making them and the
energy expended in flying with them. The resource gained by not making
wings can be used for alternative purposes in the wingless males and
this manifests as the second tactic, the soldier phenotype (e.g.
*Sycoscapter*). These develop strong mandibles and in some cases armor
and engage in lethal combat with other wingless males – 25-50% of the
males often die in combat, frequently through decapitation, in their
natal fig – as the great biologist WD Hamilton estimated millions of
males might die in combat on a large nyagrodha or udumbara tree. This
level of lethal combat is atypical for males and is predicted by
evolutionary theory to occur only if the future reproductive
opportunities are very low relative to the currently contested
reproductive opportunity, which is indeed the case for these wasps.
While the determinant of male dimorphism remains unclear, the evidence
in several cases favors it arising from two alleles at single locus.
This makes it remarkably similar to the sitter-rover dimorphism in the
fly, raising the possibility of a similar genetic basis for it. However,
in some wasps like *Otitesella pseudoserrata* the close match between
the morph and the availability of the mating opportunity specific to a
morph, suggests that similar dimorphism could emerge from conditional
epigenetic control of a determinant genetic locus. As we will see below
this also holds true for the PKG gene.

***Trimorphism and the rock-scissors-paper game***

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-nETweA6qG24/VQZ-t2IP6GI/AAAAAAAADRA/_XPmZ7l7Jg8/s800/polymorphism.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/mQXoqQEh9WTte1n2M8cMyNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Like the above examples of dimorphism, there can also be trimorphism if
a triad of alleles result in three distinct phenotypes, which are locked
in a rock-scissors-paper (RSP) game – in such a game one strategy always
beats another but is always beaten by the third (rock breaks scissors;
scissors cuts paper; paper can cover rock). Numerous cases of phenotypic
trimorphism is observed in distant members of the animal tree. In the
isopod crustacean *Paracerceis sculpta* (sponge louse) the 3 types of
males alpha, beta and gamma adopt 3 distinct strategies with the alphas
being big harem holders with large uropods that hoard females in the
cavity of sponges. The smaller betas in contrast mimic females in
appearance and reside in the harem by passing of as females. The gammas
in contrast are very small and slip right through every now and them
into the harem evading the alpha even as he is fighting to throw out
interlopers with his uropods. Trimorphic males often distinguished by
the differences in their weaponry or ornamentation used in sexual
conflict. It has recently become clear that this is prevalent in
beetles. In the iridescent green rhinoceros beetle *Oxysternon
conspicillatum* the three forms are those with a long horn, those with a
short horn and those with no horns which resemble females. Similarly, in
the stag beetle *Dorcus rectus* the three types of males are
distinguished by having long mandibles with two teeth, medium mandibles
with one tooth and short mandibles with no tooth. In the weevil
*Parisoschoenus expositus* it manifests in the sternal spines which are
long in the alpha, short in the beta and absent in the gamma.
Trimorphism is also seen in the case of the fig wasps like *Otitesella
longicauda* and *Otitesella rotunda*, where the three morphs differ
entirely in mating tactics; hence, each has its own specific feature:
the primary dichotomy, as noted above, is between (1) the winged flier
male and the wingless forms; which in turn use two distinct strategies:
(2) the wingless soldier male with armor and (3) the unarmored dwarf
male with long mandibles, which are used to pull females out of galls
and mate with them before they emerge on their own.

Trimorphism is not the unique preserve of arthropods of the
pan-crustacean lineage – a similar situation is observed in the case of
trimorphic males of the lizard *Uta stansburiana*. The belligerent alpha
males with bright orange throats and large territories hold harems and
beat the beta males which have blue throats and small territories.
However, once the betas get a female they hold tight guarding them
jealously against the smaller yellow-throated gamma males that look like
females. The gammas however beat the alphas by slipping into their
territories looking like females and sneak a copulation with the real
females. Finally, it should be noted that trimorphism is not the
exclusive premise of males. In the case of the damselfly (e.g. *Ischnura
elegans*) there are three female morphs with two being regular females
types and one being a male mimic (Something l discovered for myself via
endless hours of dragonfly watching in school and college). Here sexual
harassment by the male apparently reduces the future fitness of the
females. Thus the male-mimicing female is believed to gain a selective
advantage even though it is less preferred by the male. Evidence from
the *Uta*, *Paracerceis* and the female-trimorphic *Ischnura elegans*
suggest that the presence of three distinct alleles at a single locus
result in three morphs. Moreover, the frequency with which trimorphic
males have independently emerged across the animal tree, and a similar
genetic basis for the instances when trimorphism emerges in females
suggests that a single gene with three distinct genetic (i.e. alleles)
or epigenetic (expression) states is the most likely mechanism by which
this is initiated. If these three morphs are then locked in a RSP
conflict then they are all likely to persist in the population.

However, the possibility of greater complexity in the interactions
between the distinct morphs is suggested by the male trimorphism seen in
the ruff (a sandpiper-like bird; *Philomachus pugnax*). Here the alpha
male holds territory and advertises himself with his dark color and a
prominent collar of feathers on his neck. The beta males hold no
territory and are light colored with a weak collar. They are satellites
which associate themselves with the alpha males. The gammas are female
mimics, which lack the collar and are difficult to distinguish from
females. The alphas compete with other alphas in territorial conflicts
but they tolerate betas when the males assemble in large groups to
attract females. Females prefer assemblies with large numbers of males.
Hence, toleration of beta satellites by alphas allows them fluff up
their numbers to attract females better. Once the females come the
alphas with territories are dominant in securing their mating rights.
However, as the alphas are squabbling between themselves for obtaining a
territory the betas sneak in quick copulations. The gammas in contrast
mingle with the females by looking like them and get their copulation.
The issue with this avian situation is that there is both conflict and
cooperation between the alphas and the betas and the exact situation of
the gamma vis-a-vis the other two morphs is unclear. Thus, at the face,
it does not look like a simple situation of conflict between the three
morphs with each beating one and losing to the other.

***Polymorphism and caste***  
When such polymorphism of strategies arising from genetics or epigenetic
regulation is superimposed on a social organism it can manifest as
caste. This is likely to be accentuated in a social organism because
there can be greater buffering against the fitness reduction in the
individual caused by certain strategies if they can result in increased
included fitness (kin selection) or group success (group fitness).
Interestingly, some studies do suggest that cGMP-dependent kinase
activity in social hymenopterans plays a role in the labor
specialization. The honeybee workers begin their adult lives as nurse
bees which hang out in the nest and perform the task of rearing
offspring. Subsequently, they transition to forager bees, which fly out
of the hive to seek flowers to gather nectar and pollen. In the
stay-at-home nurse bees the PKG levels and concomitantly activity is low
but when the transition to the forager state is made PKG doubles in
expression level and activity. Moreover, treatment with cGMP triggers
the transition to the forager state indicating a causal role for this
phosphorylation pathway. This increase in PKG activity also appeared to
initiate expression of the archetypal PAS domain protein Period which
regulates circadian rhythms. This correlates with the fact the the nurse
bees engage in round-the-clock activity without any particular circadian
rhythm, whereas the foragers seek flowers only in the day. Thus, the
labor specialization in the honeybee is a mirror of the PKG allelic
dimorphism in *Drosophila*, only that it is achieved in the same animal
via epigenetic means. A similar pattern of PKG expression is also seen
in the bumble bee suggesting the generality of this function. However,
this clean dichotomy has been fudged by work on the ant *Pheidole
pallidula* where it is the soldiers which have high PKG levels rather
than the minor workers which do most foraging. But these observations
should be treated with caution because recent work on the red harvester
ant (*Pogonomyrmex barbatus*) shows that early in the morning foragers
are marked by lower PKG expression levels than stay-at-home workers but
at midday their PKG levels of former shoot up much higher than the
latter. This suggests that time of the day for such measurements and
also the age of the worker (for with aging generally PKG goes down in
some hymenopterans) might make a difference. Thus, the same gene under,
genetic, epigenetic or more dynamic and immediate regulation can produce
dimorphism in population, dimorphic behavior in the same animal with a
switch at certain point in time, or cyclically over the day.

This said it is there is evidence for at least partial genetic control
of the labor specialization between a nest-bound nurses and the foragers
bee in the honeybees. Studies point to the presence of a genetic basis
for the predisposition to take up forager roles as indicated by the
variation being related to queens inseminated by multiple males
differing in their genetics. Within foragers the threshold of response
to sucrose has a genetic basis and determines whether the forager brings
back water, pollen, nectar, or nectar+pollen in that order. Given the
role of the PKG polymorphism in differential sucrose response in
*Drosophila*, it is possible that the genetic basis for differential
foraging in the honeybee works via the PKG network. In at least three
distinct hymenopterans, the honeybee, the leafcutter ant *Acromyrmex
versicolor* and the social wasp *Polybia occidentalis* a distinct
subgroup of workers have emerged that specialize in corpse disposal
\[like the caṇḍāla in the historical Hindu caste structure\]. There is
some evidence that there is a genetic component to their specialization.
Likewise, as Hölldobler, Wilson and others point out in the honeybee
there are some workers known as elites that consistently perform better
than the rest in terms of speed, productivity, or memory and also in
stimulating and organizing their nest-mates. This elite status might
also have a genetic component to it as suggested by the heritable nature
of task learning performance/memory in honeybees.

Thus, hymenopteran societies are anything but what social thinkers,
particularly those with a Marxian psyche, have wished – the egalitarian
society with no caste structure. Old Hindu thinkers, following their
earlier Indo-European predecessors were different, they accepted the
biological reality of strategic polymorphism and tried to frame their
social theories against the backdrop of caste differentiation. Modern
Hindu thinkers are generally very troubled about this aspect of their
history. They may take the stance that: 1) they were really egalitarian
as in the Marxian theories; 2) they had varṇa but it was a pernicious
aspect of their society that needs to be abolished today; 3) they accept
the existence of varṇa but argue that it was entirely by vocation and
not by birth, and argue the latter to be a perversion of the original
intent. Indeed, even in old India there were two theories – varṇa by
janman (caste determined by birth) or varṇa by karman (caste determined
by vocation). When compared to the societies that emerged among
hymenopterans or cockroaches it becomes clear that both forces have been
just as active in Hindu society – varṇa by janman might be compared to
the genetic contribution to propensity for particular labor
specialization whereas varṇa by karman may be compared to the epigenetic
specialization for a particular activities. Given that the human ape has
both a sex and reproductive organization different from its insect
counterparts, the genetic basis for specialized tactics are likely to be
common and is seen in societies even today as suggested by the work of
Clark. This is not going to vanish irrespective of what people wish.
Moreover, irrespective of whether epigenetic switches or genetic
propensities have a primary role in labor specialization there will be
scope for intra-caste conflict and struggle for belonging to a
particular caste. One may illustrate this by examples from the brilliant
work of Hölldobler and Wilson: In the ant *Odontomachus brunneus* the
dominant workers establish their location within the colony close to the
brood, the middle ranked workers are inside the colony but doing tasks
away from the brood, finally the low ranked workers with withered
ovaries do the foraging outside the colony. This hierarchy is enforced
by aggressive posturing with the defeated pushed to a lower rank and
walk away with lowered bodies and shivering antennae in the direction
indicated by the higher ranked. In the leafcutter ant *Atta cephalotes*
the garbage dump workers are confined to permanently working in the
garbage dump via aggressive behavior by other workers upon sensing the
smell of garbage on their bodies. So the emergence of such behaviors in
human society should be considered in this light.

***The victory of the fire ants: genetic polymorphism and a
transnational society?***  
Some modern human social thinkers yearn for a society without national
boundaries. Can this happen? The fire ant *Solenopsis invicta* comes in
two behavioral flavors: One is the the monogyne/oligogyne version whose
colonies have a single or a small number of genetically closely related
queens. These colonies are like nations that strongly defend territories
as result of which they form spread-out nests. The other flavor is the
polygyne which has numerous queens and it does not maintain territorial
boundaries. Interestingly, a dominant allelic variant in a gene coding
for an odorant-binding-protein (OBPs) Gp-9 is the genetic basis for the
polygyne phenotype. The OBPs are insect proteins which bind small
molecules on their antennal sensors and help them identify and respond
to different smells. The polygyne variant is incapable of responding to
the differences in odors of workers and queens from different colonies.
The loss of this discrimination has resulted in loss of recognition of
territorial boundaries. A key aspect of this phenotype is that when
polygyne workers are as few as 15% of the colony they kill all queens
that are homozygous for the monogyne allele. Thus, the colony is
converted to polygyne. In the polygyne colony the queens are small and
produce fewer eggs and the whole colony becomes a mass of individuals
with no specific genetic relationship between the workers and queens.
One wonders if certain human societies are like this and certain alleles
in our midst predispose such behaviors.
