+++
title = "upakathā of previous: śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam"

+++
It was a bright spring day, when the vaṭakinī mahotsava was being
celebrated. Several families from the town were arriving early in the
morning at a shrine, which contained a gigantic image of the terrible
ape Hanūmat. Even as Somakhya arrived with his family he saw his
classmate Lootika, with whom he had recently made acquaintance at the
Padmāvatī-caitya, arriving arriving at the shrine with her family. The
two of them high-fived on meeting each other, but conscious of their
families watching, kept to their respective groups. Soon they all
assembled at the enclosure before the idol and the arcaka performed the
ritual of abhiṣeka with milk, honey and various other substances before
the final lustration with water. Then each family had to wait for their
turn for their personalized session where the image of the great simian
was garlanded with their personal offerings. Some offered a garland of
vaṭaka-s with a central hole, yet others were offering garlands of
jahāngiri-s and still others garlands of laḍḍuka-s made of a legume’s
paste. It was a wait of several hours before that would be done. In the
meantime some families participated in listening to a narration of the
sundarakāṇḍa, others took part in a saṃskṛta-saṃbhāṣaṇa-śibiram, and yet
others in cooking food to offer to poverty-stricken people. The
youngsters were playing various games. However, Somakhya did not feel
like joining them. Instead, he sat for a while with his parents hearing
the sundarakāṇḍa but he was not too inspired by the lack of the
vīra-rasa and the melodramatic bhakti of the bhāgavata. Hence, he got
up and wandered away to see what his friends were up to. Vidrum who was
playing marbles with some others called out to him to join them but that
day his mind was not in the game, and he wandered away after watching
for a minute or two. Then he saw some other acquaintances playing a
kandūka-krīḍā but he was again disinclined to join them. As he wandered
towards the river adjacent to the shrine he saw Lootika’s sisters and
other girls playing a childish game with much enthusiasm. Finally, he
wandered past two vīrakal-s of dead heroes and reached an enormous
aśvattha at the edge of the shrine’s campus. Beneath it were several
Nāgas and on the rim of the circular platform around it he saw Lootika
seated. Noting her to be engrossed in a book he let her be and proceeded
to the wall near the river from where he saw several dinosaurs cackling
and screaming in or by the water. Then he saw a vāhana of the great god
Kumāra jump off a tree and course into the sky in his full glory. This
brought to his mind a mantra from the Ṣaṇmukha-kalpa – he felt it was
some kind of signal and started walking back. As he passed the sprawling
aśvattha Lootika called out to him.

Seated beside her under the great tree he asked: “Not engaging something
more physical like your sisters? What are you reading?”  
Lootika: “Actually my limbs are still aching from yesterday’s five hour
climb up Candragupta Maurya’s western precipice. Hence, I thought I
would finish off reading the fourth of the śūlapuruṣa-s.”  
S: Which śūlapuruṣa? I remember you mentioning Herr Nietzsche before…”  
L: “Well, I have covered Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Spengler. Though
we routinely study Karl Gauss as part of our education in mathematics
and science, I am only now taking in his biography – he is the fourth of
the śūlapuruṣa-s”.  
S: “Reading biographies of scientists serves more than one useful
purpose. First, it lets us gain an estimate of where exactly we stand
with respect to their deeds. In this regard Gauss is an unscalable peak
in the realm of science and mathematics; perhaps in times closer to our
own only Śrīnivāsa Rāmānuja could have come close. May be a thousand
Newtons.”  
L: “Indeed. Reading and thinking about these mleccha-s, the four
śūlapuruṣa-s in particular, has brought forth many disparate questions
some potentially deep and others shallow. Among other things, the
parallels and contrasts between the scientist and the philosopher among
the mleccha-s as well as our own midst strikes me. I wanted to talk to
you about these things.”  
S: “Pray proceed.”

L: “What do you think of Gauss’s aphorism in Latin – ‘*pauca sed matura*
(Few but ripe)’ . Is this the correct approach to science?”  
S: “Today we are often confronted with ‘pūrṇa-kara iva khara-viṣṭāḥ |’
in science. In this atmosphere, this is indeed a sound approach,
especially for those who do science for merely for the sake of fluffing
up their publication count – saying little new but appearing in
possession of a big CV. On the other hand it is misused by the cartel
which runs the magazines to slow down and prevent publication of what is
really good science. Looking at what a man does often reveals more than
his motto. After all, in real life Gauss himself provided the
counter-example. He published two immensely dense books and papers
amounting to at least 12 sizable volumes. So his motto was certainly no
obstacle to his productivity; hence, if we have a lot to say there is no
harm putting down a lot on paper. Moreover, given that today science is
done by the mleccha-rIti, we should be ready to move fast to strike
before our bhrātṛvyas.”

L: “One thing which caught my attention is in regard to the little that
we know of the peculiar philosophical positions of Gauss. Among these
was his alteration of a statement of Plato recorded by Plutarch ‘ἀεὶ ὁ
θεὸς γεωμετρεῖ (the god always always geometrizes)’ to ‘ἀεὶ ὁ θεὸς
ἀριθμετἰζεῖ (the god always arithmeticizes)’. In our days, with
computers being an inseparable part of our lives, one might be inclined
to say: ‘saṃkhyānti nityaṃ devāḥ | (the gods always compute)’. It
appears that Gauss privileging arithmetic over geometry might be a step
in the direction of eventually seeing the ultimate action of the gods as
being one of computation. Perhaps, it was reflection of his own capacity
for enormous calculations and algorithmic thinking as seen in his
algorithm for π. It also seems to me that our people arrived at
something closer this position than that of our yavana cultural cousins.
After all, though we display geometry of some sophistication and
intricacy in our śrauta rituals, we arrive at it not so much by
geometrizing but via an algorithmic back-end intensive on computation.
What can be more distinctive than the way the yavana arrives at
![\\sqrt{2}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csqrt%7B2%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sqrt{2}") and the way we do so in the altars of the soma rituals via
a computation with the ‘scaffolding hidden away after the edifice is
constructed’ as Gauss would say.”

S: “Gauss’s favoring of ‘arithmetic’ at first sight does appears like a
step in the direction of: ‘nityaṃ hi devāḥ saṃkhyānti na kṣetraṃ
pragaṇayantīti |’. But it appears that our position was much more of
the pure form of it than that of Gauss. For us it would seem that all
emerges via an algorithmic process; mathematics itself is subservient to
and a limb of the algorithmic process, even as the śrauta ritual and
bhāṣā were produced via computational processes. However, what we see
on part of Gauss is a much greater status accorded to arithmetized
mathematics. After all he remarked to Bessel, another man close to the
pinnacle of scientific capacity: ‘*all the measurements in the world do
not balance one theorem by which the science of eternal truths is
actually advanced.*‘ Thus, Gauss places the measurements, which form the
basis of science as we know, below the ‘science of eternal truths’,
which is mathematics. Here perhaps he is closer to the Platonists than
to us.”

L: “Somakhya, we can clearly apprehend certain things to be
computational processes. The development of a multicellular organism can
be seen as computation performed by transcription factors on DNA
sequence. We can also see the maintenance of particular gene expression
states as computation performed by enzymes writing and erasing
modifications on histone tails or DNA in chromatin coupled with reader
proteins that recognize them. One can also imagine other forms of
computations taking place more generally in the whole universe: after
all if space and time are quantized then reality is amenable to being
conceived as a series computations performed on these discrete units.
Then the question would emerge if there is a need at all for the θεὸς in
all this.”

S: “If indeed the whole universe were a computer, as it seems likely to
people like us, then we may say that the fundamental aspect of it is
information which impinges on and underlies existence. This information
is what one might be inclined to assign to the realm of the θεὸς. In our
old sāṃkhya thought this underlying information is an essential
foundation of the universe in the form of the guṇa known as sattva; of
the two other guṇa-s, energy maps to rajas and mass to tamas. The deva-s
were seen as manifestations of that underlying information the sattva:
thus one may see them as the limbs of the code that operates the
universe-computer. In this conception one might say we are the ones
closer to the Platonists. But there is no place for the θεὸς outside of
the universe-computer, as Gauss, due the vāsana-s of the preta-delusion
might have imagined.”

L: “Hence, it would seem to me that when those entities of the
underlying universe-code impinge on the physical world we see them as
manifestations of the deva-s as praised in the veda; when they impinge
on our phenomenal world we see them as the devatā of the mantra or the
mantra itself. The latter aspect appears to play a larger role in the
tantra-s.”  
S: “Lootika, we may with some caution accept that to be the siddhānta.”

L: “Gauss seems to accept something like a śuddha-bhuvanādhvan (pure
worlds) beyond this physical world where the one might rest after
cessation in the physical world. But his certainty in this regard
despite admitting the absence of a ‘rigorous scientific basis’ in
notable. Let me read out his words to you:  
*‘In this world there is a pleasure of the intellect, which is satisfied
in science, and a pleasure of the heart, which consists principally of
the fact that human beings mutually ease the troubles and burdens of
life. But if it is the job of the highest being to shape creatures on
special spheres and to let them exist 80 or 90 years in order to prepare
such a pleasure for them, then that would be a miserable plan. Whether
the soul lives 80 years or 80 million years, if it perishes once, then
this space of time is only a reprieve. One is therefore forced to the
view, for which there is so much evidence even though without rigorous
scientific basis, that besides this material world another, second,
purely spiritual world order exists, with just as many diversities as
that in which we live – we are to participate in it.’*

Now let me read out what he writes in a letter to his friend Bolyai:  
*‘It is true, my life is adorned with much that the world considers
worthy of envy. But believe me, dear Bolyai, the austere sides of life,
at least of mine, which move through it like a red thread, and which one
faces more and more defenselessly in old age, are not balanced to the
hundredth part by the pleasurable. I will gladly admit that the same
fates which have been so hard for me to bear, and still are, would have
been much easier for many another person, but the mental constitution
belongs to our ego, which the creator of our existence has given us, and
we can change little in it. On the other hand I find that this
consciousness of the nothingness of life, which in any case the greater
part of humanity must express on approaching the goal, offers me the
strongest security for the following of a more beautiful
metamorphosis.’*  
O descendant of Bhṛgu, would you think any of this can survive the razor
of knowledge?

S: “O daughter of the Āṅgirasa line before we apply the razor of
knowledge let us look at this: Gauss sees the world from the perspective
of his suffering and believes, directed by his a priori belief in the
‘highest being’, that the said being should have something more
beautiful in mind than the ephemerality and the suffering that
characterizes human life. On the other hand he admits, what today we
would term the biological component that makes people able bear
suffering to different degrees. Now, from the perspective of our own
first person experience I can tell you this: Today we are young,
sheltered, provided for amply by our parents, and enjoy a certain ease
of living on account of which we can pursue the paths among the rarefied
heights of mental experience – a luxury which a man or woman born in a
low station cannot easily afford. I can also tell you that people like
our classmate Vidrum considers and even in the distant future would
consider our lives ‘adorned with much worthy of envy’. But in that
distant future we will also see suffering as we lead our real lives
outside our parents’ shelter, battling various dasyu-s and avrata-s in
different struggles. We will also be afflicted by the darts of Paśupati,
even though we know the incantation “na bhavo na śarvo neśānaḥ”, and
finally one of us will watch the other being consigned to the fires in
which we had made our oblations as the final offering to Vivasvān’s
bludgeon-wielding son. At that future time though Vidrum would be
envious of our station, we would see him as taking his suffering more
lightly than us. Now tell me O Ūrṇāyī, if, when confronted by all this
that awaits us in the future, you might think that these are but
ephemeral dreams before our awakening into that blissful wakefulness
where these foregone dreams would be forgotten.”

L: “I too can see some glimpses of the future you see. From the reading
of our national epic I have learned that such indeed is the way life –
like that of Pāñcālī, the Pāṇḍu-s or Rādheya. I believe it was
originally meant by the great sage Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana to be a tragedy.
With the destruction of the Yadu-s on the final picnic, the death of the
great hero Devakīputra at the hands of a hunter, and the Pāṇḍu-s on
their Himalayan climb. But since then the Hindus did not want to see
tragedy in literature anymore for we have enough of it in real life.
Hence, unlike the Yavana-s who saw a direct catharsis in the tragedy,
our ancestors hoped to make every story, however tragic its course,
finally end on a more positive note. Thus, in our national epic as we
now have it Pāṇḍu-s except the realized Yudhiṣṭhira tragically die one
by one on their climb. Even Yudhiṣṭhira is left alone with his dog and
despite mounting the great Indra’s car is sent to naraka. But in the end
we are presented with a world in spirit much like what Gauss seems to
envision. There Yudhiṣṭhira sees Bhīma united with the Maruts, Kṛṣṇa has
become Viṣṇu, Arjuna has become Indra, Droṇa has united with the god
Bṛhaspati, Abhimanyu has united with Soma, Nakula and Sahadeva have
united with the Aśvinau, the 5 sons of the Pāṇḍu-s have become
Gandharvas, Bhīṣṃa has returned to his Vasu-hood, Karṇa has united with
the Sūrya, Sātyaki had become a Sādhya and Draupadī has become Śrī
(though in terms of vaidika equivalence she is actually Sarasvatī).
Thus, in the current form our national epic teaches us that there is a
rather strong pull for imagining that ideal world and a journey or
awakening into it. In terms of first person experience it has probably
the same purport as the concept of mokṣa, which later the Hindus came to
place on much higher pedestal than the attainment of the daiva world.
However, to me it appears a transition to such a daiva world would seem
like a much more satisfying belief than the colorless, self-looping
bliss of the mumukṣu. Thus, I accept that the desire to believe in such
can indeed be strong but before we accept ‘suvargaṃ lokaṃ gamiṣyati’ or
even mokṣa we need to subject them to a strike from the blade of
knowledge.”

S: “O Gautamī, why do think ideas like these arose in the first place?”

L: “O Ātharvaṇa, of course I was going to apply that question to subject
them to the test of knowledge. The conviction of the peoples of old in
such concepts was strong indeed – there was a certain śraddha in such
matters – I suspect it was the strength of this śraddha that made such
concepts survive long after the initial experiences that gave rise to
it. The future suffering that we are going experience is going to be a
very real first person experience to us. Since you and me sort of seem
to have the same mind and perhaps even a unified consciousness we might
even perceive each other’s experiences. Given this, one could
inductively speculate if there is only one common experiencer across all
that exists. We believe that this type of speculation repeatedly emerged
among the ancients. To add to this the ancients also had vivid
experiences from various substances, the yoga of oṣadhi-s and the tāduri
(toad), like one discovered by our ancestors the Bhārgava-s and the
Āṅgirasa-s in what is known in the Veda as the incantation of the
toad.The first person experiences caused by these substances were as
real as the reality experienced in their absence. Some of them gave rise
to visions that looked like the journey to the daiva realm while others
were the experience of unitary universal consciousness. Given these
qualia were as real as any other qualia from real life they reasoned
that such realms and mokṣa existed. At least among our people they were
able to reproduce these to a degree based on practices independent of
oṣadhi, i.e. the yoga of the triple bandha, khecari and the like. This
reproducibility increased their śraddha in the same. This combined with
the nature of life being characterized by sorrow led to the fixation of
these memes. But then there was some doubt in the minds of even the
ancients regarding the ultimate reality of these worlds – after all you
snap out of such visions just like from a dream rather than permanently
awakening into them. However, with the mokṣa experience the ancients
were able to develop a completely consistent world placing it at the
base of a cit-parama axiomatic system. Hence, they saw it as being
something greater than the transition to the suvargo lokaḥ. But Somakhya
do we now possess a divya-cakṣus to see beyond it?

S: “I have no major disagreement with your summary of these ideas. Their
strength is indeed great as a man of highest capacity like Gauss was
enmeshed by them. Many have thought that these other loka-s were not
mere ideals inhabiting some śuddha-bhuvanādhvan that lie beyond the
material real worlds but actual real worlds like Mars, the Sun or some
other star or planet. This was indeed a strand of thought among our own
ancestors. Gauss too thought that the ‘soul’ could be situated on the
Sun or Ceres or some other planet and calculated that according to the
gravity of the world on which it is situated it might be of different
sizes – like a bug on the Sun or 12 feet tall on Ceres. But with today’s
knowledge transpositions to such loka-s seem much less appealing even if
it were somehow to be feasible.

More importantly, we have another crucial piece of information.
Yesterday I described to you the origin of the animal amine
methyltransferases via a lateral transfer from bacteria. These include
tryptamine N-methyltransferase, which enables our own pineals to
synthesize the molecule N,N dimethyltryptamine. We have access to this
molecule in our own bodies and it can confer us the first person
experience like the oṣadhi-s or the tāduri. It has been around for a
while, from at least the base of the placental mammals. Yet, it almost
appears that natural selection has kept out the ability to access such
states of experience via such molecules and even in fleeting moments if
we do, as you said, we awake out of them rather than into them. Further,
many in our religion who have attained a certain permanence of such
experiences often tend to belong to or subscribe to the ways of
ascetics, which compromises their fitness. Perhaps, it is not without
reason my ancestor, Bhṛgu said in the Atharvaṇa śruti that the great
Indra slaughtered the yati-s. This was probably to ensure that their
ways do not become the ādarśa for the Ārya-s and they do not drop their
weapons when in the strife with the Dasyu-s. It is for this, among other
reasons, that the Tathāgata and the Nagna were disrupters of the
Ārya-patha. Hence, such awakenings into alternative states seem to be
anaisargika and not necessarily the goal facilitated by nature for all.
To the extent it is pauṣṭika, as it seems it was in Gauss’s case, people
may cling to them. But we are unlikely to find it to be pauṣṭika: anṛtam
iva dṛśyate

That said, O Lootika, I do suspect there is a different kind of an ideal
(which one might call the śuddha-bhuvanādhvan), perhaps it is not
something which we awaken into at the time of death, but it is that
collection of scripts which run in universe-computer. Hence, when the
great Kauśika says in the śruti:  
Oṃ bhur bhuvaḥ suvaḥ | tat savitur vareṇyam | bhargo devasya dhīmahi |
dhiyo yo naḥ pracodayāt | paro rajase sāvadom ||  
The vyāhṛti-s are verily the universe of space and time. The sāvitrī the
energy and matter therein, which we meditate upon. The secret fourth
foot is the collection of ideals which form the code of the
universe-computer.”

L: “Keeping that in mind may we some day make the sāvitra oblations.”

Just then Varoli came by and called Lootika to join her family as their
turn had come to place a garland around the mighty vānara. Somakhya too
walked away to join his family.

[Go to upakathā of previous:
śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam-2](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/04/29/upakatha-of-previous-sulapuru%e1%b9%a3a-catvarakam-2/ "upakathā of previous: śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam-2")
