+++
title = "The ponderous tale of the tombstones"

+++
“Since you are recording the diverse Vaidruma-s would you record the
tombstone variation? While other matters like the sloths of South
America, the megalithic culture of India, cave paintings, or even WW2
might be more interesting to the occasional reader who constitute the
bulk of visitors, the Vaidruma-s have a peculiar value – the
entertainment and the motifs – for few of us.”

**The ponderous tale of the tombstones**  
When Lootika had joined the school several of her new classmates had
showered enthusiastic attention on her and helped her fit into the alien
environment. They soon suspected that she might probably know more about
certain subjects than some of the teachers in the school. Hence, many of
them stuck to her as she could effectively help them with their academic
travails, though they found her evincing little interest in their
discussions and activities. While most teachers developed a soft corner
for Lootika out of silent respect for her abilities, two of them, namely
the one who taught chemistry and the one who taught history developed a
loathing for her. They sought to trap her in a situation such that they
could inflict punishment on her. While Lootika deftly navigated these
dangers, on one such occasion she nearly fell into the hands of the
chemistry teacher due to the alleged theft of a bottle of copper sulfate
crystals from the lab. While the teacher was preparing a severe penalty
for Lootika, in the last minute, she was saved by a classmate Nikhila,
who was greatly favored by the said teacher. As a consequence, Lootika
and Nikhila became friends; the latter in return for Lootika’s help in
the exams, introduced her to some crafts. Amongst other things, she
showed Lootika how to make a lamp from the dehisced pod of the bastard
poon tree and to carve figures out of chalk. One day Nikhila showed
Lootika a necklace she had made from *Cardiospermum*, *Canna* and
*Adenanthera* seeds. Lootika wondered if Nikhila might help her in
making one for herself, but the latter did not know which plants bore
those seeds as she had bought them from a roadside peddler. Lootika,
told her that she knew those plants well and that they could go to
collect their seeds if she wished.

Soon there after Nikhila had visited Lootika’s home to seek help with
some thoroughly boring problems in Euclidean geometry. Lootika quickly
decimated them and then suggested to her friend that they go out to
collect seeds. Relieved from the incubus of the confusing problems,
Nikhila decided to accompany her. Lootika’s peculiar pursuits, largely
mystified Nikhila, as she had little understanding or interest in them.
However, collecting seeds seemed innocuous enough, unlike other
hard-to-fathom-things she had seen Lootika and her sisters do. They soon
rode out until they reached a narrow unpaved, tree-lined path that
branched off from the road near Vidrum’s house. As they took that path
they seemed to move into another world – the bustle of the city was
replaced by a sense of silence, though not a real one as the air was
abuzz with the busy stridulations of insects seeking mates and birds
going about their business. They finally reached a wall with a few trees
and shrubs beside it. Lootika directed Nikhila to chain her bike to one
of the trees, hidden from sight by the bushes. Then she pointed to the
wall and told her companion that they needed to climb over to the other
side.

Nikhila was horrified: “Lootika what do you mean\! I believe this is the
wall of the old cemetery. I am just too scared to do this – there could
be bhūta-s, preta-s, and what not. Moreover, we are girls from proper
families and it would be really wrong for us to go into such shady
places. What would people say if they saw us there.”  
Lootika smiled and said: “Don’t worry. I have worked this out well. This
spot is rarely frequented by anyone, there are no guards for it is an
abandoned cemetery, and this section is known to only few of us. We can
get two of the types of our seeds inside there.”  
Nikhila: “No, No\! This does not look right. We should not go in just
for the seeds. I am scared of bhūta-s.”  
Lootika: “Nikhila, the living man is a much greater threat to life and
limb than the dead one. But fortunately for us most living men are
afraid of the dead ones making this place one of the safer hangouts for
us. Yes, the danger from mysterious entities of the realm of the dead
exists but even if the worst were to befall you from that quarter you
can count on me to get you out.”

Saying so, Lootika jumped up to hold on to the top of the wall and
heaved herself on to it. From atop she motioned to her companion to do
the same. Nikhila had never done anything that came even close to this –
not even climbing a wall, leave along that of a cemetery. But seeing
Lootika in action, something clicked within her brain – a sudden urge to
do something which was so utterly forbidden in her parlance arose within
her and she followed suit. She struggled to get over the wall but
eventually did so and climbed down on to the other side with some help
from her friend. As Nikhila saw the gravestones her heart raced and she
held Lootika’s hand in fear. Lootika explained to her: “The region was
once the cemetery land of the liṅgavanta-s. After the English conquest
of our land the tyrants took over the cemetery and usurped the still
available land for use by them, the Anglo-Indians, and the
śavārādhaka-s. Of course they were all segregated as they did not
want the dark-skinned native śavārādhaka-s to share a resting place next
to that of a proper Englishman. These parts were abandoned after 1947 CE
and over time they fell in the sights of the real estate agents who
sought to take the land to build houses. These parts originally
stretched from over here all the way to our classmate Vidrum’s house; in
fact his house is built on a plot that was right inside the erstwhile
cemetery.”

Hearing Lootika’s narrative Nikhila felt only slightly better from
assurance that grounds were not in use for a long while. So she followed
Lootika in collecting the Cardiospermum and Adenanthera seeds, but
cautiously looked around every now and then. At one point Lootika showed
her a bone and said: “See this beautifully shaped bone? It is a human
left astragalus, a bone in our ankles. From its robustness I would say
it is most likely from a male. Note this half-pulley-like surface for
the joint with the tibia.” Nikhila was not able to easily take in the
beauty of the astragalus that Lootika was describing. She nervously
remarked: “To think that it was once a bone in a man somehow fills me
with some angst.” Lootika: “Fear not, it is just as lifeless as a stone
on the ground.” Despite Lootika’s assurances, her friend kept casting
wary glances at every little rustle of the wind or hop of an insect. As
she did so she her eyes fell upon a beautiful gravestone and she
remarked: “Lootika, that handsome gravestone to your right has a really
nice lattice work. I wish we could take a photo of it and make something
like that.”

Lootika: “Let us check it out. I suspect its owner must have been of
considerable wealth.”  
They went up to it and read the faded inscription: “Mrs. Emily Walsh,
wife of Colonel Christopher Walsh, soldier distinguished for his
services in the Indian mutiny…” As they read it Lootika interjected:
“Good riddance, killers of our people.” Nikhila: “May be so, but this
delicate work is really impressive. Let me make a quick sketch of it.”
While Nikhila was doing so she leaned forward and touched the
latticework on the gravestone. Lootika was aghast and yelled out:
“Nikhila\! Take your hand off it\! It could be really dangerous for
you.”

Nikhila withdrew her hand as though she had touched a hot pan. She was
even more terrified by the anxious look of Lootika who till then had
appeared almost carelessly comfortable, even while handling the remains
for her little osteological demonstration. Lootika caught hold of her
friend’s hand and pulled her towards the wall saying: “Let’s better get
out of this place right away.” They rapidly climbed on to the wall and
were back beside their bikes. As they rode back Nikhila asked in a
trembling voice: “Lootika, could something bad happen from touching that
gravestone?”  
Lootika: “I don’t want to frighten you but I should have told you not to
touch that one. It was my mistake.” Nikhila persisted: “Do you know what
can happen to me.” Lootika: “Hopefully nothing. But let me know if you
sense something untoward over the next few days.” To calm her friend
Lootika rode with her all the way to her house and changed the topic of
their conversation to more mundane matters. Finally having seen her off
at her house Lootika returned home to join her sisters.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

For the first time in her life Lootika felt a sense of loneliness. She
had just obtained her doctoral degree and was visiting her home for a
short while before starting her own lab. Vrishchika was busy with her
medical residency and preparing to enter her fellowship. Varoli had
joined grad school and was on course of repeating or even outdoing the
heroics of her elder sisters. Jhilleeka alone was at home but she had
entered college and was also working at a lab on her inventions, so
Lootika saw little of her. Lootika had not spoken to Somakhya, her
closest friend for most of her life, since they had entered grad school.
She had heard through the grapevine that he too had graduated and
started his own lab but he had not responded to a mail she had sent him
about some enzymes and so she feared that he had forgotten her. She had
lost touch with all her other classmates except for hearing from
Vrishchika that Vidrum had just started practicing at the university
hospital. Many times she felt the urge of visiting Somakhya’s house and
inquiring about him from his parents. On other occasions she felt she
should do the same with Vidrum but her pride and dignity prevented her
from doing so. With such thoughts crowding her mind she felt no urge to
visit their old hangout spots or even explore the backyard for
arthropods. She instead spent most of the time ensuring that the orders
of material for her lab were being delivered or helping her mother in
the kitchen making pickles and powders.

Her mother’s conversations were filled with deep worry for her. She
would say repeatedly: “Dear Lootika, all these successes in grad-school
or you starting your own lab are great and I am really proud of you. I
felt so relieved that all my daughters took after you and did not turn
out to be secularists, Aynrandists, dim-wits, or voluptuaries overly
interested in movies, clothing, and food, living off your father’s
wealth. I cannot describe how pleased I am that all of you all turned
out to be beautiful as adults, of good complexion, strong in limbs, and
generally free from disease. You all are indeed like a colorful peacock
spider, a fluorescent scorpion, an iridescent wasp or a silky
gryllacridid. So, even if the great Vaivasvata struck me down this
moment with his utkrāntida I would have no regrets for my life has
served its function. But let me tell you dear daughter that all these
are transient and a woman must make most them when they last. You are
very lucky, unlike most others to have raced through grad-school so
quickly. So nothing is lost. But then my Lootika all your brilliant
conquests will be of no consequence if you linger on like this without
finding a mate. It should happen soon and you should be furthering our
line. And certainly you should not take a mate who drinks alcohol,
ignores the rituals to the deva-s, gnā-s, yakṣa-s, gandharva-s,
apsaras-es and our ancestors, or is of low intelligence.”

These conversations filled Lootika with a deep fear that she was
experiencing for the first time in her life. For some inexplicable
reason her gloom seemed to increase when in course of their
conversations her mother mentioned how three skeletons had been
unearthed below Vidrum’s garage and that they discovered that the
bathroom of his house had been paved with gravestones. At dinner that
night Lootika was alone with her parents. Her father said to her: “Do
you remember Nikhila that friend of yours from school?”  
Lootika: “Yes, though I have not spoken to her since we collected our
school leaving certificates long long ago. But why do you ask?”  
Her father continued: “Shortly after her marriage she was afflicted by a
mysterious disease that none of us have been able to diagnose or treat.
Her condition is now worsening by the day.”  
This information made Lootika feel even more gloomy and after dinner she
did not wait for Jhilleeka to come back but retired to lie down on her
mat. Even as her mind was spinning with the various impinging thoughts
adding momentum to it she lapsed into that twilight between a dream and
wakefulness. She thought she saw Somakhya, Sharvamanyu, and Vrishchika
and that they were together operating the planchette in the cemetery.
She remarked to herself: “I must see Nikhila tomorrow”, mentally uttered
the ṛk of Gṛtsamada Śaunahotra to the great asura Varuṇa concluding with
“namo asurāya pracetase vo namaḥ |” and passed into the realm of sleep.

So the next day she called her former classmate who in a weak voice
expressed the great desire to see Lootika. When she reached Nikhila’s
home she was shocked to see her friend in a dismal state, as though she
may not have many days left. They spoke a little about their old school
days but soon Lootika found her old friend tiring and unable to sit. So
she helped Nikhila to her bed, where she lay and wearily continued the
conversation. Her mind wished that she talk a lot to Lootika but her
body was not cooperating. Sensing this Lootika was thinking how best she
should take leave. At the same time she also felt a certain obligation
to stick on, for it would almost look as though she was forsaking her
old schoolmate to her own silent suffering. All the while she had been
raking her mind about what might be the etiology of Nikhila’s condition.
She wished her sister Vrishchika was beside her but then she realized
that her sister could not be better in diagnostic deduction than her
father by any means. She had already asked her friend about the filthy
roadside eateries, cysticerci, tick bites, even syphilis and the like.
She was reminded of the vātaroga of the medieval brāhmaṇa, Nārāyaṇa
Bhaṭṭātiri, from the Cera country. But her friend had even shut off
that avenue as she said that even two difficult trips to Tirumala and
Puṣkara-tīrtha had yielded not even a smidgen of an improvement. On
top of it Nikhila feebly remarked that she had already seen more than
one great physician and also Lootika’s own father.

With not even a glimmer of a meaningful lead and those assailing
thoughts swirling about in her head Lootika got up and started pacing
before Nikhila’s bed. Just then she caught sight of a painting on the
wall and froze as she noticed a specific detail on it. With a dash of
excitement in her voice she asked: “Nikhila, where did you get that
painting?” Nikhila: “From a dealer of old stuff, dug up from second hand
sell-offs – it looked really pretty. I later realized it was a real
antique piece – I wished to learn more of its provenance but then I was
felled by this illness soon thereafter.” Lootika, with her voice choking
with agitation asked: “Did you see something strange in the picture.”
Nikhila: “Why? I used think there was a figure of a young European man
in it, which used to appear and disappear. He would appear as though
gazing at the horses which were corralled in that stable with beautiful
carvings that form the main aspect of the picture. I really did not feel
like telling that to anyone for they could think I am crazy.” Lootika
whistled in satisfaction and muttered a barely audible incantation
invoking the eight mātṛkā-s, śabdarāśi-bhairava, and parā. Nikhila:
“What’s that?” Lootika: “Nikhila, you must get rid of this picture
right away. I will be calling my old Sanskrit teacher to ask her husband
to take this away to the collections of the College of Archaeology.”
Nikhila: “What do you mean?” Lootika: “There are certain things I cannot
explain. But if you wish return to the world of the living and further
yourself do as I say.” Her friend always had a certain awe and respect
for Lootika; so when she was commanded thus she acceded.

Lootika placed a call to Shilpika to take away the painting and took a
detour to examine her old haunt at the cemetery. There she meditated for
a while on the great circle of terrifying yoginī-s on the red cakra in
the midst of the raktāṃbodhi and the aṭṭahāsa of the bhairava which
awakens the mantra-s. Thus, she experienced the great vidyā-s believed
to be transmitted by Rāmo Bhārgava. Then after offering that most secret
tarpaṇa to the eight mātṛkā-s she arose to return. She came back
performing Huḍukkāra while she entered her house as an act of pleasing
the Bhairava. Her mother sharply chided her: “Lootika\! Now what is
wrong with you? Why are you making these undignified, unwomanly clicks
with you tongue like a kāpālikā?” Lootika: “Never mind, let Śiva be
pleased.” Her mother said: “You seem in a rather merry mood, did you see
Nikhila at all? Her case is tragic indeed\!” Lootika: “Yes, I did. There
is no need to fear, I am pretty certain she will soon be fine. But I
wanted to ask you something. Would you know anything more of the
skeletons or the gravestones they unearthed at Vidrum’s place. Her
mother responded: “I am surprised by what you say. But why the concern
about Vidrum’s house. As you know well they got that land for cheap
because it was a part of the cemetery. It is not entirely surprising
that they found such things. But I think they said they were British era
tombstones.” Lootika: “Good to know that.” Her mother was a bit puzzled
by her mood and statements and asked: “What is all this – you seem to be
hiding something from me?” Lootika: “Don’t worry. Will tell you more
when all pieces fall in place.”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Finally, Somakhya and Lootika were back together after typhonic events
which are not a part of this story and had just started their own
household. They were performing a tāntrika fire-ritual on a new moon day
on a sthaṇḍila with just a single iron pātra of ghee and sesame seeds.
Lootika held the sruva and Somakhya made the oblations with the sruk.
The first oblation was made with the bahurūpī ṛk, that great mantra
which lies at the root of all tantra-s of the dakṣiṇa-srotas. Then
oblations were made with the combination of the aghora-pada to the
mantras of Aindrī and Brahmāṇī. Then with ghora-pada and the Kaumārī and
Vaiṣṇavī mantras the next set of oblations were made. Then the
ghora-ghoratara-pada was combined with mantra-s of Vārāhī, Cāmuṇḍā and
Raudrī for the next set of oblations. Then they made offerings to the
white yoginī-s emanating from the first two mātṛ-s, the red yoginī-s
emanating from the second dyad, and the black yoginī-s emanating from
the final three mātṛ-s. Since they were performers of vaidika rites they
then offered an oblation to the great goddess parā-sarasvatī with the
mantra of Śaunaka Bhārgava:  
oṃ aiṃ hrīṃ sarasvati tvam asmāṃ aviḍḍhi marutvatī dhṛṣatī jeṣi śatrūn
svāhā || They visualized parā-sarasvatī in her warrior form holding a
trident and a spear as she accompanied the great Indra and the sons of
Rudra who had set forth to slaughter the dānava ritualists known as the
Śaṇḍika-s. Then they made the final offering to the Soma-drinking Rudra
surrounded by his gaṇa-s, as done by the kāpālika-s with the mantra:  
oṃ hsauṃ hskhphreṃ śūragrāmaḥ sarva-vīraḥ sahāvāñ  
jetā pavasva sanitā dhanāni |  
tigmāyudhaḥ kṣipradhanvā samatsv  
aṣāḷhaḥ sāhvān pṛtanāsu śatrūn svāhā ||

Then they remained silent gazing at the ritual fire meditating on 16
vowels combined with ghora-ghoratarebhyo namaḥ. After a while they
sensed the presence of the terrifying yoginī Karṇamoṭinī. Somakhya
instructed Lootika to take up her siddha-kāṣṭham (magic wand) made of
the wood of the Indian ghost tree and her iron kamaṇḍalu with the
inscription of a dragonfly, which her student had given her in Mongolia.
Upon holding them up Lootika felt them being enveloped by the goddess.
Then Somakhya instructed Lootika to sprinkle water from the kamaṇḍalu on
the magic-wand and said: “Now the magic-wand is ready. Bring it along as
we go out to the grove and keep it ready for use in the appropriate
place at night.”

They next wandered into a grove on their university campus until they
reached a large *Calotropis* shrub. Lootika placed her wand among the
branches and under it they offered butter to the dreadful ape-faced
Nandikeśvara and the awful elephant-faced Gaṇeśvara. Then taking up the
wand again they walked up to a Kadamba tree under which they offered
butter to Kumāra, Viśākha, Śākha, Nejameṣa, Ṣaṣṭhī, the kaumāra elephant
Duḥsaha, Mukhamaṇḍikā and Indra. Having done so Lootika put back her
wand into her backpack and they headed to their respective offices to
attend to work.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Later in the evening Vidrum was visiting Somakhya and Lootika for the
first time since they had stared their household. Somakhya: “So, Vidrum
have you too moved to your new residence?”  
Vidrum: “Yes. It is such a relief to be there. Everything that could go
wrong would go wrong in the old place. After my parents and aunt left I
was the sole victim of whatever that was there.”  
Somakhya: “So you found a buyer?”  
Vidrum: “Thankfully, I even made a little bit on it.”  
Somakhya: “That is a good parting gift.”  
Vidrum: “Talking of gifts, I have a little gift for you guys. While
clearing out, I rummaged the house and found these two items. This is an
image of Indra. It looks very old and I don’t know how it came into my
house. I thought of handing it over to the museum of the College of
Archaeology but I remembered your words that our nation has come to the
point of sinking due to our people forgetting the worship and the path
of Amarendra. So I thought it is better I hand it you so that it can
receive appropriate worship.” Somakhya received the idol and carefully
examined it: “Vidrum, how on earth did this land in your house? It looks
like something from a the temple of Indra from Kanpur whose utsavamūrti
now lies in a museum at Lucknow. It is reported to have been vandalized
by the English in the aftermath of the First war of Independence in 1857
CE. After that the temple is supposed to have been erased from the
memory of the people. Some say that Maghavan was first worshiped there
by Urubilva-Jaṭila-Kāśyapa who fell to the tathāgata but the nāstika is
said to have asked the people to continue worshiping Vajrabāhu.”

Vidrum: “I suspect this may have something to do with the gravestones of
some erstwhile English ruffians atop which my house was built.” Then
Vidrum drew out a cast iron pot which was shaped like the frustum of a
cone with two small diametrically opposite horizontal handles at the
top. It had a cover with many circular grooves making it look like
ripples and a boss at the center made of a different shinier metal which
had been screwed in. Handing it over he said: “Lootika, this is for you
given your liking for iron vessels.” Lootika found it to be a rather
attractive vessel and set it down on the table in front of them. The
rest of the evening passed away in discussion of other topics and it was
really late when Vidrum finally left.

Exhausted by the day’s activities Somakhya and Lootika fell right away
asleep on their mats in their fire room. It was perhaps about two hours
into their sleep when Lootika suddenly awoke screaming: “Was that a
dream or something worse. Where is he?” Somakhya woke up hearing her
screams and said: “siddhakāṣṭhena pretikam ucchāṭaya\!” But Lootika
could not find her wand. So she got up and started running towards their
home lab where it lay in her backpack. But as she tried to do so she
uttered a cry and fell to the ground. By then Somakhya had drawn his own
wand from behind his pillow and uttering an incantation to the goddess
known as Mohanī pointed it at the pretika terminating the incantation
with the formula: “bandhaya bandhaya huṃ ceṭakaṃ bhava huṃ phaṭ |”
Drawing the pretika now bound as a ceṭaka he led it into the iron pot
which Vidrum had gifted Lootika earlier. He then held the wand in his
mouth and gingerly lifted the pot with the two handles and placed it in
a sacristy behind the deva-gṛha. Picking up his kamaṇḍalu he sprinkled
water on his strī and Lootika slowly got up but still looked dazed. He
looked at her closely and found that she bore a bleeding cut on her left
hand. He mopped up her wound and bandaged it, and then led her back to
her mat and placed her on it. She found herself still in a haze and kept
asking: “Has he gone?”. Somakhya pointed his wand at her with an
incantation to the goddess Cakravegā ending with the formula jṛmbhasva
prasvapihi huṃ phaṭ and Lootika instantly settled into a deep sleep.

The next morning Somakhya wandered in while Lootika was cooking food for
the day. He silently siddled up beside Lootika and checked out her left
hand. Lootika: “I don’t know how I got his cut. It seems to coincide
with a terrible dream, which seemed to connect many memories from the
past but it is stuck somewhere in my brain. I am unable to recall it or
even bandaging this cut.” Somakhya gently caressed her hand and said:
“Why did you forget your wand in the bag? Would you ever make such a
mistake in a laboratory protocol?” Lootika looked sheepishly at Somakhya
saying: “Why, I left it right there in my bag. I even have memory of
trying to get it but everything goes blank after that. I am sure the
strange phantasm of last night has something to do with it. Was it
something to do with the cast iron pot which Vidrum gave – I don’t see
it?” Somakhya: “I have bound him inside that pot, just as years ago I
bound the pretapatnī at the cemetery when we were plying the
planchette.” Lootika: “The English marauder Christopher Walsh? I now
recall he was trying to bayonet me in the dream last night.”  
Somakhya: “Ūrṇāyī we will make him speak this Sunday. We could have made
him a subdued ceṭaka doing our bidding, like vetāla-bhaṭṭa for Vikrama,
if only you had deployed your wand. But now some day like the Fenris
wolf he may break his prison to fight again on his pakṣa against us
Hindus.  
Lootika: “I recall this phrase being uttered by a dead brāhmaṇa in my
dream – ‘There has actually been only one war of independence which took
place in 1857 CE. We will have another one in the future; 1947 CE was
not the real thing’ – but I don’t see all pieces of the story here.”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

It was more dangerous than it seemed when that Sunday afternoon.
Somakhya and Lootika placed the iron pot in front after performing the
dig-bandha and experienced the ceṭaka-naṭanam. Lootika made a transcript
of it which she read out in the later years to their children, nieces
and nephews:

A party was underway at the house of Colonel Stephen Jackson. Captains
Bustin and Walsh arrived with their women in tow. Jackson: “India is not
a bad place to be. Especially with the prospects of the malodorous
vapors from Thames promising to hit a high later this summer. Sure there
is the downpour and the heat, but you’ll certainly find good śikār. I
bagged this tiger at my foot the last week I was there.” Bustin and
Walsh surveyed the walls of the old Colonel, rich with trophies of his
śikār in India. Bustin: “But then the ferocious Ghilzais of Ghazni…”
Jackson: “Young man, you should not forget that a mass of martial tribes
from the restless frontier are no match to a disciplined unit under
European command. Moreover, the wily Pole Yan Vitkevich is no more and
the Russian have no one of his caliber to stir up the murderous Ghazis.”
Walsh: “I believe our position is the Punjab is rather firm with the
bearded Sikhs brimming with martial ardor now willing to fight under our
banner. But for fair Albion I would be always ready to take the slug to
show the heathen savage his place.” Pouring himself some alcohol Jackson
continued: “I must note that the Sikh is different from the lying
Hindoo. He is less prone to insubordination and his religion provides an
incipient grasp of the Christian faith that I am sure will take him
towards being a good Christian in the near future. The Hindoo though
effete and weak in constitution is so full of guile that it takes some
time for a gentleman to gain mastery over him.”

Then the young English officers took in the splendors that the old
colonel had acquired in India. They wondered if they might be able to
similarly enrich themselves. Eyeing a golden casket studded with gems,
Walsh discreetly inquired the colonel as to where he had obtained the
same. The colonel responded: “This yarn runs a long way but let me keep
it short. We needed to present an example to the heathens after their
atrocities led by the hideous Dewan Mulraj. Hence, we conducted a brisk
razzia in the vicinity of Mooltaun. This was my trophy from one of the
devil-chapels of the idolatrous Hindoostanis; the said chapel was
apparently endowed with this casket by the barbarous Dewan.”

…

Captain Walsh was making his way back from the śikār with his four
coolies bearing the sloth bear and the leopard which he had downed that
day. While it had been a promising day, he was still yearning to bag a
crocodile as his comrade Captain Bustin had done. As he reached home he
found his woman Emily in a distraught state. She informed him that
General Wheeler had received a notice from Nana Sahib that he would
attack Cawnpore the next day at 10.00 AM. Walsh panicked as he realized
that the English situation was precarious and he immediately went to
report to the General.

Walsh then narrated: “The next day the assault on Cawnpore by the black
devil-worshipers began as expected and soon we realized that our city
was under an impenetrable siege by Nana Sahib’s men. After some
desultory fighting for few days I felt triumphant as I downed 15
Hindoostanis as they attempted to break the English positions – I did
not miss a single shot. But Nana Sahib retaliated strongly with a heavy
bombardment followed by accurate sniper fire. Consequently, my triumph
turned to despair as General Wheeler’s son who was beside me had his
head blown off by a shot from a field gun fired by a despicable
Maharatta gunner. Things turned worse as my comrade in arms Bustin
sustained a shot to his thigh and collapsed as his company tried to
relieve our position by a mid-night sortie on the mutinous Indians. He
was taken to the hospital but the next day the hospital was on fire as
Nana’s devilish men launched an incendiary shell on it. It is with much
sorrow I must state that young Bustin perished in the flames.”

Soon the English were forced to surrender and were granted passage to
flee to Prayāga. But once they were on their barges on the Ganga,
Lieutenant Wayne and Captain Walsh decided to take some potshots at the
freedom fighters as they could not take such a defeat lying down. The
Indians retaliated and the English were quickly overwhelmed by the
Nana’s men and most shot down or put to sword by the cavalry men who
rode out into the Ganga. Captain Walsh and Emily were among the few who
barely made it alive, evaded a Mohammedan cavalryman who was chasing
them, and ran into the temple of the great god Indra. There they came
across Chandrashekhar Pandit, a scholar of the Ṛgveda, whose ancestors
had settled in the north while aiding Chatrapati Śivājī escape from the
clutches of Awrangzeb. He officiated as the priest of the temple of
Indra. Walsh begged to him in his broken Hindustani to allow them to
hide in the temple. Moved with pity over the young Englishman’s
entreaties the brāhmaṇa concealed him and his woman.

Walsh narrated: “After a while I was rescued by the faithful Sikh Futhey
Sing and found myself back with General Wheeler’s company. After we took
back Cawnpore from the Satanic heathens, we decided to teach them a
memorable lesson. We lined up our devil-worshiping captives and asked
them clean up the bloodstains of the white women and children on the
terrace of the Ganges by licking it clean with their tongues. However,
since the pundit Caundrasekaur had done me good, I decided to grant him
clemency. I told him that all he needed to do was to touch the
bloodstain once with the tip of his tongue and then I would let him go.
But the Baphometh he had worshiped all his life had taken possession of
him and he most insolently chose to lecture me in response to my kind
clemency. He said ‘You mlecchas think you have triumphed but remember we
are neither beggars nor deceitful businessmen like you all. When we do
charity we don’t expect to be paid back by the recipient. So I don’t
need to be paid back by your clemency. Your men were killed for invading
āryāvarta. I let you and your woman live because an ārya grants abhaya
to those who seek refuge with him. But remember when mleccha-s occupy
āryāvarta we will not cease to resist them until we have extirpated
them from our land.’ I promptly bayoneted the ungrateful wretch. His
wife who was with him drowned herself by jumping into the Ganges. It was
then that I made up my mind to root out the heathenism, which was the
cause of the evil among the Hindoos.

Accordingly, I set out with Lieutenant Benson to pillage the chapel of
Baphometh where the pagan priest Caundrasekaur had officiated. Finders
are keepers; I got hold of the legendary sapphire of the place while
Benson took off a golden idol of the Termagant. I resolved that the idol
of Baphometh would be installed at the foot of my grave marking my
conquest of the devils of Hindoostan. We then advanced against the
rebellious Hindoos to the west. There in the town of Auwa after much
fighting I ordered several monstrous idol houses demolished to bring the
Hindoos to their knees. Finally, we advanced to the central part of the
country to complete our figure of eight campaign. We took an old temple,
which the heathens claimed was built by their great emperor King Bowje.
I had it converted to a stable for our horses. It was there that Emily
made a great painting of our stable that hung in my house.

Having put down the Indian mutiny we settled for a quieter life in a
more southerly city. We were joined there by Emily’s father, reverend
Brown from America who was engaging in bringing the light of the good
Lord to the Hindoos. He was engaged in writing epistles to counter the
utterly derogatory pamphlets being circulated by Chote Laul against
Christ and Christians. Nothing since Celsus had been so full of bile. It
was then that I believe that Chote Laul engaged in some kind black magic
to make the spirit of the old Caundrasekaur to seize Emily. They call
such a goblin a brahma-rākṣasa in these regions. Possessed by the goblin
Emily hung herself from the branch of a bastard myrobalan tree some
distance from our home. I tried my best to put salt on Chote Laul’s tail
but the wily Hindoo got away. Shortly there after while playing polo I
was struck by a bolt of lightning and expired. Unfortunately, contrary
to my wishes I was not buried beside Emily as the ground in that part of
the cemetery had gotten very soggy from the incessant monsoon. I thus
was interred elsewhere on the same grounds.

Now a ghost, I had many an epic fight with Caundrasekaur’s ghost as also
that of his wife. I also journeyed east and fought the impious ghost of
Jagabandhu who was constantly harassing me – a phantasmagorical matter
that caused extraordinary excitement in that part of the country. But I
got to rejoice when good Sir Winston Churchill himself honored my grave
and pledged not to let our sacrifices go in vain. But to my greatest
horror, at the mere suggestion of a mutiny of far lower magnitude than
what we quelled in 1857 CE those weaklings Mountbatten and Attlee handed
our the jewel in the crown, which we had fought to make that of fair
Albion, to the Hindoos and the Mahometans on a platter.”

Then the ceṭaka went silent and the lid of the iron pot seemed as though
it moved a little. We went up to it, and using an incantation of
Sarasvatī on the tongue of the rākṣasa Kumbhakarṇa, we made him continue
speaking upon sprinkling water from our kaṃaṇḍalu-s. It was clear that
what he spoke thereafter was something he never wanted to say.

He continued: “But the lords of the Anglosphere have not given up –
verily our grip is likened to the bite of a bulldog. We fully well
realized that those who control India control the world. From America we
control the whole western hemisphere. From Australia and New Zealand we
control the southern hemisphere. From England we control Europe. But
there is a lacuna in Asia, which arose after we lost India. We knew that
the Mahometans have always sought world-conquest like us. I must confess
that sometimes I do feel that Mahomet’s religion is perhaps the very
word of God in practice. We knew that if we could lure the Mahometans to
make common cause with us then we could start all over again to get the
sub-continent back in our control. We had won before using the perimeter
strategy; to win again we needed to reinstate the perimeter strategy. It
is with that in mind we had left the Mahometans in possession of the
perimeter state of Pakistan so that they could keep the noose around the
neck of the Indians. We realized that the nationalism of the Hindoos
could be very dangerous and even an unstoppable force if unleashed: much
like their old war weapon, the elephant. Hence, we ensured that they are
saddled with debilitating leaders like the naked fuckeer and the
rose-chested romantic whom they took to be their collective father and
uncle respectively. But we knew that our old enemy the Rus would aid
them against our designs. Hence, we first had a to get rid of them and
did so after a hard fought war using the Mahometans as our tool. Thus,
we finally achieved what we had failed to achieve in the invasion of
Crimea. The weakening of the Rus also weakened the Indians but
unfortunately ended up strengthening the Chinese with respect to whom we
always had the agreement of them being an equal of the white world. We
had also built them up by crushing their mighty foes, the Japanese

To restore equilibrium, we needed a foothold in Asia whereby we could
reach the rear side of China. That foothold had to be India. At this
point I should make it clear that we have always had a kinder side to
us. Just as we tried our best to bring you under our benign rule rather
than let you rot under some oriental despot, we again want you to
benefit from our actions. It is with that in mind that we bequeathed you
with secularism, a constitution, and the rule of law – this was accepted
by your emperor the mute blue-turbaned Sikh but was since rejected by
the ungrateful Hindoos. We shall incessantly try to bring you all the
book of God. When you have joined the kingdom of God we shall again
fight shoulder to shoulder to punish the godless. But addled by the
words of your lying Brahmins and Baniyans you will refuse and even try
your best to prevent your downtrodden from receiving God’s word. In the
East, where we ensured that the writ of your Brahmins and Baniyans would
be weak, the word of God will spread fast. So also would be the case
with your downtrodden in the south, in the Punjab and your capital city
when we would place our agent while the mute blue-turbaned Sikh is your
emperor. Thus we will restore the perimeter. The Rus will make one great
attempt to get back at us but will eventually fade into irrelevance. We
shall balance you all with the Chinese but since you multiply like
bunnies eventually you will hold the edge. It is then that there will
arise a ruler in your midst who will persecute the flock of God as also
the God-fearing Mahometans and seek to restore the heathen religion.
Around that time will occur a war of immense proportions with you, us
and the Mahometans, all in the fray. The lay will not even realize that
the war is being fought. It will be the biggest fight we have ever
fought since the fields of 1857 CE and we will have to put down more
Hindoos than we ever did then. I shall rise again to protect the banner,
like Napoleon’s soldier had promised when he fell while retreating from
Russia. That conflict will engulf you in your later age and therein you
and your children will perish.”

He then tried to leap forth from the pot. We silenced him with our
kamaṇḍalu prayoga and placed him in a bottle and buried it under a
vibhītaka tree.
