+++
title = "śūlapuruṣa-catvārakam-3: A method for the analysis of history"

+++
Somakhya, standing beside a pillar outside his university department,
glanced at his watch with a tinge of irritation as he waited for Lootika
to show up. She was to bring her sister Vrishchika from the medical
school, which was some distance away, and meet him there. Beside him
were several of his classmates. One clump was talking about how
difficult the latest lessons on the chemical synthesis of peptides were
and how it could slay them in their exams. Another group was less
worried and talking about sexual pleasures, cricket and films. Yet
another set had formed a little circle with Sharad, who was considered a
seasoned politics buff, in the middle. He was giving his nuggets of
political wisdom even as the other classmates were approvingly listening
and adding their own tidbits. Just then a student from the history
department walked by and delivered a brisk spray of tāṃbūla-rasa on the
pillar with a click of his mouth. Somakhya anticipating his action moved
away from the pillar even as he watched the red parabola terminate on
the pillar and in turn bounce off as little droplets to the floor. He
mentally remarked: “So much for Vātsyāyana’s effort to inculcate the use
of a pot among our peoples.” As he did so he noticed that the said
student wore a shirt with a mug shot of Che Guevara and a cap with an
image of a dustbin printed on it. From this he realized that he belonged
to the PB \[Pratibhraṣṭācār\] party founded by a rabble-rouser, Rajiv
Jaisval, from the rājadhānī. Then he overheard Sharad say: “Pakistan is
Duryodhan and Afghanistan is māmā Śakuni. Yāroṇ, this is just a repeat
of the Mahābhārat. Duryodhan will take us to Kurukṣetr where all of us
would be destroyed. Hence, I think the PM is right in keeping the peace
channel open like bhagavān Kṛṣṇ did.” Another classmate said: “Then who
are the cīna-s?” Sharad: “They are like bhagavān Balrām – they will
support Duryodhan but we can deal with them diplomatically like bhagavān
Kṛṣṇ did because they are rational players.” Thus, their conversation
went on.

Just then Somakhya sighted Lootika and Vrishchika arrive like Sinīvāli
and Anumati. Noticing the frown on his face Lootika said: “I am sorry
for keeping you waiting; it was not at all my intention to hold you up
here. We had to take a lengthy detour because there was a caḍḍi morcā
being staged by the PB party activists just outside the history
department and a beśarmī morcā by the feminists outside the English
department. You can imagine the chaos that ensued when the two met. But
we have something really interesting for you O Bhṛguvaṃśin\!”  
Somakhya: “It was with that hope I waited for you two Gautamī-s, as you
have been saying since the morning that you might have something
interesting without telling me what it might be.”  
Lootika: “You would recall that sometime ago Vrishchika had brought to
your attention the case of the patient who had died a gruesome death
from a mycosis after receiving a steroid injection for back-pain.”  
Somakhya: “Yes, I had identified the mucor as being Mortierella.”  
Vrishchika: “Indeed, I am still hoping to put together a little paper
with a case study on that but we might have something way more
interesting here.”  
Lootika: “I managed to have the genome of the fungus sequenced. It shows
good synteny with the species in the database but there these fairly
gene-rich regions where the synteny breaks down. We have collected all
those genes and have prepared a list for you. I am waiting to hear what
you might have to say about these genes.”  
Somakhya transferred the data to his computer and took a quick look:
“Interesting, many of them seem to be part of a paralog expansion.
Let’s head to my house and look at them more closely – it seems
promising.”

Just then they overheard one of the guys in the group discussing
politics animatedly say: “How could you say such things being a student
of science. Be it the god of the Christians, or that of the Moslems, or
Hindus, it is the same thing, and in this day and age science has
emphatically taught us that there is no god, hence no religion. We
better have people focus on economics, corruption, and humanity than on
religion. Religion has only brought us trouble.” Then another guy went
off: “But Hinduism is different. The principles of Hinduism have always
been the same as secularism. That is why I say let us have real
secularism and that is no different from Hinduism. What the Christians
and the Musalmans are calling for is pseudo-secularism.” Somakhya,
Lootika and Vrishchika looked at each other with a smile.

Somakhya: “Let’s be going.” As they started towards Somakhya’s house
Lootika remarked: “Vrishchika and I drop in sporadically at the
right-wing student’s debating club for an occasional dose of
entertainment and these worthies are all there.”  
Somakhya: “What a waste of time.”  
Vrishchika: “Totally, but just once or twice a semester.”  
Lootika: “But their discussions like this did bring to mind your remark
from school days of the importance of distinguishing between homologies
and analogies in historical and political discourse. Subsequently, I
discovered that the fourth of the śūlapuruṣa-s whom we alluded to was
perhaps to first to state this explicitly.”  
Somakhya: “Just to be clear, I had arrived at the same independently of
him but of course nice ideas are few and mostly someone has had it
before you. Indeed, it seems the fourth śūlapuruṣa was the first to
voice it but I must stress that my vision of it is not identical to
his.”  
Lootika: “Notably, surprising as it might seem, many biologists are not
aware of it is importance. Perhaps, some of them understand it to a
lesser degree than the turīyaḥ śūlapuruṣaḥ despite all his flaws.”  
Somakhya: “The mode of operations in biology breeds many ‘bauddha-s’:
they sound like they have seen a real sūkta but what they really have is
an imitation sutta in the vulgar Pāḻi.”

Just then they reached Somakhya’s house and having parked their aśva-s
went into his home lab. Vrishchika remarked: “Could you tell me more of
what the turīyaḥ śūlapuruṣaḥ had to say in this regard and how we would
see it today?”  
Somakhya pulled up the appropriate part from the copy of Spengler’s
magnum opus on his computer and handed it over to Lootika: “Ūrṇāyī,
could you please read it out aloud for all of us. While some of the
homologies detected by Spengler were wrong it is still to useful to
revisit what he thought. Moreover, even we as biologists occasionally
make mistakes in this regard due to the incompleteness of data.”

Lootika read it out: “*Biology employs the term homology of organs to
signify morphological equivalence in contradistinction to the term
analogy which relates to functional equivalence. This important, and in
the sequel most fruitful, notion was conceived by Goethe (who was led
thereby to the discovery of the ”os intermaxillary” in man) and put into
strict scientific shape by Owen; this notion also we shall incorporate
in our historical method.*

*It is known that for every part of the bone-structure of the human head
an exactly corresponding part is found in all vertebrated animals right
down to the fish, and that the pectoral fins of fish and the feet, wings
and hands of terrestrial vertebrates are homologous organs, even though
they have lost every trace of similarity. The lungs of terrestrial, and
the swim-bladders of aquatic animals are homologous, while lungs and
gills on the other hand are analogous — that is, similar in point of
use. And the trained and deepened morphological insight that is required
to establish such distinctions is an utterly different thing from the
present method of historical research, with its shallow comparisons of
Christ and Buddha, Archimedes and Galileo, Caesar and Wallenstein,
parceled Germany and parceled Greece. More and more clearly as we go on,
we shall realize what immense views will offer themselves to the
historical eye as soon as the rigorous morphological method has been
understood and cultivated. To name but a few examples, homologous forms
are: Classical sculpture and West European orchestration, the Fourth
Dynasty pyramids and the Gothic cathedrals, Indian Buddhism and Roman
Stoicism (Buddhism and Christianity are not even analogous) the periods
of “the Contending States” in China, the Hyksos in Egypt and the Punic
Wars; the age of Pericles and the age of the Ommayads; the epochs of the
Rigveda, of Plotinus and of Dante. The Dionysiac movement is homologous
with the Renaissance, analogous to the Reformation. For us, ”Wagner is
the résumé of modernity,” as Nietzsche rightly saw; and the equivalent
that logically must exist in the Classical modernity we find in
Pergamene art.*

*The application of the ”homology” principle to historical phenomena
brings with it an entirely new connotation for the word “contemporary.”
I designate as contemporary two historical facts that occur in exactly
the same — relative — positions in their respective Cultures, and
therefore possess exactly equivalent importance. It has already been
shown how the development of the Classical and that of the Western
mathematic proceeded in complete congruence, and we might have ventured
to describe Pythagoras as the contemporary of Descartes, Archytas of
Laplace, Archimedes of Gauss. The Ionic and the Baroque, again, ran
their course contemporaneously. Polygnotus pairs in time with Rembrandt,
Polycletus with Bach. The Reformation, Puritanism and, above all, the
turn to Civilization appear simultaneously in all Cultures; in the
Classical this last epoch bears the names of Philip and Alexander, in
our West those of the Revolution and Napoleon. Contemporary, too, are
the building of Alexandria, of Baghdad, and of Washington; Classical
coinage and our double-entry book-keeping; the first Tyrannis and the
Fronde; Augustus and Shih-huang-ti; Hannibal and the World War.*”

Vrishchika: “While I never read the whole prolix tome of the turīyaḥ
śūlapuruṣaḥ, I did read this part when agrajā asked me to read it. I
thought it was interesting but passed over it because he like the
unmatta-śūlapuruṣa betrayed a certain misunderstanding of the āṅgalika
Darwin – raising questions of how deep an insight he had attained.”

Somakhya: “He too like Nietzsche felt he was doing better than Darwin –
perhaps somewhat parochially he felt what was worthwhile in Darwin was
already known among the śūlapuruṣa-s due to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
But in the end he is only paraphrasing Darwin and misunderstood the
principle of ”survival of the fittest” like many others. He understood
the principle of homology sufficiently to use. It was after all used
effectively in the context of the analysis of grammar, perhaps more
precisely, by Patañjali in our midst in the old days.”

Lootika: “Here is what he says in passing regarding old Charles: *It is
not superfluous to add that there is nothing of the causal kind in these
pure phenomena of “Living Nature.” Materialism, in order to get a system
for the pedestrian reasoner, has had to adulterate the picture of them
with fitness-causes. But Goethe — who anticipated just about as much of
Darwinism as there will be left of it in fifty years from Darwin —
absolutely excluded the causality-principle. And the very fact that the
Darwinians quite failed to notice its absence is a clear indication that
Goethe’s “Living Nature” belongs to actual life, “cause”-less and
“aim”-less; for the idea of the prime-phenomenon does not involve
causal assumptions of any sort unless it has been misunderstood in
advance in a mechanistic sense.*”

Lootika then continued: “Indeed as Nietzsche too realized it is aimless
and doesn’t per say have an extrinsic cause. Rather, the cause is
fitness in itself – this is what they seem to have misunderstood.”

Somakhya: “In philosophical terms, that indeed relates to natural
selection being a corollary to the most basic axioms of biology: namely,
1) the central dogma and the “globular” geometry of functional proteins
and 2) the folded functional state of ribozymes, riboswitches, tRNA,
rRNAs etc making active sites mostly inaccessible to directed mutators
(i.e. the intelligent designer). Thus, evolution is restricted to the
process of natural selection, which has the fitness clause folded inside
it.”

Vrishchika: “So can the homology principle apply even if we are
uncertain of the axioms of our system, unlike the case of biology where
we know them as stemming from the geometric constraints interacting with
the underlying chemistry?”

Somakhya: “Now say in our language we consider the following words as
our old thinkers had suggested: paṭhati, paṭhana, pāṭhaka, pacana,
pacati, pācaka we may note there are some common functions shared by
paṭhati and pacati, paṭhana and pacana, and by pāṭhaka and pācaka,
then paṭhati, paṭhana, and pāṭhaka share some functions while pacana,
pacati, pācaka share some functions. The principle of homology allows us
to discern various modules just like we discover domains in proteins or
RNAs with conserved folding. The equivalents would be the roots, pac-
and paṭh-, the verbal ending -ati, the nominal suffix -ana, and the
nominal suffix -aka which also strengthens the root itself. Hence, we
can see these as the homologous modules of words, which, just like
domains fusing to constitute proteins with functions going beyond those
of the individual domains, fuse to form words with meanings beyond the
modules. This shows that even if equivalents of the axioms of biology do
not exist in the linguistic system, the principle of homology can still
be used for successful analysis and prediction of function. Thus, if you
now encounter a strange word like iṅgati you still know how to constrain
its possible function. Then we can extend this between languages e.g. we
have the root pac whereas the greater clade of the śūlapuruṣa-bhāṣā-s
have bak, which are homologous.”

Lootika: “Thus, what matters is identifying descent from a common
ancestor. If we can identify the paths of descent from the component in
the ancestor for each component in our sample of comparison, we can
differentiate similarity due to common origin from convergent
similarity. Then we can make meaningful inferences of homology that lead
to some insight about why things are a certain way or a predictive
insight.”

Vrishchika: “We can clearly see biopolymers like nucleic acids and
proteins, and languages as evolutionary systems which adhere to the
principle of descent from a common ancestor with modification. But what
about history? After all the śūlapuruṣa wants us to see historical
layers of different cultures as homologous which we could rather
interpret as being purely convergent. For example, a whale is close to
hippo, whereas we are close to a tree-shrew. Yet in brain size and
cognitive capacity we and the whales have achieved a degree of
equivalence – a convergent process. Likewise, when our śūlapuruṣa
homologizes the age of Pericles among the yavana-s and the age of the
Umayyads among the marūnmatta-s I would say he is merely seeing a
convergence; Where is the descent from a common ancestor?”

Somakhya: “Upagautamī, the way one could look at the śūlapuruṣa’s
thoughts on civilizational homology is thus: Imagine the civilization to
be like an organism developing from a single zygote and temporally
expressing various morphological features. Now when you look at the
zygote of a man and one of a crocodile the homologies will not be
apparent at that point. But as the embryos develop you will see that
both develop equivalent sets of tissues, organs and systems which you
are now able to see as being homologs of each other. Likewise, he
believes that as two civilizations develop then they would temporally
express morphological features that can be identified as being
homologous. Now in biology, we know that though those homologies are not
visible in the zygote, they are all there as a “program” encoded in the
genetics of the organisms. They express themselves only later as the
program is executed. Thus, Spengler’s idea implies that the
civilizations in their embryonic state have homologous programs that
execute themselves as the civilization develops. Now, outre as it might
seem, at least in some cases we might see something like this in action.
In the case of the Indo-Europeans, they originated from a common
ancestor in the steppe zone in vicinity of the Caspian and Black lakes.
Right in their ancestral homeland they had developed an elaborate
civilizational scaffold in the form of legends, epic narratives, divine
abstractions, and ritual practice. This was the program which they
carried with them as they founded new embryonic civilizations in India,
Iran, West Asia, Greece, and Rome, among others. That program inherited
from their cultural ancestor was executed in each of those civilizations
– that was the inbuilt homology which executed itself. In some cases
they supplemented it with code from their neighbors and the older people
of the lands they conquered; these were what we would term horizontal
transfers, an important concept in evolution that was absent in the days
of Spengler. Thus, one could see that when the full civilizational
expression occurred after the various Indo-European groups settled in
their various new homes the execution of the program resulted in
elements that could be considered truly homologous. For instance I would
consider expressions such as Roman law and Mānava dharma homologous in
this vein. Likewise, the development of Neo-Platonism and classical
post-vaidika vedānta can be seen as homologies expressing in the
Hellenes and the Hindu world. Hence, one could see the periods when
these developments happened as being homologous in those two cultures as
per the śūlapuruṣa’s idea. Here we are still talking of Indo-Europeans
who have a common cultural and partly common genetic ancestry. However,
other comparisons, as his between the age of Pericles and the Umayyad
Khalifa, indeed enter a more murky zone, where convergences tend to
obscure genuine evolutionary affinity”

Lootika: “Talking of lateral transfers, we could extend the idea of such
homologies to homologous memes. After all we had shown when in school
that many innovations relating to apoptosis, immunity, conflict spread
among bacteria and were also laterally transferred to distant eukaryotic
groups like plants and animals to produce comparable systems in each
place. Thus, the transfer of memes, which would then by definition be
homologous, could produce similar expressions between distant
civilizations.”

Somakhya: “Indeed, in addition to the ”vertically” inherited memes that
result in subsequent civilizational homologies the laterally transferred
ones too play a role. One could cite the examples of Hindu memes in the
Nipponic civilization or the Iranic memes in the Mongol tradition.
Likewise, it was the lateral transfer of Hellenistic memes that caused
the scientific developments attributed to the realm of the early
marūnmatta-s and later what the mlecchas term the Renaissance. Thus,
these are genuinely homologous elements that need to be discerned to
correctly understand historical developments.”

Lootika: “All these fit well with the basic understanding of evolving
systems, which we have perfected in biology, and of course I agree that
using these are central to proper historical analysis. However, it
appears that the śūlapuruṣa in his ideas on homology, even if
inaccurate, was suggesting something more – it would seem as per him all
cultures and civilizations have some deeper program being executed. For
example, we can see that the Hellenistic, and Hindu civilization
followed a certain trajectory – the embryonic Indo-European foundation,
a vigorous period/s of glorious expression with national unity or “the
classical phase”, a period of political fragmentation while retaining
cultural unity/creativity, and finally a complete demise or near demise
under the assault of one or more Abrahamistic infections. Now, we could
say that the inherited Indo-European blueprint they shared was what
conditioned the similarity of trajectory. But then I would say that we
do see this even in a non-Indo-European civilization, like that of the
Egyptians, playing out on a different time scale. Now, one could say
that this was because all these civilizations were strongly interacting
in antiquity. However, we see elements of it even the Sinitic, Nipponic
and Mayan civilizations. Of course the period of encounter with
Abrahamism and the civilizational state makes a big difference in way
the outcomes play out but there are parallels of the overall trajectory
– ultimately the overall decline of Sinitic and Nipponic civilization
involved an encounter with Abrahamism. At first thought I would have
brushed these aside as generic similarities and not given much weight to
the śūlapuruṣa’s considerations. However, I was struck by the fact that
on the basis of such ideas he was rather successful as a futurist.
Hence, I wonder if we should see a deeper civilizational program which
might actually arise from the sociobiology of humans themselves – where
issues like regulation of sexuality, fecundity, etc interact with
factors such as group and kin selection and finally memes that
participate in and out-group recognition.”

Vrishchika took Somakhya’s computer from her sister and remarked: “Thank
you both for the clarifications. In light of all this, it would seem
that the deeper homology or equivalence between cultures which we would
not regard as closely related seems would lie at the heart of the
śūlapuruṣa’s writings. That is how I would take this account of his:
‘*‘I hope to show that without exception all great creations and forms
in religion, art, politics, social life, economy and science appear,
fulfill themselves and die down contemporaneously in all the Cultures;
that the inner structure of one corresponds strictly with that of all
the others; that there is not a single phenomenon of deep physiognomic
importance in the record of one for which we could not find a
counterpart in the record of every other; and that this counterpart is
to be found under a characteristic form and in a perfectly definite
chronological position…”*”

Then Vrishchika continued: “He even sees this as having the role of
paleontology plays in inferring anatomy of long-vanished forms:
”*Reconstructing long-vanished and unknown epochs, even whole Cultures
of the past, by means of morphological connections, in much the same way
as modern palaeontology deduces far-reaching and trustworthy conclusions
as to skeletal structure and species from a single unearthed
skull-fragment.*” In this he was perhaps inspired by the research of
Baron Friedrich von Heune who had discovered the cladistic method of
phylogenetic inference in paleontology, which for long was ignored by
paleontologists elsewhere in the world, only to be rediscovered closer
to our times. Now this view of the śūlapuruṣa is also apparent in the
comparative tables of civilizations he provides to illustrate the
previous point I just read out. There civilizations are arrayed as
though playing out a developmental plan, as you mentioned, with a
”homology” in their cognate growth stages which are labeled from
spring to winter. That civilizations have a such phases is not in doubt
– in the case our own civilization we undoubtedly see a certain
refreshing vigor at the dawn of our civilization in the śruti-s of the
Ṛk and the early Atharvāñgirasa. We see a certain genius in our early
medical tradition from the latter texts and Caraka, in the mathematics
of the Śulba, and in the sūtra-s of the sages Kaṇāda and Akṣapāda. Over
time we even see a certain maturity: in the religion of the Tantra-s,
the medicine of Vāgbhaṭa, and the genius of king Bhoja and Bhāskara.
Then we see an autumn where the soma-drinking Nīlakaṇṭha and Loliṃbarāja
standout like the bright colors of the deciduous leaves and an Appayya
like a sprinkling of snow shining on the footpath on an autumn evening.
We are indeed in that winter where we shudder in the confines our heated
homes with a blizzard blowing all around us, even as the walls of the
vidyāpīṭha are painted red by an activist of the Pratibhraṣṭācār party
and our classmates ask: ”why waste time on an earthworm or a rat when
the objective in med-school is slice open a nṛ-kalebara?” Now the
question is if the course similar for other civilizations?”

Somakhya: “And the day may come when the blizzard shatters the safety of
the shelters. Thus, indeed with the violence of a February night lie
shattered the cultures of the Maya, Greece, Egypt and Iran with their
fragments blown all over to be collected by bandits at their leisure.
But coming back to the issue of the deep homology we may ask to types of
questions: 1) What is the evidence for it? 2) Can we reach the
conclusion that such a thing might happen from examination of the data
or by means of analogies we have at hand? We know that mythologies of IE
cultures are related. But some have noticed that many relationships in
the mythosphere that go well beyond the ancestral IE, probably back to
the first humans who left Africa and encountered the Neanderthals,
Denisovans and others, and perhaps a few go back even to our deep
African roots. Likewise we see faint linguistic echoes of a distant past
that might again go as far back as the African roots. Now those are
signs of descent from a common ancestor who already possessed a spoken
language and a body of legends regarding origins, animals and plants,
and the sky along with a sense of ancestors living on in some form past
their expiration and a world of gods. So those are deep homologies
relating to descent from a common ancestor. Now humans also share other
neural synapomorphies in the form of the capacity for language with some
hard-coded linguistic features, the capacity for myths and the capacity
for religion. These are aspects of the ”inbuilt hardware” which interact
with the evolving memetic ”software” in the form of the actual legends
and language acquired from the ancestor. This we might see as possible
evidence for deep homology between cultures. From this one might posit
that the interaction between biology and the evolving memes would result
in similar features being repeatedly produced across the mythospheres
and languages of distant cultures. Hence, it is possible that Spengler’s
surmise regarding historical development of cultures emerge from similar
processes as those for myths and languages. As a biological analogy we
know that the endosymbiosis of cyanobacteria gave rise the primary plant
lineage. Then they were engulfed by eukaryotes giving rise to several
secondary photosynthetic lineages. Across all these lineages was the
deep homology of chloroplasts and a gene-repertoire of cyanobacterial
origin. Those repeatedly favored the emergence of comparable
“plant-like” morphologies across many of these lineages. Hence,
while we would properly describe these as convergences in biology, they
still are conditioned and channeled by a deep underlying homology
interacting with selection by geometric constraints.”

Lootika: “Jāmadagnya, in addition to memes, we may also add their
technological equivalents the temes interacting with the underlying
biology. One may even say that the śūlapuruṣa was perhaps one of the
first make note of a concept that would lead to temes. He says: ”*The
peasant, the hand-worker, even the merchant, appear suddenly as
inessential in comparison with the three great figures that the Machine
has bred and trained up in the cause of its development: the
entrepreneur, the engineer, and the factory-worker.*” Then we may also
ask why technological innovations of high standing to do not persist in
civilizations – Why did the surgical instruments of Divodāsa vanish; why
was the Antikythera mechanism forgotten; why did Mayan way of building
concrete roads cease to exist? It does seem to suggest that technologies
emerge at a certain points in the evolution of independent cultures and
may vanish unless a certain process of lateral transfer disperses them
more widely between cultures, even as the lateral transfer of memes. The
inventor of a technology may not be the one who actually benefits from
it – hence, a teme might perish due to the indifferent or negative
fitness advantage it confers on the host, unless it has other means to
laterally spread itself. Rather than the inventor, someone else who has
merely acquired a teme by lateral transfer might make most use of it. In
biology, as you discovered, the bacterial peptide-modification systems
”invented” the SET domain methyltransferase but it remained marginal
therein, hardly in the league of the other methylases. However, when
eukaryotes acquired it, it became mainstream ”technology” – there is no
eukaryotic life without SET domain methylases. Likewise, many
technologies were invented by mlecchas but it was not they who made most
use of it; rather it was the pītavarṇa-śvapaca-s and bindudhvaja-s who
did so. Hence, the śūlapuruṣa prophetically feared that technologies
invented by gaurāṅga-s might help anyavarṇa-s against them – the fight
of this type launched by the bindudhvaja-s on the gaurāṅga-s is
well-known to the discerning. Finally, like successful memes which might
be maladaptive to the host, the spread of certain temes might also be
maladaptive to the host and drive cultural senescence. Following the
śūlapuruṣa we may say money itself might fall in this category: I
don’t know whether it is all meme or teme or mixture of both, but as
it becomes the central focus of the culture it exposes the said culture
to a certain vulnerability which allows senescence to set in.”

Somakhya: “Indeed\! Regarding that last point O Ūrṇāyī and Alalūmā: In
that matter lay the original strength and the eventual the failure of
the brāhmaṇa, and is ironically also the block on which the Bhārata-s
stumbled to be left with very little wealth of their own.”

Vrishchika: “So, Vatsajanya and agrajā in conclusion can we conclude
that an extension of the śūlapuruṣa’s ideas is still valid? One where we
do accept a deep biological homology but see it as interacting with
vertically inherited and laterally transferred memes and temes of
ancient as well as more recent origin. The determinism that it suggests
is not entirely different from the ancient conception of our ancestors,
which we share with the yavana-s and others, expressed in the form of
the caturyuga view of history. It is ironic since the śūlapuruṣa saw us
as being ahistorical and atemporal, much like most gaurāṅga-s see us.
Keeping with his background, the śūlapuruṣa’s forecast spans just one
cycle but there is nothing to preclude a certain degree of cyclicity as
held in our tradition. But the realization of determinism leads to a
certain foreboding and what some like to term fatalism. This feeling is
even more demoralizing to a civilization already reaching the winter of
its existence. We see that in the life of the great yavana sage Proclus
and even in the optimism of Georgios Gemistos Plethon we can sense the
last flash of a spluttering flame…”

Somakhya: “Well the original śūlapuruṣa-s would have said that after the
Ragnarok, Modi and Magni would return with Vidarr and in our thought
there is still a new cycle that will come, for which the seeds must
exist in this one. Then if those ideas still sound empty to you at least
we should at least bring down the skambha even as the yuga-cakra turns,
for when the time come there is the teaching regarding the great
axe-wielding Rāma’s battle with the Vītahavya-s, Tuṇḍikera-s, and
Tālajaṅgha-s \[Not given, as it cannot be stated in public\]. But
then ladies we have wandered from our purpose of meeting –  time is
running short and let us get back to our mucor.”

What they discovered that day was to be a big story in their lives, one
which they were only able to fully unravel and utilize only when
Indrasena joined them.

◊◊◊◊

At a later time… Vrishchika: “ārya, I heard from my senior Vidrum that
the train-stop near my old home was vandalized yesterday by the PB party
members.”  
Indrasena: “svādiṣṭhā, there is not a word of it in the news. You may
remember the day the PB activist Nitish Singh had killed his wife in
your old city. All news reports said she had died by accidentally
falling down the stairs.”  
Vrishchika: “I don’t think I told you this, I was part of the team that
had performed the autopsy – it was rather obvious that she had been
killed. Agrajā had asked to me read the words of the old śūlapuruṣa
then:  
*”And the other side of this belated freedom — it is permitted to
everyone to say what he pleases, but the Press is free to take notice of
what he says or not. It can condemn any “truth” to death simply by not
undertaking its communication to the world — a terrible censorship of
silence, which is all the more potent in that the masses of newspaper
readers are absolutely unaware that it exists \[He then goes on to note
that this is worse than all the books burned by the Chin Shi Huang\].*”

Indrasena: “Vrishchika, he continues: ”*…but in no other Civilization
has the will-to-power manifested itself in so inexorable a form as in
this of ours \[i.e. the śūlapuruṣa’s mleccha civilization\]. The
thought, and consequently the action, of the mass are kept under iron
pressure—for which reason, and for which reason only, men are permitted
to be readers and voters — that is, in a dual slavery —while the parties
become the obedient retinues of a few, and the shadow of coming
Caesarism already touches them.* It is this mleccha-kṛtā kṛtyā which has
been sneaked into our midst via laterally transferred memes, and is now
used to subjugate our people.”

◊◊◊◊

There will be further part/s on Spengler
