+++
title = "World War 2 and thexa0like"

+++
Right away we should state that there is going to be some dilation –
hence “the like”.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/--Gq0uTa_xOI/VU8JZWLdIUI/AAAAAAAADTI/hMSdRrhWDBw/s800/American_propaganda.JPG)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/zwcpmQl-aV57qSQObkjSbNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

“In my generation, we lived under the impression that the term
patriotism was poisoned during Nazi times. German history, unlike
American or French history, did not allow the growing of patriotism in a
natural way.” Richard von Weizsaecker brother of Carl von Weizsaecker.

“I commemorate the 60 million people who lost their lives because of
this war unleashed by Germany… I bow before the victims.” Angela Merkel
at Gdansk, Poland; formerly the German territory of Danzig.

“History is harsh. What’s done cannot be undone. With deep repentance in
my heart, I stood there in silent prayers for some time. On behalf of
Japan and the Japanese people, I offer with profound respect my eternal
condolences to the souls of all American people that were lost during
World War II…Our actions brought suffering to the peoples in Asian
countries. We must not avert our eyes from that. I will uphold the views
expressed by the previous prime ministers in this regard.” Shinzo Abe
speaking to the congress, USA.

“The hard lessons of the World War II say that coexistence of humanity
is not ruled by the law of the jungle. The politics of peace is the
exact opposite of the aggressive hegemonic politics of force. The path
of human development does not lay in the principle ‘the winner takes it
all,’ not in zero-sum games,” Vladmir Putin the lord of all Rus.
(Addendum: “There are no longer any international security guarantees at
all and the party responsible for the destruction of global collective
security is The United States of America.”)

“ ” Apology of the Americans to the Japanese for making them the first
human victims of nuclear strikes. (Addendum: “We save innumerable human
lives by swiftly ending the WW2 by nuking the Japanese.” – commonly
heard from the mleccha-s of krauñcadvīpa)

“ ” Apology offered by British for their genocides of various peoples.
(Addendum: “Today, with the balance and perspective offered by the
passage of time and the benefit of hindsight, it is possible for an
Indian Prime Minister to assert that India’s experience with Britain had
its beneficial consequences too.” nīloṣnīṣa klība)

The above statements tell a tale that discerning men can immediately
flesh out. However, as victors write history, we are fed a non-stop
propaganda about the WW2, which the undiscerning swallow without
reflection and eventually end up believing and propagating the same.

While the WW2 was primarily a war between mleccha-s, the Hindus were
wittingly or unwittingly dragged into it (Those inspired by Subash
Chandra Bose fought willingly to liberate their land from the mleccha-s
or the wage Jihad on the Kaffirs. Others were dragged into it
unwittingly, though some Hindu leaders like Savarkar felt it was good if
the Hindus participated, even if on the side of their enemies, because
it would give them battle experience for the impending conflicts with
the mleccha-s and marūnmatta-s).

From a Hindu perspective, in some ways one can see it as a parallel to
the great war at kurukṣetra in our national epic. At the heart of that
war was a sibling rivalry between the Kuru and the Pāñcāla, the two
mighty Indo-Aryan kingdoms of the day. Likewise in WW2 at its heart was
the rivalry between the sibling Germanic peoples, the continental
śūlapuruṣa-s and the island āngalika-s. At Kurukṣetra, there were
other rivalries running in parallel: e.g. between the Kuru Somadatta
clan on one side and the yadu-s Kṛṣṇa and Sātyaki on the other; between
two factions of Yadu-s, namely those who sided with the Kaurava-s and
those who sided with the Pāṇḍu-Pāñcāla alliance; between the rākṣasa-s
and the Pāṇḍu-s. All of these got sucked into the core sibling conflict
at the kuru field. Likewise, in WW2 there were other parallel conflicts:
the German-Slav conflict along ethnic lines; The intra-Slav conflict
between the Poles and the Rus; The deep civilizational conflict between
modernized heathen Japan and the Christian world of the mleccha-s;
Economic conflicts involving groups close to the deep-scaffold of the
mleccha world, which cannot even be mentioned openly to this date.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-fElc8KwTie0/VU8JdSisL2I/AAAAAAAADTQ/AFAgsXslgp4/s800/English_trampling_Hindus.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/cF2V9pl0mnCMcXOJXJ8TK9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Moreover, while many people may think this to be frivolous, we also hold
that there are some parallels to the First War of Independence and WW2
(interestingly, 7/8th May is what the victors of WW2 celebrate as the
end of the war in Europe while 10th May is the start of the FWI).

In both these wars the prime villain was the fiendish nation of the
āngalika-s, which played its guileful game very well. In Europe they
were alarmed by the rising might of their siblings on the continent.
They knew well that if anyone could challenge their power it would be
their cousins on the continent who possessed in ample measure the
qualities, which had led to the success of the āngalika-s, even as other
European powers like Spain, Holland and Portugal waned despite their
head-start. Hence, the śūlapuruṣa-s had to destroyed at all costs. In
WW1 they had achieved this partially, but it was clear that it was just
a matter of time before the śūlapuruṣa-s recovered. Hence, the
āngalika-s and their allies tried to curb the śūlapuruṣa-s via economic
warfare resulting in much damage to them. Importantly, they divided the
old śūlapuruṣa nation by giving part of their territory to their hated
bhrātṛvya-s, the Poles of śrava blood and severing off Austria and other
bits, granting them to France, Czechs and Slovaks. Finally, they built
up the over-confidence of the Poles to such an extent that they thought
it would be possible to defeat the śūlapuruṣa-s all by themselves. The
wild-card in all this was the Rus who were lead by the blood-thirsty
Stalin who could nearly match the āngalika-s in his cunning. But the
āngalika-s knew that if they played their game just right even Stalin
and his vast Rus horde would be sucked into to a 0-sum game with the
śūlapuruṣa-s. In the extreme scenario, the āngalika-s knew that if
things still went south, they could count on their brothers from
krauñcadvīpa, with their akṣayapātra of resources to shore them up in
that situation. It is amazing that even today these very same mleccha-s
play the very same game and minnow nations unerringly fall prey to it to
their own detriment: We saw just in the past decade how the mleccha-s
incited the Georgians and Ukrainians in conflict with the Rus much as
they built up Poland’s territorial ambitions with respect to the
śūlapuruṣa-s. Even as this is being written we are watching the
consequences for Ukraine unfolding – which will probably end up
seriously damaged or even destroyed at the end of it.

Going back to WW2, it is clear that the Rus were the biggest
contributors to the victory of the victors and that came an enormous
human cost to them. The Rus were considered by the western European
powers as something of an outcast. First, they were inheritors of the
old multi-ethnic heathen state of the Khaganate of the Rus, where
Slavic, Germanic, Finnic and Altaic people lived together with the Rus
Khagans themselves being apparently of part Germanic ancestry. We have
evidence from the discovery of a Hindu idol by Alexander Kozhevin in the
middle Volga region raising the possibility that there were even Hindus
in this mix. But with conversion of the Rus queen Olga to Christianity
things started going down hill, and despite the vigorous efforts of
Khagan Sviatoslav to uphold the Slavic version of the Indo-European
religion, Vladimir the confused eventually fell victim to infection by
the pretamata. He and his clan destroyed the old Slavic temples and
“with fire and sword” forcibly converted the people of the Rus to the
pretamata. However, Vladimir went to the ‘other side’ of the deep schism
within the pretamata by accepting the orthodox church. This affiliation
of the Rus even after conversion to the preta fold was the second factor
that kept them apart from the western Europeans and their allies.
Subsequently, the star of the Rus dimmed under the defeats at the hands
of the Mongols. But being defeated by a heathen rather than Abrahamistic
force meant that they retained their preta affinities through this dark
phase until they were finally revived by the energetic czar Peter-I. He
now put them on the path of competing with the powers of western Europe
and they were quick to recognize this. However, they saw the Rus as
uncivilized and still of a part Asian type who had rudely broken into
the party of the Westerners like a bear entering a house to ransack the
kitchen. Thus, they tried their best to keep the Rus out. Just as the
west was plundering the Americas and Australia, the Rus too felt their
urge of the great exploration and colonization. Being a traditional land
power they did it their own way by expanding eastwards into Asia and
eventually reaching Alaska, which they were coerced into ceding to the
USA by āngalika action.

In Europe the first great continental challenge to the āngalika power
emerged in the form of Napoleon Bonaparte, whose campaigns in many ways
foreshadowed those of the śūlapuruṣa-s in WW2. The Rus saw an
opportunity to increase their power and waded into these affairs playing
on both sides just as they did in WW2. In the process they expanded
their own territory by conquering Georgia and the Derbent Khanate. The
activity of the Rus, especially the tacit alliance with the English,
alarmed the French who under Napoleon had risen to be the greatest power
of continental Europe. Napoleon, now at the head of the biggest army
which had ever been assembled in Europe, decided to silence to Rus for
good by launching a massive invasion against them. While Czar Alexander
and his generals took a heavy beating, and even saw Moscow along with
the center of the orthodox church being reduced to ashes, they put up a
resolute resistance using the strategic depth of Russia to finally
inflict a disastrous defeat on the French.

continued…
