+++
title = "Comet Lovejoy, C/2014xa0Q2"

+++
[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-2_gZwn1jB8Y/VLtkW4OZm_I/AAAAAAAADN4/gLP7HtjLOSM/s800/Lovejoy.JPG)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/IJt5POmpXYR6XeYXYdsGaNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

On pauṣa kṛṣṇapakṣa 11, kali 5115 (16th Jan 2015) around 8.10 PM,
braving the cold of the height of winter (felt like -5°C) we caught
sight of śvetaketu in the constellation of Taurus near the 6 mothers of
our patron deity. It was a dhūmagola around the magnitude of 4.3 and
clearly visible through our binoculars (20X70) and was about barely
visible to naked eye close to the limiting magnitude from our bad
observing site. It had a faint tail that was hardly discernible from our
site via our instrument. Nevertheless we would place it as one of the
brighter and memorable comets of our life. It could be located fairly
easily by using the Kṛttikāḥ as the signpost. Thus, it was like a
Skanda-graha coursing through the welkin. Indeed, the ancient jaina-s
imagined Skanda as a comet emerging from the Kṛttikāḥ and coursing to
Bhāratavarṣa to take the embryo of the future tīrthaṃkara the nagna to
place him in a kṣatriya womb after removing all the brāhmaṇa molecules
from his body and replacing them with clean ones \[Indeed the brāhmaṇa
hatred of the nagna-s began early\!\].

Orbit of Comet Lovejoy, C/2014 Q2  
[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-0irTUhDJP-k/VLtkWqLWcMI/AAAAAAAADN0/9clwl5XqSiU/s800/Lovejoy_orbit.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/I93aqB_BZN-T1I269JwXM9MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Update: On pauṣa kṛṣṇapakṣa 13, kali 5115 (18th Jan 2015) a new
observation was made. The comet had cleared moved from Taurus into
Aries. Much of the day there was heavy cloud cover and rain which
suddenly cleared in the evening leaving behind excellent skies. The
comet was more easily seen with naked eye on this day. It appeared to be
at the same brightness with a faint hint of a tail in the direction of
the Pleiades.

Below is a more zoomed out view of its orbit which gives a feel for the
enormity of the distance of the Oort’s cloud, where comets originate,
from the planets and the Kuiper belt objects like Pluto, Eris and
Makemake with their highly inclined orbits.  
[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-nFZg94Zg1AE/VLxmS9xBO7I/AAAAAAAADOI/1nshWceYrxQ/s800/Lovejoy2.JPG)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/N0QR0hGGPsM9Fm0SLMA0_tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)
