+++
title = "The autumn days"

+++
Vidrum had just finished up with his last patient for the day. Before
heading out to his office one of his assistants offered him a rich
halvā. He curtailed his temptation reminding himself how bad it could
be for one’s health. Hence, with great determination he helped himself
to a small piece and warned his assistant of the dangers of such foods.
After completing some analysis of the cases in his office he had decided
attend a T20 match that was supposed to take place in his city that
evening. As he was walking towards his office the somber light of the
low autumnal sun reflected off his window casting a strange glow along
the corridor. Somewhere in his mind that lighting triggered a deep sense
of gloom, which was perhaps in resonance with the thoughts regarding
Meghana’s violent death the previous month that mobbed his brain. In the
aftermath of that event his ties with his old friends Somakhya, Lootika
and his colleague Vrishchika had gone cold for he had reacted rather
impulsively to what he felt was their chill or even frivolous response
to Meghana’s death. Hence, he had been spending more time with his other
friends Gardabh and Mahish. With them he had much more in common to talk
than what seemed to him like arcana punctuated by occasional remarks of
the cryptic type, which marked his meetings with Somakhya and Lootika or
Indrasena and Vrishchika. Yet Vidrum sensed that for some reason he felt
more comfortable and at greater contentment with them than with Gardabh
or Mahish despite their conversations seeming much more lively and
cheerful.

Thus, with his mind thronging with conflicting thoughts Vidrum was just
about to turn round the corridor to reach his office when he ran into a
woman. She greeted him and he returned the greeting. As he did so he
found her to be vaguely familiar. At the same time he felt a strange and
instantaneous attraction towards her. Hence, he introduced himself and
she too responded as though she had known him. Hence, they talked a
little bit more and then went their own ways. She told him that her name
was Kalakausha (Kālakauśā). She had just begun her fellowship with the
high-profile professor Vardhanga who had been newly-appointed to start
the organogenesis division. Upon finishing the business in his office
Vidrum returned home. As there was still sometime before he had to leave
for the stadium, Vidrum sat down in his study to catch up with the
literature. But his constant sleep deficit conspired with his plush new
chair and ere long he had lapsed into the world of a dream; therein he
beheld the following:

Those were days when they were rather young and when Vidrum’s house
still seemed to have a presence within it. It was a somber autumnal
afternoon when Vidrum left his home and walked towards the bus stop that
was close to the western wall of the cemetery. While he still had an
hour to catch the bus, he left early because he hoped to chat with
Meghana on the way. As he kept chatting with her he wondered if he
should rather not go to the bus stop at all. But he feared that his
parents might somehow know that he had not gone to the intended
destination and severely upbraid him. Hence, with much reluctance he
pulled himself away from Meghana and reached the bus stop. Even as he
reached there he saw Lootika walking up to it as had been already
planned. After a short initial exchange of pleasantries the two remained
quiet but for an occasional oligosyllabic remark. The bus soon arrived
and as they got into it they saw Somakhya waving out to them and they
ran up to join him. Thus journeying together they arrived at the stop
next to an interestingly constructed building bearing the board
Kalāvihāra. They saw many other young individuals like themselves
assembling there. Even as they entered the compound of the Kalāvihāra
and headed to the registration desk they saw a girl hail Lootika, who in
return called her to join them. As she joined the three of them Lootika
introduced her as a good acquaintance from the school she had formerly
attended before joining that of Vidrum and Somakhya. Her complexion was
grayish brown, her eyelids thick and her eyes slit-like. She was not
someone who would be described right away as universally beautiful, yet
she was not without certain strong subliminal charms that would appeal
to a male. It was these charms that ensnared Vidrum right away and for
some reason he felt deeply enamored by her.

Their program was to visit the Kalāvihāra daily for a week and on each
day learn different arts. Upon registering they were handed a card on
which were printed boxes that were to be stamped based on which activity
they chose. They could not chose the same activity again after attending
it on one day. The different activities were taking place in different
rooms, in the garden, or the central space in the building. Soon Vidrum
found himself drifting in and out of the rooms with his new companion,
i.e. Lootika’s old acquaintance, leaving his other two friends to their
own devices. Lootika and Somakhya each went their own different ways –
Somakhya settled for a room where they were teaching people to make
human faces with clay. Somakhya already knew to make many different
animals from clay but found humans extraordinarily difficult. Hence, he
thought that it might be a useful thing to learn. Lootika found herself
in a room where they were teaching the art of making marbled paper.
Vidrum and his new companion went to the room where they were to act out
a mleccha play. As the week wore out Vidrum and his new companion grew
inseparable – they were beside each other from the time they saw each
other upon entering the Kalāvihāra and always chose the same activity to
do for the day.

After the first day Vidrum had even stopped visiting Meghana and on the
last day he felt a certain anguish that he might not see his new friend
from the Kalāvihāra again. To his surprise after they finished up the
activities of the Kalāvihāra she came with him to join Lootika and
Somakhya rather than take her bus to a distant part of the city. She
explained that she intended to go with Lootika who was going to make
some soap – she wished to get herself some of that special soap. Vidrum
told her that he lived close to Lootika’s home and wondered if she might
stop by briefly near his house to chat. Lootika sensing that they might
want to hangout together offered to get her the soap once it was made if
she remained with Vidrum at a fixed spot in the vicinity of his house.
When they reached the bus stop near the cemetery the three bade Somakhya
good bye and got off. But Vidrum’s plans all came to naught – as he
stepped out of the bus he saw that Meghana had come there for some
reason, and she immediately called out to him. He had to embarrassingly
cancel his plans without much explanation and go away with Meghana even
as he watched his new companion vanish down the road with Lootika.

This deep embarrassment in the dream awakened Vidrum with a start. But
his horror quickly turned to a pleasant buzz in his mind as the
realization dawned on him that Kalakausha whom he had just met was
perhaps none other than this companion from the past who had appeared in
the dream. He turned this over and over again in his mind until he felt
convinced that it was indeed so. He dropped the idea of going to the
match and instead called Kalakausha and asked if she might want to join
him for dinner.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

It was a chilly autumn day. Even as Somakhya and Lootika were arriving
with their kids at the house of Varoli and her husband Mitrayu they were
joined by Indrasena, Vrishchika, their kid and Jhilleeka. Somakhya’s
elder kid ran up to his aunt Varoli and hugged her and expressed
happiness that she was back. Somakhya: “I think he is really relieved
and happy to see you back.”  
Lootika: “He would cause us so much distress by daily asking if you and
Mitrayu might be killed by various entities in Africa. First he asked he
you might eaten by a lion or a Nile crocodile or a Rock python. Then he
wondered if you might be a victim of a hippo. Passing through the
possibility of a bite from a mamba he descended to the microscopic realm
wondering if you might get malaria or Ebola or an arenavirus.” Varoli
patted her nephew and said to Lootika: “At least he does not appear to
have regressed all the way to the mean as you had feared. In any case we
survived and I think at least for now we can place our entry into
Vaivasvata’s abode in the dramatic or dismal future.”

Then Jhilleeka embracing her sister asked: “Varoli, I seem to have been
completely out of the loop. How come you and Mitrayu ended up going to
Ghana of all places and that too on so sweeping an adventure?”  
Varoli: “It is not something we expected either. It so happened that
when we were in grad school there was this fellow from Ghana who took
lessons from Mitrayu to pass his course. The link further developed as I
had helped the said Ghanaian with the synthesis of a pyrazinone obtained
from a fungus from those lands. Somakhya, you may recall I used a
dipeptide synthetase you had discovered followed by selective chemical
reduction of one of the keto groups taking advantage of the bulky side
chain. Subsequently, he seems to have become a man of some note there
and invited us to advice on some matters. Given that it might be a once
in life chance to visit the heart of Sthūladvīpa teeming with
Kṛṣṇa-jana-s of all types, Mitrayu and I decided to go; I also
realized that it might be a good opportunity to obtain samples for
studies on various natural products and obtained the necessary permits
for the same.”  
Jhilleeka: “It seems you guys had some great adventures there. I need to
hear all of it.”  
Mitrayu: “Well, why don’t you and everyone else have lunch first then we
could yarn to our heart’s content about the adventures. But frankly
while one feels like a hero when one is back from Citragupta’s clutches,
I am sure it will give us dreams that will wake us up for a while to
come. It also gave us a first hand glimpse of the life our early
ancestors in Sthūladvīpa and the effects it has had on the rest of the
fauna – for after all man is the most wicked of all animals.”

After lunch they all gathered in the porch, and Mitrayu and Varoli
started narrating their adventures to the rest. After spending the first
five days in Accra, they spent the next 10 days before their return in
navigating down the Afram river into the forest preserve on the shores
of the gigantic Volta lake, studying life and obtaining samples all
along. It was here that their narration reached its high-point and had
all spell-bound even as they displayed the pictures they had taken in
course of it. Reproduced below is a paraphrase of the relevant section
from Mitrayu’s memoir of the journey:

“…We were about a day’s journey away from the main entry into Volta lake
via the Afram river. We had sailed on our barge the whole night on the
Afram river. That morning we made it to the bank to refresh ourselves in
a village. We then planned to canoe a little further to examine the life
in the river and the more forested parts that lay to the east. Just as
we were getting ready for the canoeing, one of our Ghanaian companions
came up to us saying that he had some news of significance. A
mlecca-preta-ghoṣaka from Switzerland had gone with a couple of African
assistants to fish. They saw a baby hippo and were thinking of taking it
back as bush-meat for a feast. But just then they were attacked by the
mother hippo which knocked down the missionary and bit through his
sternum sending him along to join his kīlita-preta. One of his
assistants suffered a bite to his leg but somehow made it alive. So our
local companion was concerned about our going ahead with the canoeing
foray since the irate hippo had been sighted along with many others just
a little ahead on river where we had intended to canoe. One of our
companions, a practitioner of a local syncretic offshoot of the
deva-dharma centered on Rudra and Dattātreya suggested to us that we put
back our canoes on the barge and catch up with it the next day
downstream. He instead suggested that we take the land route through the
dense forest on the banks where the hippos were unlikely to cause
trouble. He also hoped to introduce us to the big man of a tribe that
practiced a west African religion in which the local deity had been
syncretized with Śrī.

As we began our land trek with two of our local companions (the
remaining four went with the barge) through the dense forest we
encountered many birds and plants of interest. By late afternoon we
reached the village of the traditional religionists. There we learned of
their worship of a water-cycle deity who conceptually maps on to the
Sarasvatī-like deities in the IE world. But they had syncretized her
with Śrī, whose images they had obtained from Saindhava Hindus. After
some familiarization and discussion the big man realized that we were
unlike the mleccha anthropologist who had visited them earlier.
Thereafter, impromptu he showed us the stambhana of a kukkuṭa by
pointing his ritual knife at it. Varoli for some reason had an impulse
to show her mantra-prowess by breaking his stambhana with a kaula
Vināyaka-prayoga. The big man quickly realized what was happening and
pointed his knife at Varoli to induce stambhana. Seeing her
instantaneously succumb to it, I caused the big man stambhana using the
veiled Vārāhī. Taking advantage of that my strī freed herself from his
stambhana. The big man immediately recognized us as fellow prayogin-s
and was pleased to talk about more weighty issues. He showed us a novel
*Voacanga* plant and explained how it had been a potent force against
the advance of the Abrahamistic memetic diseases in his tribe. Varoli
informed me that well-studied *Voacanga* varieties contained several
compounds of interest including the famed ibogaine. While they had been
characterized before, she obtained good samples of this *Voacanga* for
further studies on the pharmacology and biosynthesis of those alkaloids
which remained poorly understood – it was promising as it appeared to be
a novel *Voacanga* that had not been investigated thoroughly before.
After the big man felt more comfortable with us, he revealed yet another
plant of interest: A novel variety of *Tabernaemontana* with interesting
pot-shaped fruits. It was clearly distinct from the Hindu version, which
is used in preparations along with the mysterious lakṣmaṇā and
nāgakesara plants in the Māheśvara-vaśīkaraṇa-prayoga and attainment of
the state of universal benevolence (sarva-priya-darśanaḥ) as per the
Kākacaṇḍīśvara Tantra. Subsequently Varoli and I also discussed the
possibility that the nandyāvarta (endless knot) was an imagery emerging
from the hallucinations caused by the Hindu versions. In any case the
big man of the tribe was kind enough to give us a good sample of this
plant including its seeds that could be used for further studies.

The next day the barge arrived as stated but we were up for more
trouble. About quarter of an hour after we got going the engine
developed some problems and the handyman declared that it might take a
day to fix. Our local companions suggested that we could canoe ahead
towards the lake and catch up with the barge downstream. We took this up
and jumped on to our canoes. Our party of two canoes was joined by
another canoe with two mleccha adventurers and their guides. Close to
noon the canoe with the mleccha-s was just 35 meters downstream of us on
the river when one of them leaned towards what looked like a calm river
to take a photo. Even as he did so we saw a huge splash in the water and
he was seized by a giant niloticus crocodile and pulled into the water.
Before we could even realize what was underway we saw two more crocs
join in a death roll to rend apart the mleccha adventurer. I looked at
Varoli and she appeared supremely calm – that reminded me that she was
after all one of the caturbhaginī. With this incident we had to veer to
the northern shore to help the stricken party. We parked the canoes in a
place where crocodiles were unlikely to come to bask and the surviving
mleccha and a subset of the locals decided to wait till a larger boat
arrived with some assistance to take the mleccha back to a safe place.
We waited along with them for some time to make sure that they will get
the necessary help. It was clear by then that there was no chance of
recovering anything of the mleccha who had become the food of the
crocodile. Our local companions informed us that a big male crocodile
had been machine-gunned but it managed to survive the wounds and since
then routinely took revenge by attacking humans whenever he got the
chance. They were sure that it was this guy who had eaten the mleccha. I
was not convinced with this revenge theory. But in response they regaled
with tales of crocs to drive home this point: from the great croc
Gustave, which had lived in the other side of the vast African continent
and was reputed to have killed at least 300 humans and an adult hippo,
to another 7 meter giant in the Niger river. They pointed to us these
crocs did not only kill to eat but also drowned some of their victims
without eating them, thereby presenting support for their revenge
hypothesis. Varoli and I said to ourselves that as man is wickedest of
all animals, the long presence of our kind in Africa had only allowed
the animals capable of coping with us to survive – be it the hippo or
the crocodile – without that ferocity they would not be still around
with man. We then thought how it might have been for our ancestors in
the company of the now gone *Rimasuchus*.

While the party waited for the boat, we set out with two our companions
to meet the medicine man of a traditional tribe. After a couple of hours
of trekking we reached his habitation in the forest. He was at first
taciturn but after our companions assured him of our intentions he
seemed rather forthcoming and allowed us to accompany him on his
collecting foray, which was to include material for the ceremony that
they were to perform later that night. Two plants of great interest were
collected by him. One was a *Pancratium* species, which he declared to
be a very toxic plant that was used for killing or making the victim
mad. The other was a *Caesalpinia* species whose flowers and seeds he
said were used to see ghosts. Then he collected a spiny looking mushroom
of the genus *Lycoperdon*, which he said was to see ancestors come and
talk to you. We too obtained samples of all these. Unfortunately, we
could not stay on for his ceremony as there was the report of a male
leopard on the prowl on our path back and we had to make it back in time
to our party. Nevertheless, we made extensive notes of the medicine
man’s accounts of these plants. Thus, we saw first hand, contrary to
certain claims, that Africa is likely to possess a rich tradition of
psychoactive plants, even if it were not in the same league as central
and south America.

While we thought we had already had our share of adventures, it was not
the end. The next day we started canoeing to catch up with the barge
when our canoe suddenly ran up against a sunken tree. At that point
Varoli’s paddle got entangled in submerged vegetation and she was thrown
out into the raging waters. She was washed out into the river for over
80 meters by the current but she somehow found her bearings and
recovering the paddle started swimming back toward the boat even as we
moved as fast as we could to approach her. Just then three crocs swam up
towards her. To my horror though our companions had their spears they
just seemed as though paralyzed. Varoli swam moving the paddle in a
certain pattern even as the crocs swam for a while on either side of her
and then retreated. By then she made it back and I hauled her back into
the boat but was too shocked for any words. But she reminded me that she
was one of the caturbhaginī – what surer evidence could I have that dear
Varoli of bright eyes was indeed a natural siddhā of those 5 mantra-s
than this immunity to crocs? The mantra ‘śiṃśumārā ajagarāḥ purīkayā
jaṣā matsyā rajasā yebhyo asyasi deva tuṃburo rudra jalāṣa-bheṣaja |‘
came to my mind, and I beheld the fourth suchian face…”

After Varoli and Mitrayu had finished their narrative the rest remained
silent for sometime taking in the adventure they had had in Sthūladvīpa.
Jhilleeka: “We all know when any one of us deploys the makaramukha. When
I knew someone had deployed I was just headed for the defense of my
dissertation. So I called Lootika as soon as it was over and the first
thing I asked was who deployed it. She thought that I had deployed it
because of a irate committee member trying to give me trouble in course
of the defense, but she did have her doubts for it would be surprising
if I had used mantra-s for such commonplace secular issues. That’s when
it hit us that it was you.”

The conversation eventually shifted to the plants they had obtained.
Indrasena: “When we were in Bali a mantravādin showed us a certain
variety of *Copelandia* mushroom that he used to visualize the Rudra-s.
A milder version was incorporated into a dośā and eaten by people before
a dance. Vrishchika had obtained samples of those with the intention of
giving it to you Varoli. I don’t know if they reached safely.”

Varoli: “I do have them in the deep freeze. I have finally got two
students who will be devoted the characterization and synthesis of all
this stuff. So we should hopefully have something exciting in the near
future.”  
Somakhya: “In that case don’t forget the *Salvia* that I obtained from
the forests of Uttarakhanda. But I hope your sister passed them on to
you.”  
Varoli: “Yes I do have that too. Lootika actually managed to grow some
of that and gave me bunch of whole sage plants.”  
Lootika: “bhārgava, was there not some story about that *Salvia*?”  
Somakhya: “I asked a yogin who had some siddhi-s and practiced
oṣadhi-prayoga-s if he knew the Sanskrit name of this sage. He said it
was the hāsyaparṇi and said that upon taking it by the appropriate mode
one laughs uncontrollably for a while and then has deep insight into
himself. He then quoted Udīcya Śyāmilaka to bring home the point as to
why that laughter is good:  
na prāpnuvanti yatayo ruditena mokṣaṃ  
svargāyatiṃ na parihāsakathā ruṇaddhi |  
tasmāt pratīta-manasā hasitavyam eva  
vṛttiṃ budhena khalu kaurukucīṃ vihāya ||

yati-s do not attain mokṣa by crying,  
comedies do not block the ascent to svarga,  
therefore with cheerful mind ought to laugh  
the wise one, verily having given up bad ways.

Perhaps such a plant played a role in the laughing rituals of the
pāśupata-s\!”  
Indrasena: “May be. One gets a sense of that persisting in the
expressions of the Kashmirian śaiva yogin Utpaladeva.”

Vrishchika: “Listen, regarding our psychedelics I believe we shall have
a good chance to do some interesting pharmacology and biology that has
not been done before. There is this guy Vardhanga, who has set up a lab
in our med-school and has specialized in growing organs in culture. He
has been rather successful in growing little human brains with both
neurons and glia in the lab and they mimic the neural organization of
real brains to different degrees. I have been proposing to use those
cultured brainlets to test out responses to our various compounds,
provided Varoli and her students are able to synthesize them. My group
could initiate the process with some known substances to standardize
various procedures and measurements before we get to the new
substances.”

The rest agreed that it sounded like an interesting idea to pursue.  
Mitrayu: “Good luck with your ventures guys. Now with Sthūladvīpa behind
us I need to return to the tholins on Pluto and Ixion”  
Somakhya: “Good luck with that hopefully we would hear more of that the
next time we meet.”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

It was a dim autumn evening. The bustling city streets were a little
quiet that night as the cold had suddenly set in. Vidrum and Kalakausha
were returning after a delightful dinner at a restaurant. Kalakausha
barely concealing her excitement said: “Now for something really
thrilling\! We need a quite secluded place.”  
Vidrum: “Calm down, let us go to my house – best place for anything like
that.”  
Kalakausha: “Any chance Gardabh or Mahish might drop by?”  
Vidrum: “Don’t worry. They would call if they want to come and it is too
late for that\!”

Back at Vidrum’s house he set up the cushions in a comfortable, dim-lit
and quite room at the back of his house. The room had large glass window
panes that separated them from the cold silent night outside but let the
moonlight stream in. It also lit up the tangle of trees that lay to the
back of Vidrum’s house separating it from the cemetery wall. The dim
lamp shed an amber aura around the room and Vidrum lit a couple of
dhūpa-daṇḍa-s to enhance the olfactory experience. He brought two
ornate-looking cups with a cast-iron teapot and placed them on the low
table beside the cushions. Vidrum: “Do you think caffeine could do any
harm?” Kalakausha: “My results suggest it should be totally fine.” Then
he and Kalakausha sat for sometime holding each others hands and taking
in the ambiance. Kalakausha approved of it and taking up her bag brought
out a multicolored bong. She then brought out a couple tubes and added
them to the bong’s cup saying: “That should be it. You go first and I’ll
follow.” Vidrum inhaled the substance from the mouth of the bong and
then passed it to Kalakausha who did the same. They held each others
hands tightly even as they felt like they had left the world.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Kalakausha felt it to be incongruent for a moment but accepted it as
though she knew of no other state of reality thereafter. She saw herself
with her friend Lootika walking along a corridor in their old school
towards a little playground where they usually spent their short rest
break. She was asking Lootika to help her with an Euclidean problem
involving congruence and similarity of triangles. As Lootika was
immersed in cracking it, a guy suddenly darted at her from the side of
the corridor and tripped her with his leg. As she stumbled, he quickly
kicked away Lootika spectacles and crushing them with his foot he
swiftly ran away. Lootika calmly got up and went to the tap the wash the
cut she had sustained on her knee. As Kalakausha helped her with
applying some first aid Lootika asked her: “I did not catch who the
bastard was. Did you?” Kalakausha: “Lootika, I did, but it was so
disappointing that I do not know what to tell you.” Lootika: “Who was
the masūrīmukha?” Kalakausha: “Well It is the principal’s son Shonit. We
will not get anything from reporting this to the school authorities.”
Lootika: “Ah, the damn pūyakīṭī was the one who slashed my sister
Vrishchika’s bike’s tires last week. I should have been more attentive
to the surroundings. But by greatest Indra some day this Shonit will pay
with śoṇitam.” Kalakausha felt a deep sense of awe run down her like
those on the kuru field might have felt even as Vṛkodara approached
Duḥśāsana. Everything in front of her eyes turned red. She then had
a singular experience of pure red color.

Kalakausha looked down and found her dress to be covered by patterns of
exquisite form. Those forms constantly changed, each seeming as wondrous
or more than the previous one. She was seated on a bench at the railway
station. Her feelings were fluctuating like the cadences of a Mongolian
song she had heard Lootika play. Soon she felt that it was not just her
feelings but her whole head was being contorted into spherical harmonics
in sync with the tonal fluctuations of the Mongolian song. Seated there
by herself she was wondering if she had done the right thing in life by
entering the medical school. She told herself: “Wise Lootika shunned
med-school. Perhaps she had seen through all of this and decided with a
deeper insight.” With a vague sense of discomfort she longed for her
hometown. Kalakausha had intended to go back home for the inter-semester
vacation. However, mid-way through the semester the prime minister
Pratap Simha had unexpectedly died and a couple of weeks later great
unrest and violence had broken out between people who were classified as
other backward classes, backward classes and scheduled castes. The
violence had spread to their campus resulting in the classes and labs
being canceled. As result the classes and labs were shifted to the
inter-semester vacation so that the exams could be held in time. In the
meantime there were further holidays because new elections were being
held. Kalakausha herself belonging to the other backward classes was
concerned that the violence on her own campus might eventually envelope
her. However, as she had obtained her seat in med-school on merit, few
knew of her place in the classification.

As she sat there feeling a bit homesick, the afternoon air was suddenly
pierced by the noise of the arriving train. As the train came to a halt
people started spilling out to the platform. Her eyes anxiously sifted
through the crowd but she did not see any sign of the person she was
waiting for. Then a great terror gripped her as she felt someone
suddenly creep up behind her and shut her eyes off by placing a palm on
them even as another hand grabbed her throat. Just as she thought the
worst outcome was inevitable, she heard a familiar voice make a threat
to her impersonating a criminal. The familiarity in the voice did little
to relieve her fear. But then she felt her attacker release the grip on
her and to her great relief it turned out that her “attacker” was none
other than her friend Lootika, who having evaded her scan of the crowd
had successfully surprised her. Kalakausha: “Hey Lootika, you remain
just the same as you were as a kid.” L: “Oh no. I am much better at
protein purification these days.”

Later that evening Lootika and Kalakausha were at dinner. Kalakausha:
“So, you guys intend collecting earthworms and leeches that eat
earthworms in the forest?” L: “The annelids are one part. There will be
multiple people in our group looking at everything from plants to
leopards. I will be focusing on the annelids this time around but I am
always on the look out for interesting biology, where ever it might crop
up. Kalakausha would you like to join us?” K: “I would love to be with
you in the forest but I have all but forgotten the anatomy of earthworms
and other teeny things that interest you.” L: “We always need more hands
in such field work and you can always be of help to us if you so choose.
K: “If you think I could be of help I will certainly come with you.” L:
“As a bonus I can also fill you in on all the biochemistry in your
curriculum that you seemed so tentative about.”

Just then a wave of sudden agitation passed through the busy restaurant.
A stylishly dressed guy with a gun walked in and took a seat beside a
window. In a low voice Lootika whispered to Kalakausha: “Who is he?”
Kalakausha cautiously looked around and told Lootika in her ear: “He is
Fakhr az-Zaman. A politician of the All India Muslim league or something
like that. He is allied with the so called Samatā party. It is prudent
we don’t tarry here for too long. He is a regular but could be joined by
his rowdies.” The two soon covered their faces with their
uttara-vastra-s and made a quick inconspicuous exit from the eatery.
Once on the street Kalakausha made sure nobody was within earshot and
pulled out a flyer from her bag and showed it to Lootika: “While I was
waiting at the station an activist of the Samatā party walked up to me
and gave me this flier saying agar tū hameṃ parsoṃ vote nahiṃ dī to ham
tumheṃ katl kar deṃge. I was really scared and just took the flyer and
put it in my bag.

Lootika took the flyer from her friend and examined it: “Why Kalakausha,
the leader of this Samatā party is the sphicchiras Shonit.” K: “Who is
he?” L: “He was a guy who harassed me and Vrishchika at the school where
we were together for some years.” K: “Thankfully he had gone out of my
mind entirely. Of course I remember now. He became an even more advanced
type after you left our school.” L: “It says he belongs to the ‘World
Panthers Alliance’ claiming to represent the most backward, enslaved
peoples of the world. Does he even belong to one of the jāti-s he seems
to represent?” K: “Not at all…I am sorry to say he is supposed to be
from your varṇa. Every week he writes a new article about caste
oppression. Just last week the Samatā party men along with Fakhr’s
cadres killed five people from a scheduled tribe in a political clash.
But the irony is this fellow was in the news talking about it as an
example of grave caste oppression his party was fighting.” L: “Ah
another of those patita-s … a walking cemetery to borrow the words of
Āpastaṃba one of our lawgivers … the lout seems to have really built up
his portfolio since school days.”

Just then Lootika was distracted by the sight of an interesting plant
with white spiraling flowers by the sidewalk. She went up to it and
collected some of its fruits. K: “Why is this plant of interest to you?”
L: “Its fruits have interesting psychoactive properties.” K: “Have you
tried them?” L: “No but ‘am aware of the literature on it.” K: “Could
you give me a few?” L: “Here, but don’t try them.” Kalakausha could not
control her curiosity and when Lootika had fallen asleep consumed some
of them. She felt she was falling through a hole in time. Soon the whole
vision she had just seen played itself out before her eyes starting from
the corridor at her old school, to the caste war, to the consumption of
Lootika’s plant. Again and then again it kept playing and with each
passing cycle the realization dawned on her along with an ever deepening
fear that her whole reality was reduced to an endless loop from which
there was no exit.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

When Vidrum came to terms with his new reality he found his entire
experience to be just an ellipse of light and nothing else. Suddenly, he
felt himself diving through the ellipse and as he did so he saw many
tendrils of various textures radiating out from his body and connecting
to various people. He saw one tendril connect to Meghana, another to
Kalakausha, yet another to Somakhya, one to Sharvamanyu and so on. The
tendril connected to Meghana was connected to his left eye. He suddenly
saw Meghana fall into a deep hole and felt the tendril joining him to
her tugging him really hard. He felt a severe pain on his eye as though
a Mohammedan torturer was trying to pluck his eye out. But then it
snapped and he gradually felt his pain ease out. He then held the
tendril that connected him to Kalakausha and he felt a calming of bliss
pass through his whole form. But even as he was savoring it he suddenly
saw all the tendrils burn up and he was soon in a free fall as though
through a dark space.

—–

When found his feet on solid ground Vidrum realized that he was no
longer his human self but a one-horned rhinoceros. He was now at the
base of a great hilly spur on which later the fort of Chittorgarh was to
be built. He felt great pleasure in eating the luxuriant vegetation on
the hill side, swinging his tail swatting away biting gnats. Suddenly,
three strange animals appeared before him. They looked sort of like men
but were not exactly men as we known them today; rather they were an
archaic type of *Homo*. Rushing at him they attacked him with their
hafted weapons. One of them hit him but the missile glanced off his
thick hide. Realizing the danger from them he charged them. The one in
the front was an easy target and his horn found its mark. The hominin
was hurled high into the air and he came crashing down. Changing his
path he next attacked the hominin to his left who was raising his
weapon. But seeing his companion crash to ground and remain motionless,
the remaining two hominins deserted him and ran downhill. Vidrum still
as the rhino charged the fallen hominin again and hurled him once more
into to air – the ape was relieved of his misery.

—–

Suddenly, Vidrum felt he was a man again. He was not far from the place
where he was in the state of the rhino but it was a much later era. He
was armed to teeth. On his helmet he had piled a few cakra-s. He had a
spear fixed to his back, a sword in his hand and another saber with a
more curved blade at his waist. He felt himself surging with manliness.
He performed a routine of prāṇāyāma to steady himself for the rush of
men that was to break out. He looked at the saffron flag of the Hindu-s
fluttering high and this sent a surge of epinephrine through his whole
frame. Mentally focusing on Śiva he conditioned himself that today no
marūnmatta who crosses his path would remain alive – they would all be
narabali-s for Raṇacaṇḍikā.

The battle was on; the great leader of his band vīra Durgādasa issued
the command to punch the detached Rohilla division with a heavily armed
infantry attack. Vidrum found himself charging with his comrades in arms
towards the Rohillas who had been separated from the main force of
Awrangzeb’s imperial army. Soon they collided with the Rohilla band. He
hacked down three marūnmatta-s in quick succession after parrying their
exaggerated swings with his shield. He and his comrades now advanced in
a tight configuration keeping the bloodthirsty ghāzī-s to their northern
flank driving them into the range of the cavalry that vīra Sāvaladāsa
was just going to deploy. Even as he marched ahead he was attacked by
yet another Rohilla who was trying to break through the cordon they were
setting up. In the fight that ensued he found himself struck by the
Rohilla on his helmet. For a moment he thought he was dead but his
senses came back even as the Rohila went for his throat. Retreating
backwards he just made enough distance to hurl a cakra that struck the
Rohilla’s arm and stopped his lunge. Regaining his control Vidrum found
himself leaping forward and burying his sword in the Rohilla with the
full force of his jump. But even as he pulled his sword out with a
squeaky noise from the innards of the marūnmatta he found a lasso
tighten across his torso, and with a swift tug he was felled to the
ground. As he turned around on the ground he saw a fierce Uzbek
mercenary rush at him mace to crack his skull. But just before the Uzbek
reached him. He saw a small cavalry band of svajana-s to his south and a
warrior in their midst brought down the Uzbek with a single arrow.

As they were coming to terms with their victory Vidrum now found himself
with the cavalry man who had saved his life and asked him: “Who are you
O paṇḍita-śrī who saved my life?” The brāhmaṇa answered: “I am a
paippalāda śākhādhyāyin. They call me Varāhaviṣṇu.” Vidrum: “It is
really my good fortune that you arrived here when we expected no succor
to our south. I would like to give you my dakṣiṇa for saving my life.”
Varāhaviṣṇu: “I was to proceed to the rāṇa with my band when brave
Dayāla the vaṇij informed me of the action and that it might be better
to offer further assistance to Durgādasa. Thus, I arrived to provide
cover to your column. As for the dakṣiṇa there is no need as I was only
doing my duty to the dharma and the rāṇa. Our paths will cross again
hundreds of years later in a much greater clash of men when you will
meet my descendants Somakhya, Lootika and others.”

—–

Suddenly everything went red. Vidrum felt a swell of emotions as he saw
Meghana enter the house of the politician Shonit. Shonit was upstairs
reading the Sṭāhlinastuti and performing a nīrājana to the Das Kapital.
She heard him recite loudly with his voice quivering with emotion:

sṭahlino nītivijño hi paṅkāvilāṃ  
rājanītiṃ na jagrāha kaṣṭe.api san |  
satyamārgaṃ na tatyāja satyavratī  
sajjanāḥ satyamārgasya saṃpoṣakāḥ ||  
Stalin the knower of politics, did not take up dirty politics,  
even when faced with great difficulties.  
The truthful man did not renounce the path of truth,  
for indeed the truthful are the nourishers of path of truth\!

She knew that he brooked no disturbance in this matter and waited
quietly on the couch downstairs. Suddenly, his friend Fakhr az-Zaman
also barged into the house. Seeing Meghana he made himself comfortable
on the couch next to her and started making salacious small talk with
her. Soon Shonit was done with his pūjā and rushed downstairs to check
who had come in. Seeing Meghana comfortable with Fakhr he erupted and
pointing his finger threateningly, asked his political ally to take his
hands off the shoulder of Meghana. Fakhr: “Hey what’s your problem. You
are not a Moslem and in communism everything is public property.”
Meghana pushed Fakhr’s hand away and jumped out of the couch saying:
“How dare you say such things.” Fakhr ignored her and looking at
Shonit said: “Hey, if she can be friends with other guys then why not
me.” Shonit flared up and rushed at Fakhr with reaching out for the
knife in his pocket: “Fakhr I will make you see your houris today”.
Meghana came in between them: “Guys, calm down. We have little time and
need to decide all the slogans and the posters for the Equality of the
People march.” Fakhr calmly went on: “arre Kaffr learn how to talk
respectfully to a momīn or I will be the one sending you to the
hell-fire.” Shonit leaped at Fakhr with his knife now out. Fakhr still
reclining on the couch whipped out his pistol and fired. Two shots got
Shonit. Meghana rushed to him as he fell and received one shot. Vidrum
saw nothing but strange red patterns and heard a sledgehammer like noise
reverberating through head.

—–

It seemed almost like an eon before it stopped. When it did Vidrum felt
he was an old man. It was a close to 1:30 AM on an autumn night. Driving
his all-terrain vehicle he reached the home-cum-lab of Somakhya and
Lootika. Everything seemed dark as if no one was inside. He sent in his
password and he heard Lootika ask him for the “keywords”. Upon his
answering, the gate opened and he went in. On seeing Somakhya and
Lootika he realized they looked rather old and grayed too. It was only
then that he felt that everything was congruent.  
Vidrum: “Before anything, I would like convey my heartfelt condolences
for the tragic demise of Vrishchika and Indrasena.”  
Somakhya: “Ah\! the ruse has worked well. I am happy to inform you that
they are alive and have fled the city to Dyutinagara in what will become
residual Hindustan.”  
Vidrum: “What\! I read in the news that their burnt remains were
extracted from the ruins of the medical school and you two were quoted
as hoping that the police will bring the perpetrators to law.”

Smirking, Lootika said: “You know well that we have long stopped
believing in relying on the police – we should be fools to think so when
Abraham’s merry followers are rampaging thus and things have come to
this pass. We had the intelligence that they would be targeted first in
their house; if they were not found there in the medical school and
finally in main university campus. We planned that the best scenario for
us would be in the medical school. Hence, they purposely went there
prepared two corpses from the morgue by faking the DNA evidence to stand
in for them, and slipped out just before the attack to join our children
who were waiting in advance with our vehicle at the pass in the hills to
complete the escape.”  
Vidrum: “Wow\! That’s quite an escape. Then I guess you all would have
also divined that even I had faked my injury and did not show up at the
hospital.”  
Somakhya: “We hoped you would do it. That is why we had delivered the
intelligence to you via Vrishchika.”

Vidrum: “Why did you not leave with them?”  
Somakhya: “We need to complete key experiments which were doing. They
will lead to future weapons on which our survival as a nation might
depend. We have intelligence that we cannot easily do any of those
there. Moreover, we are the oldest and our children went with them;
hence, even if we die before we get out, there is nothing to grieve
about.”  
Vidrum: “Despite all the talk of death I see you two seem in good shape
– I guess the magic nucleotide you found one evening many many autumns
ago is still doing its job for your all. Here, I have the guns for you
two.”  
Somakhya: “Thank you\! The nucleotide aside these nālikā-s could be our
lifeline. We have trained Lootika with her shooting – she’s pretty good
now with her mark, but I still fear whether she can maintain it if we
come under fire from the marūnmatta-s or the mleccha agents. We need to
move out shortly. Lootika make sure you have taken everything.”

For the first time Vidrum saw tears roll down Lootika’s eyes. For all
those years he had know her, he had seen her personality to be
steadfastly unemotional on the exterior – something he had always felt
could only gel with that of Somakhya. Lootika was just unable to easily
detach herself from her lab, her numerous specimens, her cultures of
organisms, her snails and the like – it finally dawned on her that she
was never going to see them again. She remembered Somakhya telling her:
“some day we shall become the last offering for the great Vaiśvānara
whom we have maintained all our lives.” Finally, pulling herself
together she checked for one last time that she had the vials for
ultimate weapons. But she was not sure if those could be used after all
because she had been informed by Varoli of the mleccha embargo that was
being imposed on import of various materials on account of which they
could not get their new lab running to the standards they wished.”

Somakhya donned a false beard and a skull cap and handed one to Vidrum.
Lootika had by then pulled on a robe to look like a bibi. Somakhya then
handed a vial of suicide toxin to each of the others: “Well, this is in
the event we fall into the hands of the murderous ghāzī-s. He then
handed some cash to Vidrum: “Despite the embargo, the mleccha-s and
cīna-s need some somethings from us. So our ventures with Sandeep and
those of Jhilleeka’s husband Prachetas at least keep us out of penury.”
They loaded all their stuff including the pot with the fire into
Vidrum’s vehicle and started moving.

As they passed by the university Vidrum asked: “Did you give any
intelligence to professor Shashikant?”  
Lootika: “I thought we should because he had been good to us when young
but Somakhya was categorical that we should not.”  
Somakhya: “Of course we should not. He was indeed good to us as a
person, but remember he was a signatory on the letter for the release of
Jihad al Akbar, who then masterminded the strike on the medical school
with the intention of bumping off Vrishchika and Indrasena. Moreover,
let us not forget that he had been a major participant of the infamous
campaign against the so called of intolerance towards marūnmatta-s and
śavārādhaka-s, which is why we have come to this state. When the
election results are out he will be one of those who would be slain like
a camel on the street by the very men of the marūnmatta for whom he
campaigned.”

Vidrum: “Lootika, you left your lab as is. Would all your stuff not fall
into the hands of the marūnmatta collaborator of you guys Shaikh Irfan
giving him an undue advantage?”  
Lootika: “If he lives, he would likely give up science and go back to
his ancestral profession in the sharia court. But it is also rather
possible that before the marūnmatta-s breach our compound the Shaikh,
despite all his pedigree, is dispatched to jahannam for being a munāfiq
rationalist.”  
Somakhya added with a smile: “More than the Shaikh it is the mleccha-s
who will be there as soon as they know we have fled. But when they enter
our lab they will not come out of it.”  
Then Somakhya pinged Indrasena and said: “Fish; slipping cat; woman;
pain-relief; disabled man; new year; horror; inflammation;
Bacteroidetes; Indreṇa amaviṣṇavaḥ”  
Vidrum smiled thinking that after all these years his friends continued
with their inscrutable ciphers.

Vidrum after reflecting for a while remarked: “There is no doubt we are
in the midst of that great clash of men. I guess people like professor
Shashikant will have to fall in it like Śalya on the Kuru field.”  
Lootika: “Indeed. I did come to agree with dear Somakhya that we have to
be pitiless as Vāyu who was praised by our extinct Iranian cousins, and
uncompromising like organisms are in biological conflicts – that is the
only way to survive. Imagine, if we transplanted Shashikant to what will
become residual Bhārata. He might again start agitating for rights of
marūnmatta-s and śavārādhaka-s there. Hindus being foolish might fall
for such softness yet again, and our successors will have to iteratively
go through what we are facing. Then in time we might contract here in
the subcontinent to the size of Bali, just as what happened to our
coreligionists there after having owned the whole of the Malay
peninsula. Moreover, remember that with each such contraction our
ability to defend ourselves reduces and we are increasingly looking like
a once great star shedding all its gas as its life nears the end. While
smaller nations have won against bigger ones, they have only done so by
having a degree of technological dominance or a deep capacity for either
guile or to take hell. The latter we now lack among the Hindus. If we
need to gain that technological edge we need a great mass of people.
This is because, given the probability with which scientific innovators
are born in our midst, only if we have many people would a sufficient
mass of such innovators emerge. Then those innovations need to be
translated into technology. But for that you again need a large critical
mass with a different kind capacity, but still one that is to right in
the curve of what exists in our average individual. This mass again can
be achieved only if we are a large nation. Finally, we need a leadership
that has the capacity to learn from mistakes and can be ruthless with
the ekarākṣasavādin-s. The likelihood that such even arise again enters
the realm of realistic possibility only if we have numbers on our side.
We have not even touched the issue of physical resources that will
become even smaller for us shortly. Indeed in the past despite the
technological edge we had over the marūnmatta-s, the lack of certain
physical resources, combined with slowness in learning did us in. Hence,
with these contractions, the chance that we can again pull off a miracle
like what the great Chatrapati had done seems even more remote now than
then.”

It was the morning of the 3rd day they were on the road. They were about
to emerge from the hills and still had one stretch across open road
before reaching the safe zone. They had stopped were powering their
devices and generating power by various means beside their vehicle.
Lootika checking the news remarked: “The election has gone as expected
and Jihad al Akbar has declared secession. We need to be on the watch.”
Suddenly a grenade went off as though fired from a rocket-propelled
device – it was not clear if it had hit their vehicle or had gone off
just in front of it. But it was so sudden that Lootika scampered behind
a rock leaving her gun behind. Somakhya tried to retrieve it before
scurrying for the rocks when bullets whizzed past him. Vidrum gathered
himself and returned fire even as they scampered to the rocks. As Vidrum
peeked from behind he saw a beard take aim with his RPG. Vidrum fired
first and found his mark; the Meccan demon seemed to hit the ground.

Suddenly there was a soft white light and a series of geometric patterns
appeared and disappeared against that background.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Kalakausha: “I certainly don’t want to do this ever again.”  
Vidrum: “I too don’t want to do it again but I have no regrets for
having done it for this one hell of a trip. Then dear, you said it was
going to be all pleasure, what happened?.”  
Kalakausha was busy checking her messages. She then said: “Hell\! I
believe this was the wrong compound. I have to come up with some
convincing excuse but nothing is going to go too well. I just got this
message from the boss Vardhanga regarding what happened to the vial with
the new substance Vrishchika had handed to him. I fear we used that
one…”
