+++
title = "Nālika-s"

+++
The first week of college had ended. Vidrum was returning from an eatery
with his new friend Manjukeshi after an early supper. The two of them
were rather surprised by the ferocious competitiveness of their
classmates. Some refused to discuss the solutions to a difficult problem
in trigonometry, while others refused to talk about synthesis using
Grignard’s reagents. Just then he saw his old friends from school
Sharvamanyu, Somakhya and Lootika. He heaved a sigh of relief at their
familiar faces. He thought to himself: “I hope Somakhya and Lootika
remain the same and help us out a bit with these difficult problems
which seem much stiffer than what we had in school.” He told Manjukeshi:
“Hey, let me introduce you to my old friends from school. They may also
be able to help us with these problems our classmates are refusing to
discuss with us.” After the introductions he quickly came to the issue:
“You guys seem rather unaffected by new stuff in the classroom. I
noticed that you cut most of the classes this week\! I hope we can ask
you some questions.”

Sharvamanyu pointed to Somakhya and Lootika and said: “Hey Vidrum, as I
have always told you, whatever the quirks of these two dear friends of
ours, we must put up with them. Do you think I found all that stuff
easy. I am looking calm because I have signed up to get some tutoring
from them this weekend in all the subjects.” Manjukeshi thought they
must be studious students and added: “Trust me we have been spending the
evening brushing up on all the books but the new stuff seems really
difficult\!”  
Lootika: “Easy or difficult depends on the vantage point. We can show
you a viewing point – if that works for you then great\!”

Somakhya turned to Vidrum: “You are of course welcome to join us for the
lessons the next two days. They will be in my home lab starting 2.00 PM.
As for Manjukeshi, you too are welcome to try out a lesson or two to
first see if it works for you because as Sharva politely put it, Lootika
and I can be bad people.”  
Vidrum heaved a sigh of relief that things were settling into a more
familiar routine: “So what are you all up to now?”

Lootika: “We were going to have some exercise trekking up the rocky
outcrop of Gaṇeśaśilā and then Sharva was going to show us some
stuff.”  
Sharvamanyu: “Would you like to join us?”  
Vidrum and Manjukeshi: “Why not?”  
At the end of their trek they were seated on basaltic eminences under a
hidden rocky overhang. Vidrum: “Sharva, what do you have to show?”  
Sharvamanyu: “New āyudha-s ?”  
Vidrum: “New gravity knives?”  
Sharvamanyu: “No, those are for kids. Nālika-s.” Saying so he pulled out
a couple of hastanālika-s and passed them around saying: “They are not
loaded.”  
Somakhya examined one closely and asked: “So they are forging these
śūlapuruṣīya-nālika-s now? Is this one like the one you have got for
me?”  
Sharvamanyu: “Yes, will deliver it tomorrow. When the marūnmatta-s
whacked the śūlapuruṣa-s they got hold of the stuff and smuggled the
design into the deś for mass production. One of our pakṣa in Uttar
Pradesh then got hold of the designs in course of the demolition of a
rākṣasālaya during the riots and it has become accessible to us.”  
Vidrum: “Wow\!”  
Manjukeshi was shocked by what she saw and the discussion of her
companions. Her face turned pale as she looked at Vidrum with the
expression of utter disapproval and fear. Vidrum sensing this pacified
her: “Don’t worry our friends here are not terrorists. This is just for
self-defense for they have strong reasons to suspect that the
marūnmatta-s could cause mayhem in our regions too as they doing along
the Ganges.”  
Manjukeshi: “But is this not illegal.”  
Sharvamanyu: “When the chips are down and the beards are out to saw your
neck off, legal or illegal is not going to matter much.”  
Manjukeshi: “But by this attitude of yours you are contributing to a
violent society yourself. Why do we have the constitution, the law and
police? I bet you did not take civics seriously in school.”  
Sharvamanyu: “Sure I did not. But how will all of those, the māmu-s
included, help when push will come to shove? You must have seen the news
in the Śarmaṇya-deśa and Phiranga-deśa. Did their well-armed māmu-s help
in any way? What to say of our weak māmu-s in Uttar Pradesh? It was our
counter-rioters who saved the day. In contrast, in trivarga-deśa the
marūnmatta-s were easily put in place. Why, because most people have a
good nālika with them\!”  
M: “OK I see your point about Moslems but most Moslems are not
terrorists and our Moslems are citizens just like us, not migrants. But
then just imagine if everyone takes your advice. Ours is a violent
society as it is. People would be settling scores with nālika-s and the
streets would be lined with corpses\! You know how it is in the Land of
the Free.”  
Sharvamanyu: “On what basis do you say our society, excluding the
marūnmatta-s, are a more violent society than that in the Land of the
Free? I would say the Land of the Free is going to be difficult for the
marūnmatta-s to ultimately conquer because of their love for nālika-s.”

M: “Common on. Everyday when I take the bus or train to college I see
angry altercations. Now imagine if everyone had a nālika like you and
Somakhya: These altercations are nasty as they are but will now turn
bloody and fatal\! Then there is road rage it will devolve from
fistfights to gunfights. We don’t need the marūnmatta-s to do it. It
will be like in the Land of the Free\!”  
Sharvamanyu: “Have you even studied the violence from nālika-s in the
Land of the Free? Do you think they are shooting each other on trains
and buses or on the road?”  
M: “Of course they are\! Do you not see the news. The saving grace is
they have better police and law than us. Which gives the appearance of
keeping things under some control.”  
Sharvamanyu: “What you said sounds paradoxical. Just think about it and
what you said before.”  
M: “What paradox: you just seem to be unaware of the news. Extending the
comparison from the Land of the Free we have an even more divided
society riddled with caste. It will be the upper castes which gets all
the nālika-s and use it to oppress the Dalits and tribals. So the
Moslems are only an excuse boy, it is going to be the socially deprived
and Dalits who bear brunt of your trigger-happy types.”  
Sharvamanyu: “While I might have not studied my civics, it appears that
you have not studied you history. Did you know that till the British
disarmed them the deprived groups you mention were well-armed. As of
today there is no magical mechanism by which the upper caste is somehow
preventing them from being armed. Knowing guys from those jāti-s, I can
tell you they are no less armed than me and fear the marūnmatta rather
than upper castes guys like Somakhya and Lootika. In fact their numbers
are much greater than the upper castes; hence, if they wanted they could
have killed all of them anytime in the past 3000 years or so for their
oppression.”  
M: “I must repeat, I wish you guys showed more interest in the
constitution, the law and social reform than lionizing violence and
whitewashing historical injustices. Lootika, as an educated girl are you
sitting and approving this ridiculous stuff of your friends?”  
Vidrum: “Please cool it everyone. Manjukeshi, they have killed nobody
and are quiet law-abiding citizens.”

Lootika: “Never mind. People say I am good with my hands but for
whatever reason it has taken me some effort to shoot accurately. So all
I can say for now is that I am not sure my marksmanship will see me
through a tough spot. Instead, I keep my body fit so that I can at least
flee swiftly if needed.”  
M: “Lootika. Think about it; you don’t have to do these useless things
just to impress your violent friends. You are really giving in to their
displays of machismo and fantasy, rather than fighting for gender
equality, which is what we should be fighting for first in this day and
age rather than the rare Moslem who takes to terror.”  
L: “Just to let you know Manjukeshi – I am a real biologist in that I
use the evolutionary theory for my work; hence, equality is not exactly
the stuff I am operating off.”  
Somakhya: “Alright everyone. It is rather dark now and even with the
safety of our nālika it might not be a great idea to linger on here.
Manjukeshi, as true Hindus we have enjoyed the debate and hope you did
so too and are not feeling as though you want to use a nālika on us, in
case you knew to use one.”
