+++
title = "In the grayxa0zone"

+++
Among the thinkers of the modern Occident one may take note of the
Englishman John Gray. He is firmly an insider of the Anglosphere not
just by origin but also by worldview: he is quick to spot the barbarisms
in the transitions to modernity of the Germans and Rus while being
\*apparently\* silent about those of higher magnitude of the
Anglosphere. He also apparently acknowledges that the first two
Abrahamisms were positive contributors to human thought thus squarely
falling inside the Abrahamosphere. On these matters, especially as
heathens who have directly faced the genocides committed by his nation
and more generally Abrahamism, we cannot disagree more. Yet, there are
other matters in which he seems to be rather distinctive in that
occidental space in being among the few who explicitly recognize
secularism as being a resurfacing of a blend of the first two
Abrahamisms.

He also makes several other notable points that are not commonly
understood in the western academia:  
\-He notices and criticizes the “physics envy” among the economists. He
notices how a large body of investigation that tries to provide an
economic explanation for every human endeavor, including religious
conversion; he points out that this is fraught with erroneous
assumption.  
\-He points out that science cannot and is unlikely to replace
religion.  
\-A related point he seems to make is that not all science or more
broadly human endeavor in the realm of knowledge would come within the
ambit of the usages of hard science (i.e. the most mathematized
science).  
\-He notices and points out that the theory of the telos \[the end\] of
history is fundamentally flawed and history will continue with all the
basic causes of conflict spurring it on in the future.  
\-A related point he makes is that the transition to modernity, while
widely assumed in the west to be a universal in form, is unlikely to be
so.

Regarding the last point, for a heathen it is easy to notice that the
universality is merely a secularized version of the second Abrahamism in
turn deriving its roots from the Mosaic distinction of the first one.
For people like us who have had a more expansive experience of the 3rd
Abrahamism can again see how closely the universal modernism hews to the
universal peace that is sought by the 3rd Abrahamism, the religion of
peace, be it of the type pedaled by the leaders of the Anglosphere or
the Marxians. Thus, unlike several in the west, Gray is willing to admit
that Russia has its own modernism. Thus, one can say that the
anti-Russian block of the Occident’s idea that Russia is somehow caught
in a barbaric Tsarist past (currently represented by Vladmir Putin) is a
rather flawed characterization. We would go further to insist that an
analysis of the Russian genius and transition modernism and needs an eye
that is entirely unaffected by Anglospheric bias.

In contrast to Gray there is a whole cluster of thinkers which
represents what we characterize as the opposite side of the occidental
thought spectrum: Jared Diamond, Steven Pinker, Steven Levitt, Dick
Dawkins, Stephen Gould, Daniel Dennett and the like. While I am acutely
aware of the differences between members of this cluster, I still group
them together because they all display a certain proclivity for secular
universalism in overt or covert ways. Indeed, Gray in his review of
Dawkins’ biographical narrative brings out this issue. In addition to
Dawkins, Gray had earlier criticized the claim of Pinker’s claim of the
trend of decreasing violence. In this aspect of Pinker’s thought one may
see a secularized form of Abrahamistic eschatology – comparable to the
telos of the second coming of the preta or the unmatta.

Another facet of this claim of Pinker relates to the “criminal tribes”
view of Diamond. Diamond presents the case that tribal societies are
quintessentially criminal, in essence violent and homicidal, a trait
that has been since attenuated in humans. However, as we have said
before, and suggested in Armand Leroi’s review of Diamond’s sweeping
universalism, Diamond seems to deny a role for genetics. To paraphrase
Diamond’s words that would simply be “racist”. So it is not genetic
change but something more superficial that has effected a transition
from a past as “criminal tribes” to a peaceful present. This clearly
smacks of a secularized form of the Mosaic distinction being received by
a tribal group in the form of a prophetic revelation from the ekarākṣasa
there is a transition of the tribe to a state of religion distinct from
the evil heathen past – what the marūnmatta expresses as the jāhilīyah.

This is rather easily noticed in secularizing Indian Mohammedans,
Pakistanis and Bangladeshis, who typically eagerly lap up the same
secular condition of the Occident, rather than returning to their past
in the dharma. They would continue to condemn the latter as something
primitive, disgusting or in the least as unpalatable as the overt
Abrahamism they are shedding. In fact even the more discerning and
informed among them feel more threatened by the unabashed display of
Hindu religiosity than homicidal Abrahamism. On a personal note, we have
interacted with a powerful and dangerous man of intelligence and
originality (not a marūnmatta but originating in another Abrahamism),
who was extremely enthralled by Diamond’s, Levitt’s, and Pinker’s
theses. We gingerly questioned him as to how he so easily bought into
all of it given all that he knew and the paradox it raised with respect
to his own knowledge. His answer was interesting in that it drew not
from logic but from a purposeful ignorance stiffened by an underlying
rock-firm foundation of credo – a secular manifestation of his
ancestors’ credo in Abe and his successor unmatta-s.

The above cluster of players in modern occidental thinking have a
notable parallel that is little known outside Hindu circles – a
subsection of white indologists and their fellow travelers. This
subsection, epitomized by Sheldon Pollock, Wendy Doniger, Robert
Goldman, Johannes Bronkhorst, Giovanni Verardi and the like differs from
their earlier European counterparts. Their analysis of Hindu tradition
(of course they would doubt something like that exists) is essentially
the application of secularized Abrahamistic constructs in guise of
objective theorizing. This cluster, while professing scientific
objectivity with almost the zeal characteristic of Abrahamism, deep down
do not seem to care much for that. Rather they play a game similar to
what Aristotle is said to have taught Alexander – eristics – something
the Macedonian warrior is said to have enjoyed. In eristics you can
successively take either side of an argument and argue for it being the
correct one. Similarly, members of this cluster, who are particularly
common in elite American academia, can take up a viewpoint and argue for
it without really being interested in investigating the truth –
seemingly it is an intellectual game for their high IQs. At the long end
of history much of this cluster can be seen as making little lasting
intellectual contribution beyond creating ferment in their times.

In conclusion we find Gray’s thoughts in regard to the dominance of
secularized Abrahamism in occidental intellectual endeavor rather
consonant with ours.

This brings us to a gray zone, something which John Gray expresses
obliquely in his critique of his compatriot Dawkins as well as in his
talks, i.e., man is not a machine. Many old Hindus would have said that
man is a machine but inside that machine or permeating that machine is
something non-mechanical, which they termed the ātman. The bauddha-s
would say that that ātman is a mere illusion, which may not be required
for explaining things but would they accept that the organism is
machine? It is not entirely clear. While Gray might be entirely willing
acknowledge these possibilities, his bigger concerns seem to be at the
level that early Hindus did not doubt much: yes, man is a machine in so
far as what they defined as his śarīra goes, i.e, his biochemical body.
Gray seems see that there is a certain complexity with things like the
body or at least aspects of its function that it is not simply analyzed
like a machine (i.e. even before reaching the issue of a philosophical
zombie).

This brings us to another domain which we have thought about due to our
own performance of science and ritual. How “algorithmizable” is
science/mathematics or to put it more simply can we make a machine that
replaces the “expert”. One can easily see that the performance of
mathematics often features the virtuoso who obtains remarkable insights
that are quite unattainable by the average human. Even with advanced
computational mathematical tools of today, which make the mathematical
experimental procedure more accessible to lesser mortals like me, it is
easy to see that the mathematical virtuoso cannot be recapitulated by
just a machine or a lesser mortal running these tools. Conversely, there
are certain computer-heavy proofs which some have questioned as even
constituting real mathematical activity as they merely involve a
gigantic scale of exhaustive mechanical computation that is best done by
machine.

Beyond mathematics one could argue that the sciences heavy on more
mechanical activities like chemistry and biology, which need that
prolonged training in the mechanical aspect (people usually say about 10
years of practice), are less amenable to virtuosity. Yet common
knowledge and psychological investigation suggest that not just these
sciences but other activities clearly has a class of experts who can
categorized as virtuosos even if not recognized as such. Such have been
noted in many domains which are clearly distinct from each other: 1)
expert physicians with extraordinary special diagnostic capacity; 2)
chess players; 3) Bird identification by bird watchers; 4) Aircraft
identification. 5) chicken sexing; 6) Auditing; 7) Financial investment
(e.g. see Richard Horsey: The art of chicken sexing; Ericsson, K. A. &
A. C. Lehmann (1996): Expert and exceptional performance: Evidence of
maximal adaptation to task constraints. Annual Review of Psychology, 47:
273–305).

Indeed, this has been explored in a domain removed from “Science” in the
case of sexing chickens, which relates the barbarism that arises from
the industry catering to dinosaur-eating barbarians – male chicks need
to be killed ASAP for the industry to cut costs; hence, there is a great
premium on identifying the sex of chicks when they are day old or so.
Here interestingly machines have been replaced by the human often
receiving training in Japan. Those coming from that school make out the
sex often with very subtle cues which others can hardly notice. When
asked to explain how they do it, their answer is not different from the
expert who “sees” the answer. This is also seen in the medical science
where the “great” physician can diagnose difficult cases, which would
take the average physician with the same formal training much more
information and trouble to diagnose if at all. Indeed, the negligence of
this aspect in modern medical culture (e.g. in USA) has resulted in
physicians of a lower rung being accorded powers much more than they are
really deserving to the detriment of patients. In bird-watching the
virtuoso can often recognize birds correctly with the smallest of cues
gleaned from the briefest of glances. The average watcher might merely
register the presence of something up there with the same stimulus.

The experts, to different degrees in such domains, can often perform at
a remarkable level of virtuosity and display particular special
features: 1) They often “catch” or “see” the right answer or solution
with cues far fewer than what others need to achieve the same result, if
at all they can achieve it. 2) Often they are unable to easily explain
how exactly they reach the result – thus it might almost look like magic
to the rest. The expert often says that “he just sees the right path” or
it just “flashed in his mind”. For instance, in my own domain of
activity I have seen people working with me, who are doing things in an
adjacent rather the same activity, think I am somehow magically
producing the result. Even if I explain how I arrived at the result to
them they are often unable “to get it” and are unable to “see” what I am
seeing so clearly in my head like a real object.

So now the question is whether a machine can be created that does the
same as such experts. There can be potentially several different lines
of answers to this:  
1\) Yes, a machine can be created. Such tasks are merely very complex,
hence the machine would need to be similarly very complex and our
technology might eventually get there to achieve such artificial
intelligence.  
2\) A conventional machine cannot be created but one which exploits some
deeper physical principle such as one stemming from the quantum theory
can.  
3\) No machine can be directly engineered for this. One can only
recapitulate the evolutionary process in some way to create a biological
system where such capacity might emerge as a higher order system
property. The lower order system components by themselves will not have
the property but it will emerge from their interactions – i.e. the
conglomerate is greater than the parts, like the assemblage of neurons
or cells having properties beyond those of individual cells. Hence, the
emergent property cannot be determined (at least easily) by the
underlying parts.  
4\) It needs a special system so far not seen among engineered machines
that has this capacity to somehow “connect” deep into a system’s
information and read it directly. This recapitulates the subconscious
element of virtuosity described above.  
5\) No machine can achieve it. It is actually related to the hard
problem of consciousness, which lies outside the domain of objective
inference.

Now, in the modern scientific world conditioned by secularized
Abrahamism some of these alternatives could be seen as a blasphemy by
some. However, we feel these should be evaluated without offhand
dismissal. First, we hold the last possibility of the above to be
unlikely. Even though there is a first person experience associated with
the act of the expert having “seen” the answer, that experience is
produced only after sensory activity much like qualia produced by the
act of seeing more mundane things like red color, and it is this sensory
activity not the qualia which matters. Second, not all people with
similar or higher IQ than the expert can be trained to become one. There
is a vector with a non-zero angle with respect to that of IQ though the
two might show some correlation in certain domains of expertise. In
particular, many of these tasks and IQ have a relationship to memory.
Moreover, the propensity for such expertise in several domains shows
genuine difference between the sexes. These things suggest that there is
ultimately a component rooted deep in the biology of the individual.

Next, like with IQ, we think this capacity is actually distinct from
being able to perceive some kind of mathematical regularity or beauty.
In fact such patterns often fool the seeker. We can cite the example of
Kepler seeing the wrong pattern of the relationship between planetary
orbits and the Platonic solids. Similarly, great minds like Gamow and
Maynard-Smith had wrong ideas for the genetic code which were moved by
such considerations seeking a certain mathematical regularity of
patterns. So we can say that it cannot be achieved by a machine that is
merely very good at capturing such patterns. The genetic code in
particular offers a great case of how the biological solution is rather
distinct from a seemingly mathematically regular one.

However, at this moment we do not know if a really complex engineered
machine can do the same thing as a non-engineered evolutionary product
i.e. the biological machine. Our hunch is that it might not be able to
do the same kinds of computations as our immune systems or or neurons.
We see science, the human endeavor, as a product of the latter type of
system. If this were the case then indeed the line of thinking of Gray
might have a deeper validity.

Additionally, we also hold that the same features that result in an
expert in the domain of science also leads to an expert in the domain of
religion – the capacity to “see” certain things with very subtle cues.
Expert practitioners of rituals and what today primarily survives in the
indosphere, the mantraśāstra know this well whereas the layperson sees
nothing at all. That is why the lay person who has been detached from
his heathen system by Abrahamism can easily see all this as mumbo-jumbo.
In the past, even in the Abrahamistic world, certain
scientists/mathematicians like Newton or Euler had a deep religiosity.
Had they been in the Hindu world this would have been seen as as
unsurprising as the domains of knowledge are not disjoint for the
heathen. This dismemberment is yet another secularized aspect of the
Mosaic distinction.
