+++
title = "A commentary on the vairin-s and the like of Viṣṇuśarman’s tradition"

+++
In one sense Viṣṇuśarman’s political presentation was nothing short of
revolutionary. One may rightly ask: why so? One could say after all he
was merely encapsulating in tales the principles already laid out by the
ancient ārya-s and thoroughly presented by Viṣṇugupta Cāṇakya before
him. To counter it one may say the proof is in the pudding it –
brilliant as it was, the Arthaśāstra was forgotten even by the Hindus
(although much to their detriment). But the tantra-s of Viṣṇuśarman were
widely appreciated as a serious educational text, be it by the
Zoroastrian Iranians, the Syrians, or even our enemies, the marūnmatta-s
of Arabia and Turkey. For example, it was part of the “curriculum” of
Sultan Suleyman the Osman Amir al-Momin who carried marūnmāda deep into
the lands conquered earlier by pretonmāda.

Yet the primary reason why we stress the revolutionary nature of
Viṣṇuśarman’s teaching is because of this:

iśvarāṇām idaṃ tantraṃ prāyeṇautsukyam āvahet |  
yatas tiraścāṃ caritair nītimārgaḥ pradarśyate ||  
This text of the gods might appear puzzling due to its teachings;  
However, it intends illustrating by actions of animals the path of right
politics.

Human politics is ultimately biological in origin; hence, other examples
from the biological world, examples from fellow animals as Viṣṇuśarman
used, should be taken seriously. [As we have briefly pointed out before
Viṣṇuśarman was a keen observer of biological conflict in
nature](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/04/13/wise-vishnusharmans-vignette-on-biological-warfare/). It
is with this lesson in mind one can understand [this
story](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/03/31/the-dream-motif/)
fully. Likewise, an example is also expounded in [this
story](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/01/13/the-caves/).
Human conflict is just another animal conflict and should be analyzed
with the same lens rather than creating constructs that have no
foundations in the world of the living.

So what Viṣṇuśarman was doing was to put the nature of politics back
into its primal context. He was not the first to do this among the
ārya-s though he was perhaps one of the most effective in presenting
this. The history of this tradition goes back to our national epic the
Mahābhārata, where one encounters the tale of the long-necked camel’s
death at the jaws of the jackal couple. This is a lesson in optimization
seen in nature: the camel by acquiring a very long neck greatly
increased the ease with which it procured food; however, this made it
clumsy and vulnerable to predation, which ultimately brought its end.
Indeed, such teachings were provided even earlier by king of the gods
Indra in the ṛgveda itself albeit in a very cryptic form to Vasukra;
e.g.:  
idaṃ su me jaritar ā cikiddhi  
pratīpaṃ śāpaṃ nadyo vahanti ।  
lopāśaḥ siṃham pratyañcam atsāḥ  
kroṣṭā varāhaṃ nir atakta kakṣāt || RV 10.28.4

Know well this \[teaching\] of mine O chanter \[of mantra-s\] (i.e.
Vasukra),  
the resisting debris is borne away by the rivers,  
the fox stealthily (atsār Vedic luṅ of the latterly rare verb tsarati)
proved a match for the lion,  
the jackal charged at the boar from its \[secret\] hiding place.  
Here we merely present this to indicate the presence of such tales in
the teachings of the gods in the RV itself (i.e. iśvarāṇām idaṃ tantraṃ)
but shall not get into the cryptic intricacies of the RV text.

Returning to Viṣṇuśarman we shall now look into an important teaching
regarding conflict in the second tantra. Now any student of the
Pañcatantra should realize that in learning lessons from it one needs
to keep dharma in mind – that it has many textures and contextual
wrinkles that are important for its correct application, else one may
look like a “vasudhaiva kuṭuṃbakam ।” mouthing Indian politician or [the
bābājī of this
story](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/08/03/the-fourth-story/).
The point we are going to talk about is presented in the conversation
between the mouse Hiraṇyaka and the crow Laghupatanaka.

hiraṇyaka āha: aho tvaṃ bhoktā | ahaṃ te bhojya-bhūtaḥ | tat kā tvayā
saha mama maitrī ? tad gamyatām | maitrī virodha-bhāvāt katham ? uktaṃ
ca-

The mouse Hiraṇyaka said: Well, you are the eater. I am among those who
become food. Thus, how can my friendship be with you. You ought to
leave. What friendship can exist between opposite natures. It has been
said \[in the texts\]:

yayor eva samaṃ vittaṃ yayor eva samaṃ kulam |  
tayor maitrī vivāhaś ca na tu puṣṭa-vipuṣṭayoḥ || (1)

Only the two whose wealth is similar; only the two whose clans are of
similar \[standing\],  
can have friendship and marriage; indeed, it cannot be between the
well-endowed and unendowed.

tathā ca-  
yo mitraṃ kurute mūḍha ātmano ‘sadṛśaṃ kudhīḥ |  
hīnaṃ vāpy adhikaṃ vāpi hāsyatāṃ yāty asau janaḥ || (2)  
tad gamyatām iti |

Moreover: The dim-witted idiot who makes friends with those unlike
himself,  
with a lesser or a greater one, such a person ends up as a
laughing-stock.  
You ought to go.

vāyasa āha: bho hiraṇyaka \! eṣo ‘haṃ tava durga-dvāra upaviṣṭaḥ | yadi
tvaṃ maitrī na karoṣi tato ‘haṃ prāṇa-mokṣaṇaṃ tavāgre kariṣyāmi |
athavā prāyopaveśanaṃ me syāt iti |

The bird said: Hey Hiraṇyaka\! I have \[just\] alighted at your
fort-door. If you do not make friendship then I will give up my life in
front of you or else I may starve to death.

hiraṇyaka āha: bhoḥ \! tvayā vairiṇā saha kathaṃ maitrīṃ karomi ? uktaṃ
ca-

Hiraṇyaka said: Hey\! What friendship can I make with you an enemy. It
has been said \[in the texts\]

vairiṇā na hi sandadhyāt suśliṣṭenāpi sandhinā |  
sutaptam api pānīyaṃ śamayaty eva pāvakam || (3)

Never enter an entente with with an enemy however strongly tied he may
be by the alliance  
\[for\] water even if well heated puts off fire.

vāyasa āha: bhoḥ \! tvayā saha darśanam api nāsti | kuto vairam ? tat
kim anucitaṃ vadasi ?

The bird said: Hey\! I have not even had a glimpse of you. What enmity?
Why are you uttering such unfitting \[words\]?

hiraṇyaka āha: dvividhaṃ vairaṃ bhavati | sahajaṃ kṛtrimaṃ ca | tat
sahaja-vairī tvam asmākam | uktaṃ ca-

Hiraṇyaka said: There are two types of enmity: natural and incidental.
Now, you and us are natural enemies. It has been said \[in the texts\]:

kṛtrimaṃ nāśam abhyeti vairaṃ drāk kṛtrimair guṇaiḥ |  
prāṇa-dānaṃ vinā vairaṃ sahajaṃ yāti na kṣayam || (4)  
Incidental enmity comes to an end swiftly with specifically made
reparations,  
\[however,\] natural enmity does not come to an end without the death
\[of the foes\]

vāyasa āha: bhoḥ \! dvividhasya vairasya lakṣaṇaṃ śrotum icchāmi | tat
kathyatām |

The bird said: Alright\! I wish to hear the characteristics of the two
types of enmity; sir, may they be described.

hiraṇyaka āha: bhoḥ \! kāraṇena nirvṛtaṃ kṛtrimam |
tat-tad-arhopakāra-karaṇād gacchati | svābhāvikaṃ punaḥ katham api na
gacchati | tad yathā nakula-sarpāṇāṃ, śaṣpabhuṅ-nakhāyudhānāṃ,
jala-vahnyoḥ, deva-daityānāṃ, sārameya-mārjarāṇāṃ, īśvara-daridrāṇāṃ,
sapatnīnāṃ, siṃha-gajānāṃ, lubdhaka-hariṇānāṃ,
śrotriya-bhraṣṭa-kriyāṇāṃ, mūrkha-paṇḍitānāṃ,
pativratā-kulaṭānāṃ, sajjana-durjanānām | na kaścit kenāpi
vyāpāditaḥ| tathāpi prāṇān santāpayanti |

Hiraṇyaka said: Yes\! Incidental \[enemity\] is produced by particular
causes. Thus, it goes away when a suitable act reparation is made.
Again, natural enmity never ever goes away. Thus, it is like that
between: mongooses and snakes, herbivores and carnivores (literally
armed with claws), fire and water, deva-s and daitya-s, dogs and cats,
rich and poor, between competing wives, lions and elephants, hunters and
deer, Vedic ritualists and rite-breakers, fools and scholars, chaste
wives and sluts, good and evil people. Though no one of these has harmed
the other \[in the pair\] with a particular \[cause\] they still fight
to take the others life (What is being implied is their conflict does
not arise due a particular redressable affront (as in the kṛtrima
enmity) but it is natural, i.e. by their very existence they are enemies
of each other).

tac ca svābhāvikaṃ vairaṃ dvividhaṃ bhavati । ekāṅga-vairam
ubhaya-vairaṃ ca ||

And then natural enmity is of two types: unilateral enmity and bilateral
enmity.

vāyasa āha: kas tayor viśeṣaḥ?

The bird said: What are the special features of the two?

so ‘bravīt: yo vihanyāt parasparam । anyo’nyena bhakṣyate ।
parasparāpakārāt tad ubhayavairam । yathā siṃha-gajānāṃ । yaḥ pūrvam
eva hatvā bhakṣayati na ca+asau tasya+apakaroti na hinasti na bhakṣayati
। tad ekāṅgavairam akasmāt yathā aśva-mahiṣāṇāṃ mārjāra-mūṣakānām
ahi-nakulānām । kim aśvo mahiṣasya sarpo vā babhro muṣako vā
mārjārasya+apakaroti । tat sarvathā kim aśakyena samayakāraṇena ?

He (Hiraṇyaka) said: Bilateral \[arises\] enmity from the killing of
each other, when the two eat each other, from the harm each causes the
other, like that between lions and elephants (i.e. they attack each
other). When one kills and eats the other, though the other does not
harm it or injure it or eat it then it is unilateral enmity without
\[reciprocal\] reason, like that between horses and buffaloes, cats and
mice, snakes and mongooses. Why does a horse harm a buffalo or a snake a
mongoose, or a mouse a cat? Then why \[use\] all means to create an
impossible alliance?

::::::::::::::::::::::  
**Commentary**  
• The first major white scholar of the Pañcatantra Hertel produced
critical editions of several Pañcatantra recensions. In white
indological enterprise he was followed by Edgerton who attempted to
reconstruct the original Pañcatantra of Viṣṇuśarman, whom he without any
strong reason thought to be fictitious. While Edgerton’s judgment that
the original was a more coherent piece than many of the later recensions
was correct, we do not consider his reconstruction to be perfect. In
this particular case we have not followed his reconstruction but provide
a more extended narrative including parts Edgerton has left out from the
reconstructed ancestor (the verses are numbered serially). We have taken
this material from Ramchandra Jha and DD Kosambi’s editions (the latter
being quite a good effort despite the author’s ideological leanings). We
believe it is difficult to be sure of the exact form of the original for
this narrative.

• A naturalist might see conflicts forming the frame of Viṣṇuśarman’s
narratives in real life. For example, in our youth as we were stumbling
out into the then well-wooded parking lot of our university campus we
saw a white laboratory mouse, which had escaped and was scurrying away
towards the undergrowth. It was targeted by a crow-couple, which was
actively cooperating in the hunt. One, swooping down, created a
distraction with its wings and caused the mouse to run in the opposite
direction into an ambush laid by the other crow, which with one strike
of its beak disemboweled the mouse. Then two crows tore into their
little meal. The mouse in a very general sense represents a baseline
mammalian body-plan, which has been present since the near
contemporaneous rise of the dinosaurs and mammals in the Mesozoic.
Indeed, small fossil mammals have been found the fossilized gut contents
of more than one dinosaur. Thus, such a conflict between a mammal of
such a form and a dinosaur have been now playing out for over 225
million years: a true svābhāvika-vairam as Hiraṇyaka terms it.

• Viṣṇuśarman also mentions the bilateral conflict between lions and
elephants, which may appear unfamiliar to the modern Hindu. While lions
are today nearly gone in India, in his days such conflicts must have
been known in the wild. We do have examples of such today in Africa as
can be seen from this video.
\[http://www.arkive.org/lion/panthera-leo/video-11b.html\] We do not
know much of the buffalo-horse conflict in real life though we have,
much to our terror, experienced more than once the sudden violent
behavior of domesticated Indian buffaloes – something which could also
easily spook horses. Moreover, in Viṣṇuśarman’s days wild buffalo was
common in India and must have been quite an aggressive animal like the
African buffalo, which has been reported to be a threat to horses.

• Other observations by Viṣnuśarman elsewhere in the PT also point to
his keen eye for conflict in nature. For instance he says:  
arito ‘bhyagato bhṛtyaḥ śatru-saṃvās-tatparaḥ ।  
sarpa-saṃvāsa-dharmitvān nityodvegena dūṣitaḥ ||

A follower defecting from the enemy-side intent on living with his
\[former\] foemen,  
has the problem of causing constant worry \[like\] having to cohabit
with a serpent.

plakṣa-nyagrodha-bījāśāt kapotād iva śālmaleḥ ।  
mūlotkhātakaro doṣaḥ paścād api bhayaṃkaraḥ ||

Like the \[danger\] of the silk-cotton tree from a dove  
which has eaten seeds of a plakṣa or banyan tree,  
of being strangled to death by their roots  
this indeed possess a future threat.

Here the possibility of a defecting enemy (coming in peace like a dove)
turning against one is compared to the danger to a silk-cotton tree of
accepting a dove which has feed on the figs of a Ficus virens or Ficus
benghalensis tree and defecates on it. This illustrates Viṣnuśarman’s
knowledge of strangler figs. In practical terms if Hindus had kept this
in mind they would have perhaps avoided the debacle at Talikota caused
from accepting the foes into their camp.

• The concept of the natural enmity expounded by Viṣnuśarman is
something very apparent to any student of biological conflicts. There
need not be a proximal reason for the conflict: it comes from something
very deep or encoded in the biology, like in conflicts associated with
interactions of prey-predator, host-parasite, or resource competitors.
By their very existence the two organisms are vairin-s. Indeed, here
extinction of one of the players can be only outcome and the constant
arms race can continue over millions of years. The great biologist Leigh
van Valen’s Law of Extinction is a manifestation of this: the
probability of extinction for clade is constant and is independent of
how long a species or clade might have existed. Unless a species
constantly develops new weaponry to survive conflict it becomes extinct.
But then what ever its adaptations it might encounter a predator or a
parasite or a competitor that it lacks of the defenses against and can
go extinct.

• This concept has bearing even in human conflict within with a memetic
component. Modern leftism-liberalism, almost as thought to conceal its
Abrahamistic roots, tries to paint all conflict in terms of proximal
causes or causes stemming from nurture, as though they were
kṛtrima-vairam. Thus, it hides and actively provide cover for the
svābhāvika-vairam that is intrinsic to Abrahamism. In this context, it
is notable that the Pañcatantra sees the īśvara-daridrāṇāṃ vairam as
belonging to the svābhāvika type. This is rather distinct from Marxian
view of it where the class-struggle results from the particular cause of
the bourgeoisie appropriating the surplus value of the wealth generated
by the proletariat without participating in the labor. The view of the
Pañcatantra puts it back in the more primal category of the natural
conflict, which exists in primate societies between individuals of
different rank with fitness consequences. Thus, lower ranked individuals
might try to overthrow the higher ranked ones to acquire their rank and
the corresponding fitness benefits. This is what we see when Marxian
doctrines are actually practiced rather than their flattened
non-biological utopia.

• Again Viṣnuśarman classifies the natural enmity into two types –
bilateral and unilateral. One might see this as the “hawk-hawk” versus
the “hawk-dove” conflict scenarios. However, this also has implications
for human conflicts. When two heathen groups fight it might be from a
particular cause (kṛtrima-vairam) or svābhāvika-vairam. When the two
heathen groups vastly differ in their social, racial or technological
backgrounds the outcome is typically a svābhāvika-vairam. Thus, the
Moriori being eaten by the Maori is a typical prey-predator interaction
type of svābhāvika-vairam. Such interactions might have played out many
times in the pre-modern and even modern tribal conflicts, like the
Paleo-Eskimos probably being destroyed by the Neo-Eskimos and in recent
times the pygmies being eaten by large-bodied tribal groups in Africa.
Indeed, this illustrates the wisdom of the advice provided in the first
of the verses in the above-quoted section.

• But where an Abrahamistic power is involved in a conflict it almost
always needs to be analyzed as a svābhāvika-vairam. This is a natural
consequence of the Mosaic distinction (vide Assmann) element of the
Abrahamistic meme-complex. Indeed, such a type of enmity had already
been foreseen by the wise Viṣṇuśarman when he presents
śrotriya-bhraṣṭa-kriyāṇāṃ vairam in the svābhāvika category. This
enmity between the Vedic ritualist and those of who have given up ritual
mirrors that arising from the militant “New Atheists”, liberal
rationalists, and other variants of today. Moreover, when the conflict
involves two Abrahamistic powers, say USA and the Moslems or Judaists
and Moslems, it should be analyzed as the bilateral type of the
svābhāvika-vairam. On the other hand when it involves an Abrahamistic
power and a heathen power (e.g. India) it should be analyzed primarily
as the unilateral type of the svābhāvika-vairam. These details are
exactly, what the leftist-liberalist authors (e.g. Jared Diamond) try to
obfuscate and keep out of sight.

• Unfortunately, modern Hindus have lost the wisdom of their wise
forebears like Viṣṇuśarman. Hence, they were unable to correctly
discriminate svābhāvika-vairam from kṛtrima-vairam. A stark e.g. is
presented by events concern the partition of Jambudvīpa. Mohammad Ali
Jinnah was very clearly presenting his case, which Hindus should have
realized as being from svābhāvika-vairam. Instead, addled with
secularism they thought it was something proximal about people who
wanted to go to Pakistan or the territorial separateness of Pakistan
relating to political aspirations of marūnmatta-s. Furthermore, by
treating the problem with the Abrahamists as one of kṛtrima-vairam the
Hindus are hiding from themselves one of the most dreadful truths of
svābhāvika-vairam i.e. “prāṇa-dānaṃ vinā vairaṃ sahajaṃ yāti na kṣayam
|”

• One can ask if there are extensions to the old Hindu discourse on
vairam from biology or modern geopolitics. One well-known conflict is
that between the myxoma virus and rabbits in Australia. Here, after
starting with a bang and decimating rabbits by the millions the myxoma
virus settled to a much milder form. This was because the highly
virulent forms were selected against as they exhausted their hosts too
quickly to sustain further transmission. Thus, the milder forms
eventually won out. Some might ask could this not happen to pretonmāda
and marūnmāda. Being parasites of the mind such hopes are limited
because they, these days marūnmāda in particular, can be bloody within
and without. So even if there is a civilizational decline upon
exhaustion of the heathen prey (e.g. Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh
and the European Dark Age) there are no major fitness consequences for
the meme, thus making attenuation of virulence towards heathens
unlikely. One can compare this scenario to the arrival of Austronesians
on certain Pacific islands where they quickly drove the native fauna to
extinction (e.g. the many birds of New Zealand) without any attenuation
of predatory practices. After they had exhausted such prey cannibalism
seems to have been prevalent – an analogy to the “bloody within and
without (vide Huntington)” state.

• One geopolitical example one can consider is Japan a heathen nation
following its defeat by white Christians and Marxians. Did their enmity
not largely end some might ask. We would say that the enmity has not
really ended – it is only a period of quiescence – like a pride of lions
fleeing from an irate herd of elephants attacking them for the cost of
pursuing the conflict at that point is to high for one side. It is not
as if the US did not try to impose pretonmāda on Japan. It tried and
continues to try, as major pretabhāṇaka outfits continue to call for
volunteers to go east and achieve what they did in Korea. On the other
hand, some have also felt that Japan has retaliated by means such as the
automobile industry against their conquerors. So because of the power
differential we say that the battle-ground has shifted for now but the
svābhāvika-vairam has not ended.

• Finally, one wonders why, as Monier-Williams had remarked, the Hindus
have failed to put their ancestors’ teachings into practice. Perhaps, a
part of the answer lies in Viṣṇuśarman’s words themselves. Among the
svābhāvika-vairāṇi he lists mūrkha-paṇḍitānāṃ vairam. It is notable
that this is termed svābhāvika because a modern might reason that when a
mūrkha receives appropriate education he would become a paṇḍita thus
putting this enmity in the kṛtrima category. However, from our
observations on fellow Hindus we suspect that Viṣṇuśarman was correct.
As we have remarked before on more than one occasion (also see [this
ākhyāna](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/12/23/lutika-somakhyo%E1%B8%A5-pravada%E1%B8%A5/))
there are several H who are well-educated and seemingly even intelligent
(as in possessing markers of above-average IQ) but exhibit a very
natural animosity towards any meaningful pāṇḍityam. Moreover, the Hindu
mass tends to gravitate with great celerity towards the inane and the
erroneous while ignoring the perspicacious – this after all might be a
sign of that deep svābhāvika divide between the mūrkha and the paṇḍita
which the text talks about. Moreover, as civilizations reach old age the
mūrkhatā perhaps tends to win in this mūrkha-paṇḍitānāṃ vairam, but then
that is a story for some other time.
