+++
title = "Turning of the Turkic wheel: unmattābhisaṃdhi, battles won, battles lost and march ofxa0marūnmāda"

+++
When the Mamluqs controlled the rākṣasālaya-s of Mecca and Medina they
were rather zealous about their possessions just like the modern tyrants
of Saud. After the Osman sultan Mehmed II had completed an important
milestone for marūnmāda with the conquest of Constantinople he sent a
rich brocade for the the Ka’ba at Mecca. However, the Mamluqs
bluntly refused it to signal their ownership and to dismiss the Amir al
Momeen status of the Osmans. Similarly, when Shah Rukh the son of Timur
sent his rich endowments for the for the Ka’ba the Mamluqs
unceremoniously sent it back. With the Timurid glory in the down turn
Shah Rukh could do little about it. However, the Osmans were not the
ones to merely sit watching. Having survived the battery at the hands of
the Christian holy warrior Janos Hunyadi, the Osmans recovered and
expanded again under Bayazid-II. In course of his reign he brought many
Judaists who had been evicted from Spain and settled them in the Osman
empire, resulting a deep alignment between them and the Mohammedans. In
his later life Bayazid was forced to step down by his son Selim the
grim, who now turned his attention on Mecca and Medina: How could those
places remain with the Mamluqs? His crowning achievement was their
conquest and incorporation into the Osman empire, which from that point
on became the Khilafat and Selim the Khalif.

Turkish literary tradition (Evliya Celebi) holds that as his son kānūnī
sultan Suleyman was to come to throne he had a dream in which the
ādimarūnmatta Mohammed appeared before him and said:  
*“O Suleyman\! you will make many conquests. You should spend the booty
on embellishing Mecca and Medina and fortifying the citadel of Jerusalem
in order to repulse the unbelievers, when they attempt to take
possession during the reign of your successors. You should also
embellish its sanctuary with a water basin and offer annual gifts to the
Sufi Tariqah-s therein. You should embellish the Rock of Allah and
rebuild Jerusalem.”* (based on Baktir’s translation from the Turkish).

Indeed Suleyman and his Ukrainian wife Hürrem Sultan greatly embellished
those centers building madrasahs, masjids, and supplying perfumes and
candles to keep the places well-scented and illuminated. Knowing that as
per Mohammedan tradition that the preta was not the messiah he sealed
off the eighth gate of Jerusalem because he wanted to block the future
entry of Jewish messiah and constructed a Mohammedan cemetery in front
of it. Nevertheless, he settled several Jews in the region and they had
a symbiotic relationship with him as he appointed one of them as his
dentist and others as financial helpers.

During the accession of Suleyman’s son, Selim the sot, his competitor
was his brother Bayazid. Selim befriended a rich Judaist banker Don
Joseph Nasi who helped him financially and in plotting the elimination
of Bayazid in coordination with his father Suleyman. Joseph was made the
governor of Naxos as a reward when Selim became the Khalif and knowingly
allowed him to use the wine trade there to enrich himself. Joseph had
also given a big loan to the king of France which the latter had refused
to repay. Accordingly, he suggested a plan to the Khalif to send the
Osman navy to attack the French ships at Alexandria and confiscate their
merchandise. With the Mohammedans successfully executing this he got his
cut to recover his debt. Joseph had also had many quarrels with the
Venetian republic whom he accused of earlier mistreating him and sought
revenge for that. So when the Khalif wanted to wage jihad on the
Venetians, Joseph suggested to Selim that the best option might be seize
the island of Cyprus from the Christians.

The senior Turkish pasha and military logistician of the Osmans Sokullu
Mehmed having studied the situation felt it might be a difficult
undertaking. He pointed out that a peace treaty had been signed with
Venice and the Venetians were paying tribute to the Osmans despite
controlling Cyprus for trading in the east. There was also a the
possibility, in an alliance with the Islamized Mongols of Crimea, of war
with the Rus. Selim received a Russian embassy congratulating him on his
enthronement as Khalif of Islam. This along with a peace treaty with the
Rus made him feel that he could turn his attention elsewhere. The
restless ghazi-s finding Joseph’s suggestion to be a great one decided
to ask the Shaikh Ebuessuud, supreme Sharia authority of the Osmans, for
a fatwa. They presented the situation thus:  
“*A land was previously in the realm of Islam (Cyprus had been briefly
taken by the marūnmatta-s before the crusades). After a while the abject
infidels overran it, destroyed madrassahs and masjids, and left them
vacant. They filled the pulpits and galleries with the tokens of
infidelity and error, intending to insult the religion of Islam with all
kinds of vile deeds and by spreading their ugly acts to all corners of
the earth etc… When peace was previously concluded with the other lands
in possession of the said infidels, the aforenamed land was included. An
explanation is sought as to whether, in accordance with the Sharia, this
is an impediment to the Sultan’s determining to break the treaty.*”  
The fatwa:  
“*There is no possibility that it could ever be an impediment. For the
Sultan of the people of Islam (may Allah glorify his victories) to make
peace with the infidels is legal only where there is benefit to all
Moslems. When there is no benefit, peace is never legal. When benefit
has been seen, and it is then observed to be more beneficial to break
it, then to break it also becomes absolutely obligatory and binding.*”
(translation from Colin Imber).

Now with financial advice from Joseph the action plan was immediately
put into motion by the Khalif who confiscated and sold the land and
properties of the Orthodox Church in the European part of the Osman
empire. Having thus raised considerable revenues the Khalif appointed
Lala Mustafa Pasha to lead the land armies for the assault on Cyprus and
Muezzinzade Ali Pasha as the admiral of the fleet. Seeing a grand fleet
being assembled the Christians trembled but due to old arguments among
themselves were unable to quickly muster a crusading fleet to go to the
support of Venice in Cyprus. In particular the Habsburgs were peeved
that the Venetians had not participated in early alliances of Christians
against the army of Islam. In March 1570 the Khalif asked the Venetians
to surrender Cyprus or face war. Before they could even realize what was
to follow the Turkish navy had swung into action and the landing force
was put on the island. After a frenetic jihad of few months the Turks
took Nicosia and pressed ahead to rid the island of the Venetians. Then
the Turks came up against the stronghold of Magosa on the island and
laid siege to it. As they were held back by the siege the pope finally
convinced the Christians to swing into action. Don John the illegitimate
son the lord of the Catholics, Charles V, sailed forth with a powerful
fleet to counter the Moslems. But in July 1571 after nearly 11 months of
siege the Turkish forces launched a powerful assault on Magosa and broke
through the defenses taking it on August 1, 1571. With that Cyprus
passed into their hands.

By then Osman navy had advanced into the Adriatic capturing other
Venetian islands and territories on the coast. Don John seeing his
chance fell upon them on 7th October near Nafpaktos (the battle of
Lepanto). The wind suddenly changed course and the Christians got a
chance to get close to the Moslem fleet with their heavy guns on calm
seas. Don John kept a constant fire on the Mohammedan navy with his
artillery from close quarters allowing them to sink most of the ships.
Even as the Christians gained the upper hand they drew back and a
violent storm blew in preventing the Mohammedans from any recovery. The
yenicheri kept fighting to the end even throwing fruits after running
out of weapons. Despite their efforts, within four hours the Osman
armada was destroyed and Muezzinzade was killed. But over the winter the
Moslems rebuilt their navy and returned to combat. The Christians were
unable to repeat their success and after several skirmishes Don John
sailed back leaving the Venetians to their own defenses. Cyprus was lost
and on top of that the Venetians had to compensate the Turks for Lepanto
by paying a hefty fine. Joseph wanted to become the Jewish king of
Cyprus but the Khalif laughed him off; all the same he gave him a grant
for his Jewish printing press to print their religious material.
Joseph’s cousin Abraham Benveniste was caught by the Venetians for
sending intelligence to the Osmans during the conquest of Cyprus and was
sent to suffer the inquisition.

In conclusion, while the west used to make a big deal of Lepanto it must
be said that marūnmāda did not lose all that much from the victory. In
the end about 7500 Christians and 15000 Mohammedans were killed in the
battle. The kill ratio was not hugely in favor of the Christians and the
objectives of the crusade were hardly met – Cyprus remained lost.

We thought about this in the context of the Kargil war we won against
the Mohammedans. Some of our friends were rather happy at the end of the
war and saw it as some kind of turning point which might change the
course of Pakistani strategy in our favor. Our friend Ekanetra merely
smiled and then said: “It’s no doubt a victory with a big kill ratio in
our favor. But what do we have to show for the victory? It’s no
different from the Bangladesh war where we are back to square one.” We
thought of the above history and nodded in agreement. By that we do not
mean that we should not fight and win wars against the army of Islam but
as long as our people continue to not know the objectives of the war
against the army of Islam such victories are mostly empty (though
certainly better than a defeat). There is more to be learned from the
above history but that is only for the discerning.
