+++
title = "The Apollonian parabola"

+++
Some say that Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga (modern Murtina in
Turkey; the center of the great yavana temple of the goddess Artemis in
the days of Apollonius) were the two great yavana-s who might have
rivaled Karl Gauss or Leonhard Euler in their in intellectual
achievements. Beyond doubt a whole lot of modern knowledge rests on the
foundation of Apollonius and in the west one could perhaps say that a
Kepler or a Newton may have never shone forth had that Apollonian
foundation not existed. Indeed, even today the study of Apollonius is a
profound experience for the man who can do so. As with yavana religion
much of their knowledge including the books of Apollonius were lost due
to the ravages of pretonmāda in the west. Not surprisingly even at a
later age the Lord Protector of England the duke of Somerset was burning
books with yavana geometrical diagrams at the Oxford university.

Ironically in the world of its younger sister, the marūnmāda, Apollonius
held a great fascination among those influenced by (Neo)-Platonism.
Among the marūnmatta-s, their intellectual ibn Sina from Persia was
perhaps the most fascinated by Apollonius. This allowed the preservation
of much more of his works than in the west. Not surprisingly later
marūnmatta-s referring to his work said that while his Qoranic studies
were fine, he should be accused of kaffr-hood, and “innovation” derived
from yavana and Hindu knowledge. Indeed, some mullahs suggested that he
should have been cut pieces and feed to raptors. Nevertheless, his
studies on yavana geometry and Hindu trigonometry has resulted in some
interesting preservations which would have otherwise been lost. One such
we shall discuss here is an Apollonian construction of a parabola using
the geometric mean theorem. It goes thus in modern terminology:

![appollonian\_parabola](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/appollonian_parabola1.png?w=640&h=457)

1\) Let point O be the origin. Take a point A on the x-axis at a given
negative coordinate
![(-a,0)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%28-a%2C0%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"(-a,0)").  
2\) Let B be a point moving on the x-axis from the origin in the
positive direction.  
3\) Draw a circle with diameter as
![\\overline{AB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{AB}").  
4\) Draw the tangent to this circle at point B. It will be perpendicular
to the x-axis.  
5\) The above circle cuts the y-axis at points C and D. Draw lines
through these points which are parallel to the x-axis.  
6\) The above pair of lines will intersect the tangent to the circle at
point B at points E and F.  
7\) The locus of points E and F as B moves along the x-axis is the
desired parabola.

From the construction we see:  
![\\overline{OA}=a](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOA%7D%3Da&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OA}=a"); The x-coordinate of the parabola is
![\\overline{OB}=x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOB%7D%3Dx&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OB}=x"); The y-coordinate of the parabola is
![\\overline{OC}=\\overline{OD}=y](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOC%7D%3D%5Coverline%7BOD%7D%3Dy&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OC}=\\overline{OD}=y"). Given the circle used for the
construction we notice that
![\\overline{OC}=\\overline{OD}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOC%7D%3D%5Coverline%7BOD%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OC}=\\overline{OD}") is the geometric mean of
![\\overline{OA}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOA%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OA}") and
![\\overline{OB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BOB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{OB}") because
![\\overline{AB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{AB}") is the diameter of the circle (geometric mean
theorem). Thus we get:  
![y=\\sqrt{ax}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Csqrt%7Bax%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"y=\\sqrt{ax}")  
![\\therefore
y^2=ax](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctherefore+y%5E2%3Dax&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\therefore y^2=ax")  
which is the equation of our desired parabola.
