+++
title = "A geopolitical package: Julyxa02016"

+++
One often hears of the tale of Śivājī and his men killing the gigantic
marūnmatta Afzal Khan in popular narratives. It was certainly an event
that captured the imagination of the lay Hindus and continues to do so
to this date. Afzal Khan was the epitome of marūnmāda and distilled in
one person what the evil marūnmāda meant and means for the Hindus.
Hence, his killing was a great morale-booster for the Hindus. But what
the lay narratives (especially outside Maharashtra) do not tell you is
the meticulous planning not just for the killing of Afzal Khan but for
the battle of Pratapgad under the leadership of Moro Tryambak Pingḻe
which resulted in one of first great routs of the marūnmatta-s by the
marāṭhā-s. Beyond this what you are not often told is the framework of
svarājya that Śivājī laid down on account of which the nation of India
exists today as a reservoir for Hindus.

Why we talk of all this is to contrast the situation with the way of the
Hindus of today and their elite. To use someone’s words marūnmāda can
advance both as a glacier and a whirlwind. We can see both strategies
simultaneously at play. For example, the Moslem Brotherhood takes the
glacial approach whereas the Khilafat under Dr. Abu Bakr takes the
whirlwind approach. The same marūnmatta group can shift from one
approach to another depending on the opportunities. Moreover, virulent
strains of marūnmāda can persist even after a defeat with alternative
strategies. For example Abd al-Wahab and Muhammad bin Saud and their
successors founded the hellhole of Saudi Arabia by means of whirlwind
Jihad campaigns paralleling those of Abu Bakr’s Khilafat of today. Their
atrocities in Iraq by described the English observers are no different
from those of the current Khilafat or any other Jihad. But the Osman
Khilafat saw them as competitors and together with their Egyptian allies
crushed the Saud. Then the Saud shifted gears to being quiescent like
bacteria expressing the toxins from a toxin-antitoxin system until
eventually they had the classic opportunity of a
mleccha-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi to ally with the Anglosphere,
reestablish their power and regain most of their territory.

Thus, any campaign with marūnmāda is not finished with the killing of
this or that marūnmatta. Certainly, their prominent leaders need to be
constantly targeted and comprehensively eliminated. But this in itself
gets one nowhere closer to victory. Instead any group which wishes to
survive marūnmāda needs to prepare itself for an arms-race on an
evolutionary scale, like the ceaseless war between bacteria and their
viruses which has been going on for more than three billion years. Thus,
if we take a commonplace bacteriophage like T4 and its host Escherichia
coli we see that they are still fighting today because they are
survivors of round after round of warfare. We see this in their genomes:
The bacterium first evolved a defense in the form of
restriction-modification systems, where its own DNA is marked by the
modifying methylase using methylation of bases, which allows them to
discriminate the unmodified viral DNA and cut it to pieces using their
restriction enzyme. The virus evolved a defense in the form of an
inhibitor of the originally deployed restriction enzyme and its own
modification enzymes to similarly methylate its DNA. The bacterium
evolved a counter-strategy in the form of new restriction-modification
systems. The virus evolved an enzyme to synthesize a new base 5hmC in
its DNA to make it invisible to the host restriction-modification
attack. The host evolved new restriction systems that now cut up the
viral DNA which came with 5hmC. The virus evolved a glycosyltransferase
enzyme to modify the 5hmC further with a sugar to make it invisible to
this new restriction enzyme. The host evolved yet another restriction
enzyme that could cut up DNA with with a monoglycosylated 5hmC. The
virus evolved a second unrelated glycosyltransferase to modify 5hmC with
two hexoses again making it invisible to the host restriction apparatus.
With restriction being overcome repeatedly the host opened another
totally distinct attack mechanism: the metal-independent RNase system
which cut the anticodon loop of tRNA to prevent translation of the viral
proteins. This “scorched-earth-policy” is activated only when the
bacterium senses its restriction-modification system failing under viral
counter-attack. The virus evolved a counter-strategy against the RNase
system in the form of a RNA ligase system that could repair the cut up
tRNA. The host then evolved a further RNase system which would not just
cut the anti-codon loop but also remove a nucleotide in addition so that
the RNA ligase system cannot repair the tRNA. The viruses probably
evolved an inhibitor of even this system so the host opened yet another
front in the form of other RNases that directly degrade the viral mRNA.

The reason for this narrative of the bacterium-virus war in layman’s
terms is to drive home the the point that no one strategy and no one
victory signals a permanent end of the conflict. You may lose some and
win some but there is no end in sight within any given generation – you
need to be in the best fighting state for millennia on end just to
survive. To reiterate this important and undeniable lesson: there is no
means to surviving something like rākṣasonmāda by just standing there
and not actively participating in conflict with constantly updated
physical and memetic weaponry.There may be periods of quiet and periods
of intense warfare, ebbs and flows of marūnmāda but these should not be
mistaken for the war coming to an end.

Now, when we look back at Śivājī we may note that he had inflicted a
major defeat on the Mogols after his commando attack on Shaiste Khan.
This could have been seen as a cause for celebration but the Mogols soon
thereafter led by the Hindu traitor Jai Singh inflicted a crushing
defeat on him. This was followed by his capture in Delhi by the
Padishaw; however, by then he had already a long term vision in place.
Having escaped the Padishaw in a remarkable manner he first focused on
retaking the territory and strongholds he had lost. Having done this he
quickly negotiated a period of peace with the Mogols on one side as he
knew the long term strategic plan had to be executed whereby the Hindu
svarājya could withstand an extended conflict with the marūnmatta-s as
well as the various pretonmatta-s. To achieve this he put his plan of
conquering the peninsula to provide strategic depth for the struggle
with the rākṣasārādhaka-s into action. It was because of this the
marāṭhā-s were able to wear down the 26 year jihad of the greatest
Mohammedan army of the world at that time and eventually emerge
victorious. The results of Śivājī-s planning were to hold good until the
marāṭhā-s fought for the last time as a unified force in the battle
Kharda against the Mohammedan-English alliance. Now, the question is how
are the Hindus and their political leadership equipped going ahead since
as we have laid out the battle in not one of few years or decades but a
millennial one.

First for the Hindus themselves:  
• They have demographically weakened in several parts of Hindudom. They
have also been infected by memes that will further weaken the demography
of their elite with respect to their enemies. This said they are still
projected to be one of the major demographic blocks of the world at
least in the near future. Moreover, much of this demography is younger
than many of the enemy nations. To fight wars one ultimately needs young
men. So all in all the situation is not as bleak as it might seem as
long as what is there can still be leveraged. But in the absence of
action to keep up the numbers even this advantage can dwindle beyond the
point of salvation.

• Self-nonself recognition – As we have pointed out repeatedly on these
pages the Hindu situation in this regard is bleak. This is a much
greater danger than demography because having large masses which cannot
recognize the pathogen is just like a large organism with no immune
system. The Hindu elite in particular are only declining in this regard
and it makes it easy for the marūnmatta-s to slash their way through
them even if they were many in number. It is also the root cause of
other problems which people talk about such as “love jihad”, “stealth
jihad”, “mini-Pakistans” and the like.

• Civilizational vigor – this is a hard to define but still a clearly
experiential trait, which is typically denied by the leftist-liberalist
who thinks that all people and nations are made from the same moldable
putty. This is also something which changes over the history of the same
civilization while retaining certain definitive characters over long
periods of time. For example we can clearly see that at the time of the
early youth of our civilizational identity, as can be gleaned from the
Ṛgveda, we were a much more vigorous, active and creative people than
today. In the mature phase we displayed a successful balance between
production, mercantilism, intellectualism and militarism. However, today
we do not look so shiny anymore. We are rather flaccid and display an
extraordinary naivete which is paradoxical for a civilization of our
antiquity. This is especially manifest in our insatiable appetite for
plainly destructive occidental memes of ultimately Abrahamistic origin
going hand in hand with a lack of discipline with respect to the conduct
of life. Thus, rather than displaying signs of mature wisdom that comes
with age we are instead displaying the senility stemming from
civilizational neurodegeneration. The lack of discipline to wage war
over prolonged periods and various fronts real and virtual is a direct
manifestation of this limp state.

• Innovation – This can manifest in many ways: Science, technology,
social efficiency or most simply resourcefulness. While intersecting in
part with intellectualism, it need not entirely align with it, i.e., a
farmer or a laborer can be inventive without being intellectual. Here
again the Hindus are generally in a state of decline. While individual
Hindus display virtuosity in various intellectual endeavors much like
predecessors, as a group they are dismal. Among our many problems: 1) we
see a high proclivity for Hindu intellectuals to suddenly lose their
edge when it comes to laukika issues and humbly accept plainly
destructive mleccha constructs and propagate in the midst of their
people. This results in a lack of nationalism (or worse
anti-nationalism) in human endeavor. 2) A celebration of the crass, the
commonplace, and the flimsy as is so apparent on social media. 3) The
inability to create an intellectual saṃsada, which is by Hindus for
Hindus, rather than porting into ultimately deleterious occidental ones.
4) The lack of discipline to work on indigenous production of
technology. 5) A tendency for plagiarism.

• Vulnerability from being compromised: This stems from the self-nonself
recognition problem discussed above but is of special importance because
when nation has to fight enemies like the unmāda-s it needs a robust
scaffold which is uncompromisingly committed to the Hindu cause.
Examination of ex-military officers via social media reveals that many
of them are terribly naive and rather addled with that complex of memes
peculiarly termed “secularism” in India. A similar situation confronts
us in the judiciary and parts of the bureaucracy of the Indian state
which has been filled with some rather anti-Hindu elements. Given, the
pivotal role the judiciary and the bureaucracy play in a political
system like what we have in India today it is dangerous to let them
remain in the hands of these elements. The wise will known who needs to
be calling the shots therein – a person who does not know mīmāṃsa does
not belong in either. It is quite likely that both these wings of the
political system have been infiltrated by agents who are working for the
mleccha-s allowing them to easily paralyze the state when they need to
do so. Beyond these they have several other [first
responders](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/03/13/6384/)
embedded deep in the scaffold. These come in many types – 1) political
front-ends epitomized by the Kejriwal-type broom-heads; 2) various
NGO-backed players who keep up the constant drone of the victimization
of unmatta-s – after all faked martyrdom narratives are a very important
facet of the operation of all the unmāda. As an example in this context
we might cite a statement by a so-called “moderate” marūnmatta Mansur:  
“*It was the resistance of pagans and polytheists to Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam at their origins that compelled their early
followers in the course of their respective histories to seek in
politics protection for their religious beliefs.*”  
Though it was us heathens and our cultural cousins who were victims of
these unmāda-s note how he brazenly claims they were they the victims
instead\!  
3\) Last but not the least we have the media – the Indian media is so
completely compromised that it is merely a propaganda organ of the
mleccha-s and marūnmatta-s. We had early demonstrated this via our
[Google News
experiment](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/10/25/a-geopolitical-segment-the-news-traders/).
As an anecdotal example we may point to this relatively new propaganda
organ called the “Quartz” and its partner Scroll.in which were set up by
drawing elements from various leftist-liberalist propaganda organs in
mleccha-land. By inserting themselves into the Indian media space they
have been churning out non-stop demonization and victimhood narratives
in the usual style of the mleccha – something which is sadly taken as
serious news by many a lay Hindu who is not very sharp at seeing through
the mleccha propaganda..

• Subnational identity: A large number of Hindus are more invested in
their subnational identity than their national identity as Hindus. This
makes them less amenable to being animated by national causes which are
good for the Hindus. Instead, with greatest alacrity, they leap into
every perceived fray like Don Quixote seeing an opportunity for a
counter-Islamic crusade in a turning windmill. This “regionalist”
sentiment reaches a delirious high particularly among the dramiḍa-s,
karṇāṭa-s and rāṣṭraka-s. They charge with lances firmly gripped at
the windmill of Hindi imposition. Others cry “Aryan invasion” and yet
others among the dramiḻa-s want to restore the pristine Lemurian glory
of their Tamiḻākam which once stretched all the way to Harappan lands.
But when it comes to national causes you will see some of them take the
side of the marūnmatta-s ravaging the head of Bhārata. Nevertheless, our
surveys suggests that Hindus in general are quite positive about the
mixing of Hindus from different parts of the countries. We see this
phenomenon in actively happening the sprawling megapolises of the
nations. Hence, perhaps this might not be as bad a problem as it appears
in the long run.

Now we shall turn to the state of the Hindu leadership:  
• More than two years have passed since the lāṭendra became the
dillīndra. There are many politically engaged Hindus who see him as a
great savior much like the great scholar Lokesh Chandra referring to him
as an incarnate deity or something to that tune. There are other
politically involved Hindus who leap to abuse him at the drop of a hat.
They blame him for everything: temples being demolished in various
states, the kidnapping of Hindu women by marūnmatta-s, Hindu-s being
killed anywhere in India, Mohammedan belligerence in the subcontinent,
failure of crops, his foreign trips and many other things. It would seem
that these Hindus more than anyone else expect him to actually be not
just an incarnate deity but an Abrahmistic deity who is beyond the ṛta
comprised of satya-dharma. In our opinion the lāṭendra is not Śivājī or
even emperor Julian who failed despite all his merits at a critical
junction in the history of heathenism. Yet it our considered opinion
that he is by far the best we have at this moment with no one better
really anywhere in sight. We could not say the same of the false
vājapeyin or the octagenerian saindhava. But let us reiterate that
point we labored at the beginning of this epistle: this is a war of
yuga-s and one man is never going to be enough however decisive his
actions. So we do not see the lāṭānartendra’s performance or perceived
lack thereof as being the biggest factor. The most important thing for
him is to create a system where all levels of leaders keep arising and
even if the king falls they can continue fighting with some autonomy as
the marāṭhā-s did after Rājārām’s retreat.

• This brings us to the lāṭendra’s party the BJP (disclaimer: we do not
belong to any political party or organization in India or abroad). Fewer
people take an exuberant view of it than the lāṭānartendra himself but
again the Hindus are quite divided in their opinions about its
performance. Some blame the BJP for all the ills of the nation
conveniently forgetting the enormous damage caused by the mleccha
planted Kangress rule of ten years. The others blame them for a more
limited failure of not being able to leverage the resounding majority
they got to get things which matter to Hindus done. This brings us again
to the issue presented above: creation of a system wherein Hindu
leadership is created at every level. Looking at the BJP one thing is
clear; beyond the lāṭendra, there is a scarcity of talent: Few chief
ministers are really effective and likewise few ministers at the center
are really effective. Those who are look vastly better by contrast to
what we suffered from under the Kangress rule but still there is much
room for betterment when held to more absolute standards. As an observer
one can clearly notice that certain portfolios have seen improvement
since the days of the Kangress misrule but it does strike us that areas
that are critical for the Hindu struggle into the future are not doing
great.

While some people focus on admittedly annoying issues like the home
minister wearing a skullcap while attending Mohammedan binge parties,
this is still just an external facade. The more important issue is what
is he doing to strengthen the Hindu civilization by studying the
enemies. For example we see things like the India Ideas Conclave or
something named like that, where civilizational issues are supposed to
be discussed. We see that in such fora there is hardly any penetrating
analysis of the on going struggle with Abrahamism. One can simply
contrast the discourse facilitated by the government in regard to
matters like marūnmatta structures (the Khilafat, the various
Lashkars/Jaishs, al Qaeda etc) with what is done by say the Israelis.
Ours is really bad and there is a profound shyness to articulate it in
our universities from fear of the marūnmatta-s say in comparison to an
Israeli university. This is exactly where the BJP does not seem to be
effective in generating a strong academic framework of the H to work
within in studying enemy strategies and developing counters against
them. This has to be taken up on a war-footing if the compromised
judiciary and bureaucracy has to be redressed.

• Grassroots Hindu activism: The BJP has traditionally depended on the
RSS for grassroots Hindu activism and certain other actions which cannot
be discussed in public. Indeed the RSS played a major role in the BJP
taking power. However, it does appear from our observer’s vantage that
the RSS for all its merits is not sufficiently equipped, especially in
the intellectual sense, to develop effective H mobilization for the long
struggle. In particular they have a very poor understanding of the
unmāda-s and what it would take to counter them. While schemes like
ghar vāpasi are great, its management and operations leaves much to be
desired both a the low and high levels. Some Hindu observers like to
write off the RSS and constantly bitch about it. Yet, it is the only
worthwhile Hindu organization in terms of membership and organizational
capacity. Individual workers are also remarkably selfless and dedicated
to their goals. So rather than write them off one needs to realize that
they are the base on which the capacity for long-term struggle will be
built. It is here that the government in power needs to do lot more in
improving and diversifying RSS capacity. Among other things the RSS
leadership training and its programs for developing a diverse (in terms
of skills) group of future leaders is going to be critical. Beyond
stating that the RSS needs to be positively and socially more Hindu, for
obvious reasons much of the remaining actions for them cannot be
discussed in public.

• Alternative parties: While there is a major body of Hindus who like to
whine no stop about BJP non-performance, they simply have nothing
constructive to propose as an alternative . Whether, one likes it or not
the BJP is the only party with a modicum of Hindu leaning in a secular
polity. Keeping in mind the long-term nature of the struggle a key issue
for Hindus is to develop alternative parties that will have the survival
of the Hindu nation, as opposed to deceptively enticing but idiotic
occidental figments pertaining to a secular nation, as their goal. A key
for these parties would be keep the framework creation for the long-term
struggle rather than immediate and personal gains in mind. Thus, rather
than try to pull down the BJP they should aim at greater Hinduization of
the polity. Here we shall simply stop with another somewhat cryptic
biological analogy from our study: Biological regulatory networks that
operate via transcription control are rather robust and have a structure
approximated by a scale-free power-law distribution. While they are very
susceptible to attack on the hubs, on an evolutionary time scale the
hubs are actually not more conserved than any of the other nodes. The
hubs are constantly replaced by others which can do their function as
efficiently while retaining network structure but responding to new
stimuli depending on the selective pressures. Even so the hubs of the
political network can evolve.

::::::::::::::::::::::  
Finally, we have to look at the global scenario where it is hard to make
predictions for the long term. For this reason, and also because we have
insufficient data and inappropriate analytical devices  what we say here
could easily turn out to be wrong. Like Triśiras Tvāṣṭra we have three
major enemies, though there are other minor ones:  
1\) mleccha-s: these are by far the most powerful and way ahead of us in
power. The last great war we fought against them was in 1857 CE where
they crushed us in part using our own human resources. Today, while they
are not physically within the main body of Hindudom, they have numerous
assets even as then and could coordinate with our other two enemies to
bring us down before they even directly confront us. The many divisions
of the mleccha-s need not be elaborated in this epistle but they are
primarily the Anglosphere and a transnational elite associated with
it.  
2\) The marūnmatta-s  
3\) The cīna-s: these are geographically closest to us. They are ahead
in terms of military strength but if we are able to get ourselves to the
point where we can signal that even in defeat we can inflict a damage to
them such that they will never be able to assume a superpower position
then we might be able to keep them at bay. Importantly, they are an
aging population with poor demography and in the near term if they
cannot comprehensively win a war against us their position will be
weaker.

The cīna-s and mleccha-s are open realists and will hence do everything
possible to keep us down. With the mleccha-s there is an added dimension
of a deep civilizational struggle coming from the total incompatibility
of universal Abrahamism (or its secular offshoots) and heathenism. In
any case both will use our old enemy the marūnmatta-s to hit us.
Additionally, the mleccha-s alone will try to regain their lost foothold
within the country via their church planting operations while
neutralizing political opposition to their schemes via broom-head type
insertions and the subverted Kangress as long as it lasts.

The long term objectives of the three enemies would roughly take the
following shape:  
1\) the mlecchas would seek to break up India into smaller states with
which they can deal individually. They would like to ensure that some of
these states will be preta or preta-run secular, which will do their
bidding in various Asian conflicts especially with marūnmatta-s and
cīna-s. They can play the glacial strategy aided by structural
weakening by helping other enemies of Hindus.  
2\) the marūnmatta would seek to reestablish Islamic rule over al Hind
either in the form in very general terms resembling the Delhi Sultanate,
the Mogol empire of Awrangzeb or as part of the Khilafat. There would be
tensions with the Arab Khilafat eventually, but if the Turks reassert
their place as the leaders of the Mohammedans then there would be
greater synergy with them. Their primary strategy would be reestablish
the connection between TSB and TSP by conquering the land in between,
especially by taking Prāgjyotiṣa, Magadha, Pāñcāla and the remaining
Pāñcanada in the process. As we have said they will apply both the
glacial and hurricane strategies as the occasion demands. In the south
an independent sultanate in Kerala would be their other objective which
may then serve as the base for the pincer grip of the rest of the
land.  
3\) The cīna-s will aim for a land-grab of Arunachal, Sikkim, Ladakh,
other border zones in the Northeast, the border nations like Bhutan and
Nepal while not having any major objectives within the inner core of
Bhārata. Here they might initially collude with the other enemies but
then back off because they clearly understand that the preta states
established by the mleccha-s are footholds for mlecchas to reach them,
whereas the Islamic states will allow Islamic expansion against them.
But being hard-nosed people ready to do a Dungan if needed they would
not be too concerned about propping up Hindu states as a defense.

In conclusion, the weaker the Hindu identify and the scaffold and
stronger the secular one or the regionalist ones the less likely the
Indian state survives this triple assault. While it is a long term
struggle which will go well beyond our lifetimes, we still feel we are
at a critical juncture. If the BJP is replaced in the next election by a
Kejri-Kangress type coalition, as in Indraprastha, we unlikely to make
it at all. If in contrast, the BJP retains power then two fronts will be
very important: 1) the development of all manner of infrastructure,
water and food management, industrial development, education, wider
distribution of urban centers rather than creating hellholes like Dilli,
Mumbai or Bengaluru etc, rethinking urban development in once smaller
places like Pune, Chandigarh, Mysore, Lucknow etc which are threatening
to join the above and the like. This is a front where we can see a
government like the current one able to at least do something,
especially if it can consolidate power in states. 2) Addressing Hindu
civilizational issues for the long-term struggle: here, we are not sure
the government as the present one is well-equipped enough. What many do
not realize is that any advance on the first front can be easily
nullified overnight due to absence of the second.
