+++
title = "A note on lost Śaiva centers: consideration of examples from Magadha and Vaṅga"

+++
To be read in conjunction with this handout: [Harihara in the
Indosphere](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/harihara.pdf)

One of the poorly understood but immensely important facets of Hindu
history is the role of the saiddhāntika Śaiva-s in the cultural
unification of the Indosphere within the subcontinent and beyond. For
the white indologists within the Abrahamosphere this is a topic which
necessarily needs to be alternately downplayed or obfuscated under their
negationist routine of “religion in South Asia”. The only somewhat
exceptional case I could name in this regard in Alexis Sanderson. On the
other hand the recent Hindu workers within India have in most part
chosen the path of ignorance, which characterizes many of they endeavors
starting with the morbid fascination of the “out of India theory” for
beginning of their own religion and Indo-European languages.

Over the years we have been gathering evidence for the existence of a
vast network of shrines the driving forces behind which was the spread
of the saiddhāntika Śaiva teachers and mantravādin-s throughout the
subcontinent. In many cases the rulers of major dynasties received
tāntrika-dīkśa from them. In some cases major rulers, like Bhojadeva
Paramāra, were themselves scholars of the tradition. To the lay Hindus
this network was primarily visible in the form of the shrines they
erected. While they saw the shrines through the lens of the purāṇa-s
there was an underlying tāntrika tradition that was only known to the
dīkṣita-s. This saiddhāntika tradition while undoubtedly sectarian was
nevertheless sympathetic to the older Indo-Aryan Vaidika tradition and
emphasized the preservation of the Śruti and its rituals. On the other
hand the smārta-s, who were primarily aligned with the old Indo-Aryan
Vaidika tradition had a similar symbiotic association with the
tāntrika-s particularly of these Śaiva traditions, even though some of
the ācārya-s on both sides might have had major objections to the
philosophy and praxis of the other. Thus, while competing internally
these systems, along with the developing vaiṣṇava tāntrika tradition of
the pāñcarātra formed the core of the medieval expression of the Hindu
religion which interacted with a periphery of more heterodox systems
falling under the rubric of the jaina and bauddha mata-s.

This system eventually met a cataclysmic end, particularly to the north
of peninsular India, with the coming of wave after wave of Meccan
demons. As a result we are left with little surviving physical evidence
of the grandeur of the old saiddhāntika system in the north. The
evidence needs to be gathered from relatively obscure archaeological and
iconographic records, and what we learn is a staggering loss of old
Hindu civilizational centers. While our collection is large, putting
the examples out in a digested form does not seem easy to us. Hence,
what is presented here is just a small note on some specific sites,
which may seem whimsical, but we just need to do this remind ourselves
of the bigger picture that we have in our minds.

Just as a flavor of the losses we could cite the case of the famous
Golagī maṭha: This famous Śaiva center is mentioned in multiple
saiddhāntika texts, such as inscriptions from the Kākatīya kingdom in
the Andhra country, texts in Nepal and inscriptions associated with Pāla
rulers of Bengal and Coḻa-s of the Tamil country. For instance, the
Malkapuram inscription in the Andhra country mentions how both Paramāra
and Coḻa monarchs obtained mantra dīkṣa from Golagī ācārya-s. Thus, the
saiddhāntika teachers of the Golagī maṭha had a widespread distribution
across the subcontinent and played a major role in the establishment of
new towns and temples throughout the subcontinent. However, the location
of this all important Golagī maṭha had been largely erased from the
Hindu consciousness. In 1931 RD Banerji the famous archaeologist who
discovered the Indus Valley Civilization uncovered vast ruins of a
Śaiva-kṣetra at Gurgi near Rewa. Subsequently, an obscure Andhran
scholar Sarojini Devi and later Sanderson correctly identified this
Gurgi to be the ruins of the famed Golagī.

A parallel case is that of Āmardaka-tīrtha which was once one of the
holiest of Śaiva-kṣetra-s which find mention in the texts of both the
saiddhāntika and bhairava streams. This site was largely erased from the
Hindu mind. It was eventually identified by Vasudev Mirashi as being the
Aundha Nagnath temple in Maharashtra. Only the basal level of this
splendid, gigantic seven-level temple survives, the rest of it having
been detonated by Awrangzeb in course of the 26 year jihad. Sadly the
modern Hindu restoration is such an eyesore that it totally devalues the
sanctity of the site while illustrating how the traditional knowledge
for building such structures has been destroyed by the Mohammedans.

If this is the fate of some of the most famous kṣetra-s of the
saiddhāntika-s then what to say of the rest. As an example one could
cite the famous Rudramahālaya of Siddhapur, Gujarat, which was built by
Siddharāja Jayasiṃha and Kumārapāla. Today the few ruins of it, which
were identified by the ASI, are not accessible to Hindus from the fear
that the secular fabric of the modern Indian nation might be shredded by
Hindu obscurantists. On the other hand as an example of a more obscure
shrine we could site the lost Śaiva maṭha near Varanasi from a place
today called Mirzapur where the remains of a colossal image of Śiva has
been found which might have been at least 5.3 meters when complete. In a
similar vein one could mention the lost Śaiva kṣetra of Ghanauli in the
Panjab where the ASI has recovered fragments of a shrine including a
fragmentary Umāmaheśvara image depicting the Śaiva pantheon.

The specific sites we wish to discuss further here are from Vaṅga and
Magadha respectively. A previous investigation into them was by
Gouriswar Bhattacharya, whose report provides the background for the
ensuing discussion. In the former region the first of these shrines is
from Deopara, Rajshahi district in TSB. In 1865 after the English were
firmly in control of their greatest conquest, Hindustan, one of their
officials, CT Metcalfe, who was posted in East Bengal discovered a dark
bluish stone slab with an old Sanskrit inscription at Deopara. The
inscription was reported by Kielhorn in Epigraphia Indica, I, 1892, pp.
305-15. ‘Deopara Stone Inscription of Vijayasena’. This inscription
decorated with the verses of the poet Umāpatidhara, a courtier of king
Vijayasena, against whom Jayadeva rates himself in his Gītagovinda:
“vācaḥ pallavayaty umāpatidharaḥ sandarbha-śuddhiṃ girāṃ jānīte
jayadeva eva…” \[The utterances (poetry) of Umāpatidhara are like buds
blooming but Jayadeva alone is acquainted with the purity of lyrical
arrangement in songs…\]. There Umāpatidhara states that the king
Vijayasena (1095-1158 CE) performed the kumbhābhiṣeka of a grand temple
known as Pradyumneśvara and had a tank excavated before it.

While no signs of the temple were seen, despite the ravages of
Mohammedanism until not long ago there remained in local memory the
knowledge about the existence of a dried up tank they called Padumśār.
Excavation of the dry bed of this tank in 1919 recovered 129 pieces of
stone-work which belonged to this Pradyumneśvara shrine which was built
by Vijayasena. Further, the inscription states that the temple with the
tank in front of it were huge, and that the inscription was set by the
viśvakarman Śūlapāṇi, whose family is known to have produced noted
temple artists in this region, i.e. Varendri. The inscription suggests
that the image housed in the temple was actually a Hariharamūrti:  
lakśmīvallabha-śailajādayitayor advaita-līlāgṛhaṃ  
pradyumneśvara\[-śavdabda\]-lāñcanam adhiṣṭhānaṃ namaskūrmahe ।  
yatrā+āliṅgana-bhaṅga-kātaratayā sthitvā+antare kāntayor  
devībhyām apy abhinna-tanutā Śilpe ‘ntarayāḥ kṛtaḥ ॥

Words in \[\] are unclear to me but the verse can be understood as:

We pay obeisance to the temple bearing the designation of
Pradyumneśvara,  
which houses the husband of Lakśmī and the husband of the daughter of
the mountain sporting in their non-duality,  
where the from the fear of the breakup of their embraces (with the
respective husbands),  
the two goddesses have stood between their husbands and have indeed made
a division in the icon depicting them with un-separated bodies.

The Sena rulers had their origin in the Karṇāṭa country from a general
of the Chālukya-s in course of their victorious northern campaigns under
Vikramāṅka. They rose to great power under Vijayasena and his scholarly
son Ballālasena. They established a powerful Gangetic fleet to control
much of Eastern India with their amphibious forces and an alliance with
the Coḻa-Gaṅgā-s. Their inscriptions often bear the characteristic terms
such as paramaśaiva/paramamāheśvara, Sadāśiva-mudrā and
“Sadāśiva-mudrayā mudrayitvā…” Corresponding to these terms the
image of Sadāśiva can be seen on their copper plate inscriptions. One
example of such is a beautiful copper plate with the ten-handed image of
Sadāśiva marking the rituals performed by Udayākara-deva for the
Vijayasena’s queen Vilāsadevī on occasion of a lunar eclipse. These
features indicate that the Sena-s were not just any Śaiva-s, but
specifically those with saiddhāntika dīkṣa. Moreover, the Hariharamūrti
as that installed at Pradyumneśvara is one of the Śiva forms
specifically mentioned in the sthāpana-tantra-s of the ūrdhvasrotas.
Further, the later work the Ballālacarita records another erstwhile
massive Śaiva-kṣetra in Eastern Varendri suggesting that Pradyumneśvara
was only one of many Śaiva centers patronized by the Sena-s.

A Śiva going by the name Pradyumneśvara was worshiped in the eastern
reaches of the Vaṅga country from at least the late Gupta age for we
encounter a temple housing a deity with that name in the grant of the
second last Gupta king, Vainyagupta written by the kāyastha Naradatta in
507 CE. This temple was apparently located close to Gunaighar where the
inscription was found and is described as having attached fields;
adjacent to it was a bauddha vihāra. It was also apparently located on
close to a channel mentioned in the inscription, which was the means of
communication with the port of Pradamara. The inscription clearly states
that Vainyagupta was a Śaiva though in the manner typical of most Hindu
rulers he generously endowed various religious establishments. Thus,
this inscription establishes beyond doubt that there was a comparable
temple of even greater antiquity from Eastern Vaṅga. Evidently, this
temple of Pradyumneśvara, the adjacent vihāra and the channel were all
also destroyed by the Mohammedans without any known traces.

Attempting to trace the Harihara shrines Gouriswar Bhattacharya
uncovered evidence for a 1.83 meter tall, damaged Harihara image from
Maharava, a very obscure hamlet in the modern Nawada district of
Magadha. It was housed at the Nawada Museum at the time when he examined
it. This image is iconographically striking: The typical Harihara’s from
the Pāla-Sena realms are flanked one either side the astra-puruṣa-s of
the triśūla and the Sudarśana-cakra. However, in this Maharava image is
flanked on the left (right of image) by the deities Mahākāla (larger)
and Nandikeśvara (smaller) and on the right (left of image) by Sarasvatī
and Lakṣmī who are shown as the consorts of Viṣṇu in Pāla-Sena
iconography. The key point that sets this image apart is the presence of
Mahākāla and Nandin, which suggests its saiddhāntika affinities rather
than being an ordinary Harihara. Moreover, in this hamlet of Nawada
several architectural fragments have been located of likely Hindu and
Bauddha provenance. This suggests that there were proximal saiddhāntika
Śaiva and bauddha shrines in the now obscure Maharava region. Thus, it
represents yet another example of a Śaiva (and bauddha) shrine
completely erased from Hindu memory and the remaining hamlet a poor
reminder of a once active temple town.

Late in the reign of Lakṣmaṇasena, Māliq Ghāzi Ikhtiyār al-Din Bakhtiyār
Khalji savaged the Sena kingdom. The savage destruction of Nalanda at
his hands is only to well-known. Lakṣmaṇasena retreated to the East and
the fight against the Moslems continued under three further Sena rulers
Viśvarūpasena, Keśavasena and Madhusena. However, they steadily kept
losing ground as the Mohammedan pressure from Delhi was unrelenting. By
the mid 1200s they were eventually displaced by their sāmanta-s, the
deva kings, who represented the last pockets of Hindu struggle in the
Vaṅga country before being overwhelmed by the Delhi Sultanate. Some
Sena-s dispersed to Himachal Pradesh and Nepal where they ruled small
principalities and continued their Śaiva traditions. However, with the
fall of the old Śivācārya network their saiddhāntika tradition dwindled
and became extinct or highly diluted (Nepal). However, in Nepal the last
blaze of the Sena-s was seen in the form of Hariharasena (1631-1672). He
defeated the forces of the Awrangzeb’s Nawab Fidai Khan and liberated
the territory centered around Makawanpur including 22 districts of
modern Nepal. Upon this act he took on the title Hindupati and appears
to have patronized a Śaiva shrine at Hetauda in addition to the
Rūpanārāyaṇa shrine.

The above examples of lost saiddhāntika shrines are only the tip of the
proverbial iceberg of Hindu tradition in the East that was destroyed in
the aftermath of Bakhtiyār Khalji. The story one is not told is that the
brilliant center of Hindu knowledge centered in Varendri, representing
the efflorescence of the saiddhāntika-s was extinguished in course of
this struggle. This center was at the heart of a network that stretched
all the way to the southern tip of the subcontinent. The illustrious
saiddhāntika tāntrika Aghoraśiva-deśika from Chidambaram in the Tamil
country counted in his preceptorial network Dhyānaśiva-deśika who was
the preceptor of the Sena rulers and Śrīkaṇṭha-śiva the scholar from
Varendri who was known as the Vaṅga-vṛṣbha. As we know from the works of
Aghoraśiva that the saiddhāntika-s supported not just the study of Śaiva
doctrine but practically all branches of Hindu knowledge. Thus, with
their fall due to the Mohammedan onslaught many branches of knowledge
simply became extinct. As an example we could mention the techniques
used by the viśvakarman-s in Vaṅga for casting metal as well as
techniques used to produce gilt and blue-green pigmented stone images.
So much so that the latter type of images are commonly no longer
considered of Indian origin but seen as being of Tibetan provenance.
