+++
title = "The giants among thexa0lilliputs"

+++
For long despite protestations and assertions to the contrary men have
known that men are all not born equal. There are few men who tower over
the rest in one or more of the axes of distinction. For over a decade
now sequences of the human Y-chromosome have been pointing to a
consistent phenomenon: Few men have left behind disproportionately many
descendants. One of the most talked about cases is of a lineage within
the Y-chromosome haplogroup C-M217 clade. The clade itself had an early
origin probably in eastern central Asia, from where it spread to North
America borne by one of the Asiatic lineages which contributed to the
natives of north America. But it happened to be the Y-chromosome
haplogroup of a prominent Mongol man ∼590–1,300 years before present
(YBP). Something this man did resulted in over 16 million men today
carrying his Y-chromosome. This man was probably the great Mongol ruler
and law-giver Chingiz Khan, one of those unreachable pinnacles of human
achievement. Like him other males with big imprints have come to light
but their exact identities remain debated. Going back in time, over the
last 10,000 years, there were such founder men in Africa, India and the
steppes of Eurasia, who left even bigger impacts on the human
population. Some of them have well over 100 million male descendants
today. Of some of these super-men we personally cannot say much but
others might be the men of our legendary traditions.

The great father in Africa belonged to the the E1b-M180 clade. His
descendants in three great spurts from around 5300-4800 YBP expanded
among the speakers of Niger-Congo languages and spread across the vast
African continent. A clade related to this lineage is rumored to have
been that of the Egyptian Pharaoh Ramses-III on one hand and that of the
South African leader Mandela on the other – indicating a continent-wide
spread to include prominent men over the ages. A sister lineage that
separated long ago from this lineage contributed to up to 1/5th of the
Ashkenazi Jews (including the great physicist Einstein) and ironically
also included their mortal enemy, the former German Führer. The
phylogenetic evidence suggests that the E1 lineage probably arose in
west Asia and then returned to Africa where it differentiated further in
the northern part of the continent. It is likely that the E1b-M180
lineage arose there and then penetrated deep into sub-Saharan Africa as
the Niger-Congo languages diversified. Its initial expansions could have
been triggered by the events of the emergence of civilization in the
Egyptian cultural zone, with its bearers subsequently acquiring high
status in the sub-Saharan milieu east and west.

Around 6300 YBP a man in India belonging to the H1-M52 lineage left a
huge impact on the genetic landscape of India. He hailed from a
patriline, which was already prominent and had expanded, albeit more
modestly, around 7300 YBP. Who was this man? We do not know for sure but
his descendants allow us to make some guesses. His imprint is the
dominant one in those jāti-s occupying the middle and lower rungs of the
Indian jāti-stratification. H1-M52 is prominently present in the
currently or formerly socially powerful middle jāti-s like the Marāṭhā,
Vellālar, the Vanniyar, the Kammā and the Reḍḍī. His imprint is less
prominent in the saṃskṛta brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya jāti-s but not absent.
This distribution of H1-M52 together with the timing of the expansions
clearly suggest that the father of this lineage was a very prominent
figure in pre-Indo-Aryan India. The prestige of his lineage was so high
that even after the conquest of India by the ārya-s his descendants were
able to enter and establish themselves to degree within the highest
rungs of the ārya system as brāhmaṇa-s and kṣatriya-s. Even those who
did not were still socially prominent, often attaining de facto kṣatriya
status and spreading their genes extensively into the social strata who
lay below them.

Given that his descendants are found throughout Jambudvīpa, the timing
of the expansion of H1-M52 makes it tempting to suggest that one of the
great fathers of this lineage was probably a prominent elite figure in
the empire of the old Indus valley civilization. It remains to be seen
if this speculation might be borne out by ancient DNA from the
sub-continent. Whatever the case, he was likely a speaker of the common
substratum language that can be easily discerned in Indo-Aryan and
Dravidian. It is likely that some of his descendants collaborated with
or quickly shifted sides at the time of the one or more invasions of the
ārya-s which established them in India.

The early Indo-Aryan literature speaks of chiefs and rulers of a tribal
group they termed the niṣāda-s, who figure as either agonists (Guha and
Nala) or antagonists (Ekalavya) of the ārya-s. In the late Indian phase
of the Vedic age their leaders were already accorded adhikāra for
certain vaidika rituals. They are another potential group who might have
borne the H1-M52 haplogroup. How, if it at all, they were related to the
IVC still remains unclear. However, there is another competing
possibility namely an O2-K18 haplogroup for the dominant haplogroup of
the tribal niṣāda-s as it is common in various Indian tribal groups
today. Again the presence and status of males with this haplogroup in
the IVC remains unclear.

Around approximately 5-6000 YBP, there were two males who each left
behind over 100 million descendants. One bore a R1a Y-haplogroup while
the other bore a R1b-L11 haplogroup. Both these men came from a related
chain of cultures and likely spoke Indo-European languages. Among the
Indo-Europeans there is the persistent belief of the great male common
ancestor. We ārya-s call him father Manu Vaivasvata. Among our cousins,
the Iranians, a similar figure appears as Yima Vivaṅhat, who like our
Manu is ancient ancestor and law-giver. Manu is remembered as the
ancient father and promulgator of the tradition in the Ṛgveda itself.
For instance, the ancestor of the Gotama-s, Rāhūgaṇa says regarding
Manu:  
yām atharvā manuṣ pitā dadhyaṅ dhiyam atnata |  
tasmin brahmāṇi pūrvathendra ukthā sam agmatārcann anu svarājyam || RV
1.80.16

That mantra-thought (dhī; accusative dhiyam) which Atharvan, father
Manu, and Dadhyañc unfurled(note Vedic formation atnata as opposed to
classical atanvata),  
our mantra-s and recitations in that ancient tradition have come
together in Indra  
\[the Marut-s; the sons of Rudra, gods who accompany Indra\] recite of
his independent rule.

Here one can see that though other patriarchs, like Atharvan and
Dadhyañc, the founders of the fire ritual, are mentioned it is Manu who
explicitly gets the epithet pitṛ.

Another sage Kutsa mentions him thus:  
mṛḻā no rudrota no mayas kṛdhi kṣayad-vīrāya namasā vidhema te |  
yac chaṃ ca yoś ca manur āyeje pitā tad aśyāma tava rudra praṇītiṣu ||
RV 1.114.2

Be merciful to us O Rudra, also make us joyful. With obeisance we honor
you the lord of heroes.  
What ever felicity father Manu obtained through his rituals, may we
\[also\] attain that with your guidance, O Rudra.

Hear again the ārya seeks the same felicity through his worship of the
god Rudra as that which was formerly attained by father Manu.

In the below mantra the king Paruchepa Daivodāsi mentions several
ancient ritualists but Manu is again distinguished among them:  
dadhyaṅ ha me januṣam pūrvo aṅgirāḥ priyamedhaḥ  
kaṇvo atrir manur vidus te me pūrve manur viduḥ |  
teṣāṃ deveṣv āyatir asmākaṃ teṣu nābhayaḥ |  
teṣām padena mahy ā name girendrāgnī ā name girā || RV 1.139.9  
Dadhyañc, the ancient Aṅgira-s, Priyamedha, Kaṇva, Atri and Manu know my
birth,  
these predecessors and Manu know mine,  
Their root is in the gods; our naves (origins) are in them \[the deva-s
and these predecessors\].  
Following by their footsteps, I deeply (mahi=literally greatly ) bow to
Indra and Agni with my chant; I bow with my chant.

While in these mantra-s the allusions to Manu might give the vibe of a
near mythical ancestor, a mantra of Sadāpṛṇa Ātreya gives a more
historical standing to Manu:  
etā dhiyaṃ kṛṇavāmā sakhāyo ‘pa yā mātāṃ ṛṇuta vrajaṃ goḥ |  
yayā manur viśiśipraṃ jigāya yayā vaṇig vaṅkur āpā purīṣam ||RV 5.45.6

Come here friends \! (as Sāyaṇa points out these are likely the
Aṅgiras-es)  
Let us formulate (kṛṇavāmā: Vedic karavāma) the mantra-thought by which
the mother \[of the dogs\] uncovered the corral of the cow,  
That by which Manu conquered \[his foe\] Viśiśipra \[and\] by which the
merchant (Dīrghaśravas) \[via a\] winding \[path obtained\] the land
with water.

Here we see a concrete allusion to a military achievement of Manu,
namely the conquest of Viśiśipra, which has otherwise been entirely
forgotten in Hindu tradition. However, this puts him very much in line
of the Hindu memory that he is our first king and the ancestor of all
our kings. Ṛṣi Kaśyapa again alludes to Soma aiding Manu in the conflict
with the dasyu-s, an allusion also found elsewhere in the RV:

tan nu satyam pavamānasyāstu yatra viśve kāravaḥ saṃna-santa |  
jyotir yad ahne akṛṇod u lokam prāvan manuṃ dasyave kar abhīka || RV
9.92.5c

Now let this be the truth of Pavamāna, where \[the recitations of\] all
the reciters are in agreement:  
He made light in the day and indeed the world; he protected Manu making
the dasyu retreat (here kaḥ: modal or injunctive form of verb kṛ derived
via Vedic aoristic form akaḥ=akārṣīt).

The battle of Manu with another enemy is alluded to by Vamra
Vaikhānasa:  
sa druhvaṇe manuṣa ūrdhvasāna ā sāviṣad arśasānāya śarum |  
sa nṛtamo nahuṣo ‘smat sujātaḥ puro ‘bhinad arhan dasyu-hatye || RV
10.99.7

Rising up for Manu he (Indra) directed his arrow at the wily \[enemy\]
Arśasāna,  
he the most manly and well-born, from the Nahuṣ-es and our \[side\]
demolished the forts during the slaying of the dasyu as was worthy of
him.

Thus, summing things together we obtain a picture of Manu as not only
the ancestor warrior-king of the ārya-s but also as their ancestral
yajamāna who was also the promulgator of the vaidika ritual system (a
rājarṣi as Sayaṇa calls him), right in the RV itself. This supports the
idea that his being conceived as the primordial law-giver of the ārya-s
was an ancient one. When we move farther afield in the Indo-European
world, we encounter an interesting parallel, albeit via a secondary
source in Germania (chapter 2 of Tacitus). We present below the
translation of Tacitus’ work, a slight modification of the original by
KB Townshend, for it is considerable interest for the matter at hand:

“*The ancient recitations, which are the only record of their past
history, say that the God Tuisto sprang from the earth, and that he and
his son Mannus were the authors and founders of the race. To Mannus they
ascribe three sons, whose names are borne respectively by the Ingaevones
next to the ocean, the Herminones in the middle of the country, and the
Iscaevones in the rest of it. Others, with true mythological license,
give the deity several more sons, from whom are derived more tribal
names, such as Marsians, Gambrivians, Suabians, and Vandals ; and these
names are both genuine and ancient. The name Germany, however, is new
and of recent application, owing to the fact that the first of these
peoples to cross the Rhine and dispossess the Gauls, a tribe now known
as the Tungrians, then got the name of “Germans”. Thus what was
originally a name given to a tribe and not that of a race gradually came
to be accepted, so that all men of the race were called Germans, by the
victorious tribe first as a name of fear, and by themselves afterwards
when the name had once been coined.*”

Here the exact etymology of Tuisto has been debated but we tend to
accept the version where it is related to the Germanic tvis meaning
twice or twinned. This is consistent with the direct northern Germanic
testimony from Scandinavia which records Ymir as the primal being. Ymir
is derived from Proto-Germanic \*yumiyaz (reconstructed by Puhvel) which
also means twin. Among the Indo-Aryans and Iranians Yama and Yima are
the equivalent words also meaning twins. Now as we saw earlier, among
the Zoroastrian Iranians Yima takes the place of Manu as the ancestral
law-giver king. In the Northern Germanic legend Ymir was cleaved by the
gods in manner similar to the comparable primordial figure of the
ārya-s, namely the puruṣa (sūkta RV 10.90). This suggests that the
puruṣa was yet another early IE origin myth describing origins in the
remote past \[Footnote 1\], which existed along side a legend of another
more proximal human ancestor, the Manu figure. Indeed, in this account
of Tacitus the two were organically combined (either by Tacitus or his
Germanic source) with the more proximal human ancestor Mannus becoming
the son of god Tuisto. Most notably, in Mannus we have an exact cognate
of Manu suggesting that this name likely precedes the Indo-Iranian
period.

Now it has been suspected that the three sons of Mannus, the Ingaevones,
the Herminones, and the Iscaevones, were originally not tribes at all
but the three castes of Germania, which parallel the four castes of the
ārya-s emerging from the puruṣa. In this regard we might note a legend
on the origin of the Germanic castes found in the Viking tradition of
the Rígsmál. In that text the great god Heimdall, a possible partial
cognate of our Puṣaṇ, takes the form of the progenitor man, Rígr. His
name a cognate of rājan suggests that he was seen as the primordial
king. He starts from the sea-shore and moves inwards on the way
fathering three children on three women. The fact that he begins with
the sea shore suggests that it was indeed recapitulating a legend
similar to what Tacitus collected regarding the sons of Mannus. These
three children in order were: 1) Thrall who was black in color and
founded the race of the servants; 2) Karl who was red in color and
founded the races of tradesmen of various types. 3) Jarl who was white
in color and founded the races of warriors and masters of magical
incantations and secret knowledge. Thus, the three Germanic castes were,
like the their ārya counterparts, literally part of a varṇa (color)
system. This parallels the ārya traditions regarding Manu, preserved in
the Mahābhārata, where he is seen as the father of all the castes:  
manor vaṃśo mānavānāṃ tato ‘yaṃ prathito ‘bhavat |  
brahma-kṣatrādayas tasmān manor jātās tu mānavāḥ || (Mbh 1.70.11
“Critical”).  
Manu’s lineage is that of the humans, from him (Manu) this \[lineage\]
came to be expanded.  
Brāhmaṇa-s, kṣatriya-s etc (i.e. the castes) those born of Manu are
indeed the humans.

Thus, we have a scenario where Manu and his cognates are seen as a
founding father across traditions of all the strata of IE society.
Moreover, while he is already a near mythical ancestor in all the later
IE traditions, in the RV we still see some historical memories of him.

So who was this Manu in history? Can we or should we even equate him in
any way to the great fathers who are becoming very apparent from the
Y-chromosomal data among the Indo-Europeans? If we were to take the case
of the Mongol Y-chromosomal expansion that is ascribed to Chingiz Khan
then we do see a more recent example with parallels to father Manu:
Chingiz Khan, like Manu is a father figure in more than just a
figurative sense for the Mongols. He is also very much their law-giver
with his maxims and legal code, the Yasa, constituting the heart of
Mongol law and wisdom. By this analogy, it is quite possible that indeed
one of the Indo-European Y-chromosomal fathers was after all the
historical Manu. As we noted above two major Y-chromosome lineages show
evidence to being expanded by the movements of the Indo-Europeans from
their ancestral homeland in the steppe zone close to the north of the
Caucasus – R1a and R1b-L11. While these lineages themselves share a
common ancestor, the estimated age of that ancestor based on complete
sequence data is rather early, perhaps at least 20,000 YBP or earlier.
Hence, at this point it appears unlikely that that common ancestor was
being remembered as Manu in IE tradition. However, the common ancestor
of the R1b-L11 clade is estimated at around 5800 YBP and common ancestor
of the R1a-Z93 (most prevalent in India) and the R1-Z282 lineage (most
common in Europe) is estimated to be around 6-6500 YBP. Hence, these two
fathers are good candidates for those being remembered as the great
founder kings among Indo-Europeans. Of them the R1a founding father is
the most obvious candidate for Manu. Indeed, the distribution of this
Y-chromosomal lineage in India is consistent with tradition that Manu
was the father of all castes though the center of gravity lies within
those belonging to the brahma-kṣatra. Hence, rather ironically some of
the vociferous haters of “manuvāda” in India are likely to be his own
descendants. Speculating even farther afield it is possible that in
Germania the memories of founding fathers with alternative names such as
Rígr and Mannus are a reflection of traditions concerning ideologically
similar but genetically distinct father figures belonging to the R1a and
R1b clades.

Remarkably, in India coeval with part of the expansions of R1a-Z93 we
see the expansion of a Y-chromosomal lineage within the L1-M11 clade.
This lineage is found throughout the subcontinent but is rare outside of
it. Within the subcontinent, this lineage is found at lower frequencies
in Indo-Aryan speakers and residents of northern origin in South India,
i.e. the brāhmaṇa-s, compared to Dravidian speakers. It is significantly
higher in frequency throughout the peninsular tip of the country.
Notably, it is also found in high frequencies in tribes like the Bharwad
in Gujarat in regions with a possible Dravidian substratum and also
among the Brahui of Balochistan, who have a Dravidian linguistic core.
Given this pattern, we might state with some confidence that this
Y-chromosomal lineage was borne with the Dravidian expansion in the
subcontinent. As we have pointed out before the philological evidence
from the earliest extant Dravidian texts (the Tamil 400s) suggests that
they lived a lifestyle comparable to the pastoralist Indo-Iranians.
Archaeology suggests that the Dravidian expansions into the peninsula
were in part related to the mobile megalithic cultures expanding into
the peninsula of the subcontinent. Moreover, linguistic evidence hardly
favors Dravidian as the language of the Indus civilization. While the
evidence for a para-Munda language as suggested by Witzel is weak, it
was likely the language with a dominant ka-ki-ku type prefixes, which
occurs as a substratum in both Indo-Aryan and Dravidian. Hence, we posit
that the Dravidian expansions were closely linked to those of the
Indo-Aryans. This is indeed reflected in the expansions within L1-M11
occurring \~4000 yrs BP. A possible scenario is that the power
restructuring caused by the invasions of the Indo-Aryans allowed
Dravidian chiefs to adopt Indo-Aryan memes, livestock, and technology to
have their own expansions to the south of the Indo-Aryan zone. They were
thus at the vanguard of the advance into the peninsular region and
completely Dravidianized that zone. Indeed, among them too there was a
great founding father: whether he can be identified with the ancient
king referred to in Tamil tradition as coming from the Gujarat (Dwaraka)
region we are not sure.

While these considerations are necessarily speculative, we are likely to
have a rather complete picture in the coming decade as more ancient DNA
data is obtained to fill in the gaps. Nevertheless, the information we
have at hand raises a tricky question: is there any reason for this
greatly different fitness potential in human males? Many would be
inclined to think that it was merely chance conspiring with certain
technological revolutions of the bronze age and later dynamics of the
steppe military apparatus that allowed some of these fathers to get
ahead of the rest. Yet, there could be more to it if one closely
observes the society of apes including ourselves. So for a moment we
will step back and glance at two well-known studies on chimpanzees:  
1\) *Range Use of the Forest Chimpanzees of Kibale: Implications for the
Understanding of Chimpanzee Social Organization* by Chapman and
Wrangham.  
2\) *Kin Selection, Social Structure, Gene Flow, and the Evolution of
Chimpanzees* by Morin, Moore, Chakraborty, Jin, Goodall and Woodruff.

In the first study it was seen that the male chimps used an area that
was consistently greater than that used by the females (\~1.5- 2 times).
Additionally, adult males were seen more often (\~4 times) in the
borders of the range that was defended against other chimp groups than
females. Parallel studies on chimp communities have shown that both
males and females patrol and aggressively defend their range against
intrusions of members other groups. However, it does appear that the
males are more likely to be at the territorial frontiers defending them
than females. Again these males are aggressive to even females of other
groups except when the latter are in estrus. The second study
demonstrated that across 20 African sites estimates of relatedness among
members of a chimp group suggest that in a given group the males are
related on the order of half-siblings, and homozygosity at the assessed
loci significantly departs from Hardy-Weinberg null model.

While human social structure has slightly diverged in details from that
of the chimpanzees, most of its basic features including the
territoriality and territorial defense with active male role appear to
have been inherited from the common ancestor with the troglodyte.
Further, the emergence of cooperation between males is likely to be a
strong factor in the defense of territories and as Morin et al suggested
the data supports that such cooperation is likely to involve a strong
kin-selection component. Ethnological studies, including philological
evidence from texts like the Manusmṛti, point to a role for
group-selection on top of the basic kin-selection in humans, especially
given the subsequent social developments relative to the troglodyte.

It is also well-known that across anthropoid primates there is a ranking
of males per social dominance status. This male rank has been shown to
be positively correlated to different degrees with reproductive success
across the tree of anthropoid primates including chimpanzees, bonobos,
gorillas, Hanuman langurs and rhesus macaques. Hence, this would be
expected of humans too. Analysis of one of our closest relatives the
troglodyte generally supports this (e.g. *Male dominance rank and
reproductive success in chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii* by
Wroblewski, Murray, Keele, Schumacher-Stankey, Hahn and Pusey). However,
such studies on the chimp also points to some interesting details that
might have relevance to Homo. The high-ranked chimp males and their
female relatives strongly avoid inbreeding, which might suggest that
even in Homo societies some high-ranked males might have sired
offspring over a wider range of unrelated females than the average
males.

Finally, we may go as far as to posit that these features of anthropoid
primate societies have gone hand in hand with wide variance in male
abilities rather than channeling all males into a tight normal
distribution. The wide variance might allow better social structuring,
division of labor, and stability within a group to survive in
competition with other such groups. Moreover, cooperation between males
might have gone along with their relatedness which allows for included
fitness which lies at the heart of kin-selection. Thus, we might have
some convergence towards insect societies with similar social
hierarchies, where there is a single or few dominant reproductive
members. With the dawn of the metal age, technological developments and
ability for rapid long-range movements might have actually favored
groups with hierarchical social structures with organization of the
group around high-ranked males to compete against other such groups.
This taken together, with the above considerations, including the
possibility of the high-ranked males deliberately avoid matings with
close female relatives, might have yielded the super-males whose impact
we see on the Y-chromosomal landscape. On the other side this might have
also been a factor in origin of our lores concerning the great father
and the emergence of a varṇa system constituting a super-organismal
puruṣa.

Further reading: *Punctuated bursts in human male demography inferred
from 1,244 worldwide Y-chromosome sequences* by Poznik et al

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Notably, this puruṣa myth has been laterally mobile in the
mythosphere. It was transferred either from an Indo-Aryan or a lost
Eastern Iranian source to China as the legend of Pan-gu. There is no
evidence for this myth in any of the earlier Chinese literature and the
solid evidence for it in China only emerges only within in last
2000-2200 YBP, being liberal. From China it was transmitted to Japan as
the legend of Panko and incorporated into the Japanese origin tradition.
