+++
title = "Some notes on the heathen Lithuania and itsxa0demise"

+++
Clinging to the inner coast of northern Europe lies Lithuania, a nation
which at best only marginally figures in the Hindu historical and
geographical consciousness. Conquered twice by the Soviet “empire” it
had all but ceased to exist as an distinct entity until 1990 when it
declared itself independent from the Soviets. This might be seen as a
key event that heralded the collapse of the Soviet empire in an year
from the Lithuanian declaration of independence. Lithuania is a
worthwhile case study for Hindus for it was the last major pocket of old
heathenism in Europe that resisted the Abrahamistic steamroller of the
Christ cult.

To begin to understand the part of Lithuanian history and culture that
is relevant to us let us look at a sampling of the core Lithuanian
vocabulary and their meanings:  
Relationships  
brote= brother \[attested in old eastern dialect\]; mote= mother; sūnus=
son; dukte= daughter; sesuo= sister  
Organs  
nosis= nose; akis= eye; padas= foot; sirdis= heart  
Other nouns  
dievas= god; saules= sun; diena= day; dausos/dangaus= sky; menuo=
moon/month; aušti= dawn; naktis= night; vejas= wind; dūmai= smoke;
medus= honey; ašis= axle; ratai= cart; ratas= wheel; duru= door; pilis=
fort; zeminis= land; akmuo= stone; mesa=flesh; snipas= spy; gyvenimas=
life  
Animals  
vyras= man; guovs= cow \[attested in northern dialect\]; pēkus= cattle;
avis= sheep; vilkas= wolf; suns= dog; lāsis= salmon;  
Descriptors  
ziema= winter; gorme= heat \[attested in old eastern dialect\];
rudas=red; šimtas= hundred; juodu= pair; naujas= new; nuogas= naked;
save/sau= self; visas= all; senas= old/ancient; jaunas= young; sausas=
dry; paskui= afterwards  
Pronouns  
kas= who/what; kada= when; tu= you; tas= that; tatai= therefore; tad=
therefore  
Verbs  
zinoti= know; mirti= die; vaziuoti= drive; sandarbiauti= cooperate;
likti= remain; gyventi= live; seti= sow; duoti= give; buti= to be; esti=
is; augti= grow; begti= run; kasti= bite; manyti= think; plaukti= swim

Anyone with even a basic familiarity with Sanskrit or other Indo-Aryan
languages would be able to notice the homology between the two
languages. As a Baltic language Lithuanian is related to all other
Indo-European languages but shares certain features with Indo-Iranian
which point to an ancient specific proximity between the Balto-Slavic
and Indo-Iranian branches of Indo-European. A more specific point noted
by Indo-European linguists is that Lithuanian in particular is one of
the most conservative extant Indo-European languages. For instance in
the Encyclopedia of Indo-European the authors Adams and Mallory state:

“*…Baltic as a whole, and Lithuanian in particular, is a remarkably
conservative branch of Indo-European and so plays a greater role in the
reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European than the lateness \[i.e. all
surviving attestations are all younger than 1000 years\] of its
attestation might suggest…. East Baltic is generally a very conservative
branch of Indo-European and Lithuanian in particular preserves an
“archaic” aspect otherwise found in IE languages at least a couple of
millenia older. Particularly the declension of the nouns and adjectives,
with seven cases, singular and plural (and at least in dialects the dual
as well) persists as a remarkably faithful witness to the situation in
Proto-Indo-European. Only Old Indic attests a system that is less
changed from what is usually reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European.*”

Thus, among the languages that are still in active use today, next to
Sanskrit (what the authors refer to above as Old Indic), Lithuanian is
unique retaining more features of the ancient Indo-European language.
Elsewhere, where there is memory of the old Indo-European language, such
as Old Greek, Archaic Latin, or Avestan, they have long gone out of
vogue and are only preserved in special contexts. Even among the Baltic
branch of languages Lithuanian’s archaism is notable, thus in a sense it
resembles the Indian situation where Sanskrit remains in use along side
its rather divergent New-Indo-Aryan sisters/daughters. We believe that
this is not a trivial or fortuitous point and will be a key matter of
discussion further down in this article.

Now turning briefly to the pre-Christian Lithuanian religion we may note
that the chief god the pantheon was Perkūnas whose name is a cognate of
the Vedic Parjanya, the devatā of rain belonging to the Indra class (or
Indra’s atmospheric ectype). Fragments of incantations to him survive in
translation or the original. A few examples are provided below:

“*You drive away the winter*  
*and in all lands you give leaves and grass.*  
*We worship you that you make our grain to grow,*  
*and you would put down all weeds*\! (\#1)”

“*Check yourself, O Perkūnas, and do not send misfortune on my
field\!*  
*and I shall worship the gods and give you this meat offering.* (\#2)”

“*Perkūnas the god, do not strike the dweller of the land (of
Lithuania), strike the white Russian like a red-haired dog\!* (\#3)”

“*In the name of the Sun, through the thunder of Perkūnas, the
Thunderer, I command you, the Fever, I drive you away from people,
animals, fowls, from every live property… If you do not obey, I shall
dry you up with the ray of the Sun, I shall wear you out with the heat
of the Sun, I shall make you drink the burning dew, I shall make you eat
the enchanted bread.* (\#4)”

An interesting spell to Perkūnas is also found laterally transferred to
the Finno-Ugric neighbors of the Lithuanians:  
*Father Perkons, we offer you an ox that has two horns and four cloven
hoofs;*  
*we would pray you for our plowing and sowing,*  
*that our straw be copper-red and our grain be golden yellow.*  
*Push elsewhere all the thick black clouds, over great fens, high
forests and wildernesses*  
*But unto us, plowers and sowers, give a fruitful season and sweet
rain.*  
*Holy Perkons guard our grain-field that it bear good straw below,*  
*good ears above and good grain within.* (\#5)

Another such laterally transferred incantation has an allusions to the
nine sons of Perkūnas:  
*Father Perkons,*  
*has nine sons:*  
*three that strike,*  
*three that thunder,*  
*three cast lightning*. (\#6)

The Lithuanian incantations to Perkūnas emphasizing the fertilizing and
agricultural facets along with food offerings being made to him for the
same remind us of similar themes pertaining to Parjanya, which we
repeatedly encounter in the Ṛgveda:

yo garbham oṣadhīnāṃ gavāṃ kṛṇoty arvatām | parjanyaḥ puruṣīṇām ||  
tasmā id āsye havir juhotā madhumattamam | iḻāṃ naḥ saṃyataṃ karat || RV
7.102.2-3  
Parjanya is he who makes the fertilized zygote in cows, mares, plants
and women \[garbham oṣadhīnām; cf. \#1\].  
In to his mouth we offer the sweetest oblation (cf. offering to Perkūnas
in \#2); he brings together for us food.

The western Lithuanian spell against the White Russian (\#3) also
reminds one of the spell of the Atri-s invoking Parjanya against
evil-doers:

utānāgā īṣate vṛṣṇyāvato yat parjanya stanayan hanti duṣkṛtaḥ | RV
5.083.02cd  
Even the guiltless fly away from him of bull-like might when thundering
Parjanya strikes the evil-doers.

Finally, the incantation \#4 reminds one of the medical incantation
found in the Atharvaveda, wherein Parjanya is invoked as part of a
medical procedure for certain diseases. For instance while treating
someone who is dangerously ill the atharvan deploys the below mantra:

ā parjanyasya vṛṣṭyod asthāmāmṛtā vayam |  
vy ahaṃ sarveṇa pāpmanā vi yakṣmeṇa sam āyuṣā || (AV-vulgate 3.31.11)  
By means of Parjanya’s rain, we have stood up as immortals;  
I, free from every evil, free from disease, join with life.

In the same sūkta, Sūrya is also invoked in parallel to the Lithuanian
incantation \#4.

Likewise, the laterally transferred Finno-Ugric incantation (\#5) can be
compared to the atharvan rain-spell:  
abhi kranda stanayārdayodadhiṃ bhūmiṃ parjanya payasā sam aṅdhi |  
tvayā sṛṣṭaṃ bahulam aitu varṣam āśāraiṣī kṛśagur etv astam ||
(AV-vulgate 4.15.6)  
Roar forth, thunder, agitate the ocean, O Parjanya soak the earth with
your sweet rain\!  
Send forth the plenteous showers released by you to him seeking
refuge,  
let the man with the lean cows return to his \[shelter\].

The sons of Perkūnas in the second laterally transferred text (\#6) can
be compared to the Marut-s who are associated with Parjanya in the
atharvan rain-spell:

From Lithuanian folk tradition it can be gleaned that Perkūnas was
sometimes conceived as bellowing bull – a epithet often used for
Parjanya (Indra). In other cases he is said to spit fire, hurl an axe or
occasionally a hammer. Indeed, such a hammer was said to be worshiped by
the Lithuanians and is believed to have been the one with which Perkūnas
recovered the sun, a legend with clear parallels in the śruti. This
parallels the display of the Slavic image of his cognate Perun at Kiev.
His idol is described as having a head made of silver with golden
mustaches. In his left hand he is said to have held several arrows and
his right a bow. He also had a mace which was the equivalent of the axe
or hammer of Perkūnas. In the neighboring Latvia the cognate Perkons was
described in local lore as wielding a rod, a hammer, a sword, a spear,
stones and arrows. However, like his Germanic cognate Thor, and like the
Indo-Aryan Pūṣan he was said to ride a chariot with goats.

Not surprisingly the old religion which lingered on even after the
Abrahamistic conquest was condemned by the Isaists. Below is an excerpt
of such a condemnation in a lament of a converted Lithuanian from 500
years ago in the first western-style printed book from that country
(that few of his compatriots took to the Isa-cult):  
“*…how uncultured and dark, unfamiliar with any piety and Christian
religion our nation is in contrast with others, you can find very few
men of the people who were capable of pronouncing at least the first
words of the Lord’s prayer, to say nothing of the true and full
knowledge of the Catechism. And what is more – and it is still more
terrible to hear – many of them officiate patently at the pagan ritual
and profess paganism openly, even nowadays: some worship trees, rivers,
other grass snakes or something else, glorifying them as gods. Some of
them vow to Perkūnas, others glorify Laukosargas to save their crop or
Zemepatis the land god for their livestock. Those who are prone to evil
intentions profess goblins and sprites as their gods.*”

This excerpt however gives us an interesting tidbit about the worship of
Zemepatis the cognate of the Indo-Aryan Kṣetrapati even in the 1500s.
Likewise, we hear of the worship of Vejopatis, the cognate of
Indo-Iranian Vāyu, in the southern Baltic domain even after Isaism had
engulfed it. Some of the Lithuanian heathens who survived down to the
1900s were to face a great purge by Stalin during the Soviet conquest of
Lithuania. A detailed discussion of the Baltic heathen religion and its
position with respect to other old Indo-European religions is beyond
scope of the current article. However, the above examples provide a
flavor of the Baltic (old Lithuanian) religion and its relationship to
the Indo-Iranian religions. Thus, it is not just the language but also
the old religion that bears the mark of what appears to be a specific
relationship.

While Armenia had fallen early to the evils of the Christ cult, its
sweep across Europe started in right earnest only with the conversion of
Constantine the Roman emperor. In the East its advance was stopped by
the Zoroastrian empire of the Sassanians. The Germanics, Balts and Slavs
of Eastern and Northern Europe were the hardest to conquer for the 2nd
Abrahamism. However, starting in the 900s these frontiers were
breached:  
\-In 966 CE Mieszko, the king of Poland was converted to the Catholic
church. However, a pocket of Slavic heathens centered around Gniezno
continued their struggle for another 100 years and recaptured holy sites
ceded to the Isaists and also demolished a church there.  
\-In 988 CE Vladmir the Rus lord of Kiev was converted to the Orthodox
church.  
\-In 997 CE the German missionary Adalbert began forays in to the Baltic
territory of Prussia but he was promptly stopped by the heathen Balts
and put to death.  
\-In 997 CE however the 2nd Abrahamism scored a victory further north by
converting Olaf the king of Norway, but several parts of Norway still
remained hard to convert and fell only much later.  
\-In 1000 CE Althing of Iceland was converted.  
\-Around 1000 CE St Stephen was put as the Christian king of Hungary.  
\-In 1008 CE Olaf of Southern Sweden was converted but the complete
conversion of Sweden was not easily achieved and took much longer.  
\-In 1009 CE the German missionary St Bruno was sent to Lithuania to
convert the Baltic heathens but the mission failed and the missionaries
were evicted or killed.

It is notable that these advances of the 2nd Abrahamism temporally
coincided roughly with the invasion of India by the 3rd Abrahamism under
the Ghaznavid Turks. Thus in the initial Christian surge into
unconverted Europe the Balts emerged as the most recalcitrant. Along
with them, their neighbors, one group of western Slavs, the Wends, to
the Northeast of Germany remained resolutely heathen. In 1068 CE German
Christian holy warriors launched an attack on the Wends and destroyed
Rethra the holy town of the Wends, which housed the great four-headed
idol. The four heads in the four cardinal directions were those of
Perun, Svarog, probably the goddess Mokosh and another deity. The Wends
moved their capital along with the four-headed image to the Rügen island
and continued the struggle against the Christians. In 1147 CE the
Germans launched yet another crusade on the Wends but they were unable
to complete their conquest as their leader Niklot firmly held out
against the holy warriors despite loss of some territory and conversion
of some pagan lands. In 1168 CE the bishop and the king of Denmark
launched yet another crusade on the Wends that finally brought them to
their knees and the surviving Slavic heathens were soon mopped up by the
other Christian forces from Poland and Germany.

This conquest provide a foothold for the invasion of the Baltic
territory which still remained pagan. In the early 1200s the Vatican
sent orders for crusades against the Baltic heathens. Between 1215-1223
CE Estonia the Finno-Ugric heathen land was taken to the north of the
Balts. In 1222 CE German and Polish warrior padres started their crusade
against Prussia. But an year later the Prussians fought back and struck
deep into German and Polish territory. But in 1230 CE further crusades
were launched by the German Teutonic Christian monk-knights and
continued till 1274 CE when the heathen Prussian Balts were finally
crushed after 44 years of sea-saw encounters with the Christians. In the
meantime the northern Baltic territories of Courland and Livonia were
also taken and the Teutonic crusaders were established there. By 1249 CE
Christianization had reached Finland. However, despite being surrounded
all around the core Baltic land of Lithuania remained unrelentingly
heathen and was the one bright spot in the war against the crusaders.

![German\_Lithuanian](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/03/german_lithuanian.jpg?w=640)*A
painting by Kossak showing the abduction of children by the German
crusaders. A practice very similar to their equivalents the Ghazis of
the third Abrahamism.*

In 1236 CE the heathen Lithuanians led by duke Vykintas scored a
decisive victory against the German crusaders of the Order of the
Brothers of the Sword in the great battle of Saule. The knights with
their heavy armor drawn into battle in a swampy ground were surrounded
by the mobile Lithuanian cavalry and unable to effectively move against
their rapid attacks. As consequence majority of the crusader knights
were wiped out. So massive was this victory that the even today despite
Christianization the Lithuanians still remember the day of this victory.
By around 1253 CE the Christians made major progress by converting the
Lithuanian lord Mindaugas and crowning him as a Catholic king. On the
other hand the Russian missionaries converted some members of the
royalty to the Orthodox church. However, in 1260 CE the pagan Lithuanian
dukes won a decisive victory against the combined Catholic army of the
Teutonic and the surviving Order of the Sword crusaders. Perhaps,
influenced by this event Mindaugas returned to the heathen fold. But he
was assassinated shortly thereafter and the duke Traidenis restored
heathenism removing the Orthodox converts too. From then on till 1387 CE
Lithuanian remained heathen and even expanded against the Christian tide
as the last great heathen power of Europe. Throughout this period the
Lithuanian kingdom continued to fight against the Christian attempts to
conquer them. Yet, like other heathen kingdoms, like in India, they were
extremely tolerant allowing freedom of religion for all the three
Abrahamisms in their dominion unlike the other contemporary states of
Europe.

Thus, from 1283 CE onward despite a near continuous three front holy
war: 1) waged by the German crusaders from the north and south
i.e. Livonia and Prussia; 2) by Russian Orthodox church from the east;
3) The Hungarian and Polish crusades from the south, as the historian of
Lithuania, S.C. Rowell points out, the expansion of the heathen
Lithuanian state continued unabated reaching its peak under the
Gediminid clan. Its expansion eastwards took it close to Moscow. In the
southeast they took Kiev and in the South the Belarus city of Brest. The
anger of the Orthodox church towards these heathen conquests is
expressed in curses found in Orthodox martyrdom narratives such as:
“*These fire-worshipers observe the habit which their father, the
good-hating and wily demon, handed down to them as law to cut their hair
short and to shave their beards with razors.*” This snippet points to
the Lithuanians being seen as fire-worshipers, a term also repeatedly
used by the Mohammedans to describe the Iranians and the Hindus. The
shaving their beards and hair probably in the context of the
fire-worship noticed by the Rus was related to the practice of the
Indo-Aryan yajamāna-s. The Rus Orthodox church also misused the liberal
religious policy of the heathen dukes by sending in their agents who
tried engineer plots against the Gediminid Dukes. These agents were
promptly killed and they were made martyr saints of that church.

In the Southeast the Lithuanian state also conquered territories
originally held by the Mongol Golden Horde under duke Gediminas and his
brothers. In 1313 CE the Mongol Khan Öz-Beg converted to Islam and
started a systematic massacre of the Bauddha-s and shamanists in his
Golden Horde. Several of these fled to the heathen Lithuanian territory
and were incorporated into the entourage of their dukes. In 1347-48 CE,
Janibeg the son of Öz-Beg launched a major Jihad on the Lithuanians. In
course of this Jihad they suffered heavy losses including the capture of
one of their powerful warriors Karijotas. When they were thus weakened
the German crusaders attacked them with a great force in the west near
the Streva river. 18,000 heathen warriors along with their noted
commander Narimantas were killed in this battle reducing them even
further. The Polish crusaders launched an attack at this moment hoping
to bring down the Lithuanian state for good and captured yet another of
their noted warriors Lubartas. The pope triumphantly sent the
Lithuanians a message that the crusades would stop if they converted
\[In all this a Hindu may note how the preta-marūnmatta-saṃyojana works
– a similar fate awaits them due their misapprehension of this
situation\]. Even as the Christians thought the fall of Lithuania to
Abrahamism was at hand, the heathens regrouped and lead a major
counter-attack the next year. Strengthened by Mongol Bauddha-s and
shamanists fleeing from the Golden Horde they were able to route the
Polish crusaders and reconquer the territories they had taken and
further expand into the Rus land. By 1352 CE the Lithuanian heathens
invaded the Polish-held Galich in southwest Rus and captured several
forts from the crusaders. The unified Blue and White Hordes of the
Mongols under Khan Tokhtamysh started asserting itself in the 1380s. The
Khan invaded the Rus domains and crushed them in a series of campaigns
in 1381-1382 CE, in the process burning down Moscow. He immediately
followed it up with a great assault on Lithuanians in 1383 CE. Thus,
despite their many victories, broken by the Mongol strike and
incessantly attacked by the crusades the heathen Lithuanian finally
succumbed to Christianity in 1387 CE.

![Lithuania](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/03/lithuania.jpg?w=640)  
*The maximum extent of the heathen Lithuanian state*

Gediminas established their capital at Vilnius in 1323 CE and from that
period on the heathen Lithuanian state was one of the most powerful ones
in Europe. Archaeological studies in Lithuania have revealed a heathen
shrine and an observatory associated with the vaidilutė (female
ritualist) Birutė in Palanga pointing to active heathen religious
activity associated with astronomical phenomenon in this period. It
resulted in what Rowell calls “pax lithuanica” which was constantly
attacked by the crusades and the Jihads. In the context of these wars we
might note the striking parallel of usage between the Christian
terminology – *frontes guerrarum paganorum* and the Mohammedan term dar
al-harb. This pax lithuanica being a heathen one played and important
role in maintaining the trade contacts between the Islamizing Golden
Horde and the Christian west. As also the schisms within Isaism namely
the Catholic and the Orthodox churches and the Judaists who were able to
operate in this space as a mercantile class. However, the same tolerance
which was typical of other heathens, like us Hindus, was to contribute
to their downfall because it allowed easy infiltration by the
Abrahamists and also ability of the crusaders to recruit Isaists from
within territories conquered by the Lithuanian heathens. Given that
Lithuanian population was still largely heathen as of the 1500s (see
above), if they had held out even for about 50 more years past the date
of their conversion they had the potential to be a modern heathen state
in Europe \[Footnote 1\]. But the main reason did not happen was the
infiltration by the Christians taking advantage of the heathen
tolerance, which allowed them to get entry into the elite circles.

This leads us to the final and key point of this article: Why were the
Lithuanian heathens most successful in holding out against the Christian
steamroller? The answer we present is related to the unusual archaism of
their language and potentially religion. Thus, we posit that they were
in many ways parallel to the Hindus. The Hindus were remarkably
successful in preserving their Indo-Aryan archaism and their now
withering Iranian cousins in preserving their Avestan traditions in face
of several assaults. This relates to a well-developed ritualist caste
with a powerful oral tradition and specifically a grammatically
tradition that allowed preservation of the language, especially in
ritual, close to its old Indo-European state. While this was potentially
ancestral to the Indo-Europeans as suggested by the Roman ritualist
guild, the combination with a rigorous grammatically oriented oral
tradition is clearly attested best in the Indo-Aryans and then the
Iranians \[Notably, of the local Indian languages Tamil, a non-Aryan
language, was the next best in its preservation of archaic tradition in
India precisely because it adopted the Aryan linguistic methodology very
early in its history\]. Hence, we hypothesize that the Lithuanians had
such a tradition which approached the Indo-Iranian state to certain
degree \[Totally contra-Rowell, who rather idiotically asserts that
Germanic, Slav and Balt pagans built shrines to imitate Christians\! A
sign of how deep-rooted Abrahamistic prejudices are in academia\].

In support of this we have evidence from whatever scraps of information
survive regarding the heathen Lithuanian state that they had a
well-organized ritualist guild along with the duchy elite with whom they
intermarried – a parallel to the brahma-kṣatra elite of the Hindus.
Their ritualists included the virgin vaidilutė \[c.f. Roman Vestal\] and
vaidilos who recited incantation at rituals \[The etymology of vaidilos
is possibly related to veda and avesta\]. The so called Krivi-s were not
ritualists but a ritual item sent by the ritualists, likely a scepter
that directed people to assemble for the ritual \[Footnote 2\]. There is
evidence for specific widespread practices mediated by the ritualist
class in addition to the fire-worship mentioned above: 1) The worship of
the snake žaltys which was reared in a shed; this is paralleled by the
Vaidika sarpa-bali, which is to performed annually by the ārya using the
appropriate yajuṣ “namo astu sarpebhyo…”; 2) The worship of the water
deities, the Upinis, and the associated holy boar – the parallel of the
Indo-Aryan varāha and the Iranian varāza Dāmoish Upamana; 3) the
consecration of twin horseheads on houses representing the cognate
deities of the Aśvin-s.

Finally, we have contemporary or near contemporary accounts of the
Christians that clearly makes the point of a powerful Lithuanian
ritualist class. For example the German crusaders’ chronicle by Peter of
Dusberg from 1326 CE states:  
“*In the midst of a perverse nation in Nadruvia, was to be found a
certain place called Romowe. There lived in Romowe a certain man called
Krivi, whom the people revered as pope, for just as the Lord Pope rules
the universal church of the faithful, so not only the aforesaid peoples
but also the Lithuanians and other nations of Livonia are ruled at his
behest or command. Such as was his authority, that when he or a member
of his clan spoke or he sent his messenger with a his rod or other
recognized insignia to any of the heathen territories, he was held in
reverence by noble and commoner alike. He guarded the sacred flame; he
was sought out by the relatives of the dead to find out whether he had
seen portents concerning their deceased kinsfolk. He received one third
of any booty won by warriors in battle.*” \[Translation by Rowell\]

Thus, even if elements of this account, such as the presence of just one
such figure for all Balts, or him being the anti-pope, are Christian
concoctions, the key point that he was an important figure is likely
founded in truth. Notably, him being a fire-ritualist is confirmed by
the records of rival Christianity church from the same century. It is
however possible that Peter conflated the ritual rod for his name as
Krivi. Then the archives of the German crusaders mention how the heathen
priests of the Balts claimed that they were able to see the spirit
bodies of their dead warriors ascend to the god-realm at cremation. The
German crusader Livländische Reimchronik also independently confirms
that a priest collected a third of the booty from a battle as offering
to the gods. Then we have another Christian Simon Grunau’s account
similar to the one above from the 1500s. Also from the 1500s, the
Lithunian records explicitly mention the heathen high-priest of
Gediminas known as Lizdeika who is said to have performed rituals and
“sorcery” for the duke. In support of this even after Christianization
in the 1500s several highest level bureaucrats recorded their descent
from this ritualist of Lizdeika, a phenomenon consistent with the
existence of a powerful ritualist class whose descendants (some of whom
still underwent cremations which is proscribed by the Isaist cult) were
able to maintain influence despite the changes.

Thus, we suggest that this powerful Lithuanian ritualist class shared
some features of the Indo-Aryan and Iranian ritualist castes such as a
strong oral tradition with a grammatical apparatus that helped preserve
the language in a relatively archaic form. Moreover, they were also
likely specialists in royal and military rituals that specifically
allowed them uphold the religion by urging the warriors or even directly
leading warriors in battles against the Abrahamists. Their close
connection with the military class and function as bureaucrats meant it
was harder for the Christians to insert themselves as religious
intermediaries for the military elite.

In conclusion one may ask how this might relate to the divergences of
old Indo-European. We favor a clade that unites Greek and Armenian with
Indo-Iranian (Greco-Armeno-Aryan). On the other side Balto-Slavic is a
strong grouping. So how does on account for the special relationship of
them with the Indo-Aryans? We posit that while the Tocharian, Germanic,
Celtic and Italic branches left early from the Yamnaya zone in the
steppes, the Balto-Slavic ancestors remained behind, even if they were
closer to that part of tree with the above or a clades branching after
them. Greco-Armeno-Aryan branch had split even earlier from all the
above Yamnaya-based branches. Of them Greco-Armenian moved south
separating from the Aryans. The Aryans expanded subsequently in the
steppe zone (the details of when and in how many waves the reached India
are still not entirely clear) and now interacted with the Balto-Slavics
who remained behind. As a result they shared certain linguistic
developments (like satemization and RUKI; also perhaps genetics like
R1a1). They also shared specific religious developments such as the
Parjanya-Perkūnas and other elements alluded to above. In addition to
these we suggest that they also shared to a degree certain traditions of
preserving and analyzing oral ritual incantations and a guild of
ritual-specialists with the Indo-Iranians. This survived relatively
intact in the Balts as they were fairly isolated after their initial
entry into their new homelands and provided a certain resilience to
their religion and language.

::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: A German missionary Melanchthon wrote the below verse in
1545 CE regarding the Balts confirms the above statement in the first
Lithuanian Christian book:  
“*There is a savage race of rustics under the North Star*  
*that has as yet no notion of true religion*  
*but worships as deities blue-green snakes*  
*and performs unspeakable rites of goat sacrifice*“.

Rowell notes how Lithuanian leaders did perform such a sacrifice while
concluding peace after war with the Christians. Further, cremations
continued with heathen rites till \~1550 CE. Puhvel also notes that an
antiquarian document from this period records a divinity Puschkaytus
being worshiped in the region who might have been the cognate of
Indo-Aryan Pūṣan and Greek Pan.

Footnote 2: The German Nobel prize winner Guenter Grass in his novel
Hundejahre was still demonizing the old Baltic religion as of recently
by presenting the Krivi, mistakenly considered a priest, as a Nazi. Note
the parallel demonization of the Hindus as Nazis by the Abrahamosphere –
the deeper significance of which very few Hindus realize to date.
