+++
title = "unmāda-carcā"

+++
The Mohammedan scientist Al-Bīrūnī was the model Abrahamistic
investigator of other cultures in whose mold even those of the modern
era are cast, be they from the prathamonmāda or the dvītīyonmāda or
their secular variants. He was quick to recognize and clear state the
following:

“*The heathen Greeks, before the rise of Christianity, held much the
same opinions as the Hindus; their educated classes thought much the
same as those of the Hindus; their common people held the same
idolatrous views as those of the Hindus. Therefore I like to confront
the theories of the one nation with those of the other simply on account
of their close relationship, not in order to correct them. For what is
not the truth (i.e. the true belief or monotheism) does not admit of any
correction, and all heathenism, whether Greek or Indian, is in its pith
and marrow one and the same belief, because it is a deviation from the
truth.*” Sachau’s translation.

From the Hindu, and more generally from the greater heathen, viewpoint
(i.e. Indo-European, Afro-Asiatic or any other) the same is true of all
Abrahamisms and their secular variants – “they are in their pith and
marrow one and the same belief.” Hindus have been locked in a life and
death struggle with the Abrahamisms ever since their first encounter
with them, for by their very existence the Abrahamisms imply a death
sentence for heathenism. In some cases like prathamonmāda the ambitions
might be local (but also note their more expansive Kitos flareup that
presaged the actions of the later unmāda-s), but there is hardly any
doubt the later global manifestations also have global ambitions for
ending heathenism. Again as we have pointed out many times before, even
if one of these unmāda-s have local ambitions or even if they fight each
other with greatest vehemence, when it comes to heathens, they have a
certain resonance with each other as also their secular variants. In
light of this it is notable and disappointing that most of the Hindu
elite have a very poor understanding of the unified pith of Abrahamism.
Of course a major barrier in this regard is the low level of
philological scholarship among the Hindu elite, especially in the old
languages that purveyed the prathamonmāda and dvitīyonmāda. However,
some level of understanding can be more readily achieved by means of the
works of scholars from within the Abrahamosphere such as Jan Assmann and
the Stroumsas.

One of the notable distinguishing entities of Abrahamism are the
unmatta-s who are accepted as prophets by their traditions. The founder
of tṛtīyonmāda realized that there was a “bug” in the formulation of the
previous unmāda-s and wrote into his version of the unmāda-code that
there could be no “unmatta” after him. Before him the founder of the
dvitīyonmāda tried a different trick of declaring himself not just yet
another unmatta but the eka-rākṣasa himself or at least his putra.
Before him the prathamonmatta-s had the archetypal series of the such
figures whose consistent moha-s were the defining scaffold upon which
the latter unmāda-s could build themselves. As Stroumsa notes the the
prathamonmatta-s did recognize the link between a sādhāraṇonmatta and a
prophet, although they are careful to distinguish the two. Jeremiah
29.26 states:  
“*The lord (i.e. the eka-rākṣasa) made you a priest in place of
Jehoiada, and you are now the chief officer in the temple. It is your
duty to see that every man that is mad and makes himself a prophet is
placed in chains with an iron collar round his neck.*”

So right among the prathamonmatta-s we notice the concern for preventing
competing unmatta-s from declaring themselves as a prophet, thereby
implicitly accepting the link between the two. At that stage they are
only calling upon them to be imprisoned not killed.

Again in Hosea 9.7 we encounter this problem. There the eka-rākṣasa has
gotten extremely angry with the prathamonmatta-s for being unfaithful to
him and he accuses them:  
“*The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come;
Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad,
for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.*”

Here the prathamonmatta-s have angered the eka-rākṣasa because of seeing
the prophet as an unmatta. So the internal evidence itself is quite
clear that they did recognize the intimate link between being a prophet
and an unmatta; moreover this is a point which angers the ekarākṣasa.
Likewise we know from the records of the marūnmatta-s that their
Mahāmada was also seen as an unmatta. Given that this danger was always
there, the need arose for more stringent measures discriminating the
sādhāraṇomatta from the unmatta who will be called a prophet. Thus, the
Deuteronomy 13.2–6 gives the clear prescription regarding how this
should be done:  
“*If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives
thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, “Let us go after other gods, which
thou hast not known, and let us serve them,” thou shall not hearken unto
the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams…And that prophet,
or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, because he hath spoken
to turn you away from the lord your god…*” translation by Stroumsa.

There are some notable points here: 1) the punishment has been stepped
up. He is not merely to be “put in chains” but he has to be killed. This
was the formulation that the founder of marūnmāda perfected. 2) One of
the ways the sādhāraṇomatta is distinguished from the unmatta who
becomes a true prophet is that he leads the flock to other gods. So he
is breaking the basic principle of eka-rākṣasa-vāda, which is not just
simple monotheism but the in built Mosaic distinction (vide Assmann)
i.e. the fact that other gods are simply false. Hence, it is not any
particular manifestation of madness that matters but the specific
violation of the Mosaic distinction. Importantly, lists of such
non-prophets are seen in a prathamonmatta scroll fragment from Qumran
and their later commentarial tradition explicitly mentions their
characteristic as having visions of other gods. 3) The use of dreams as
a signal is strongly proscribed. In the heathen traditions of West Asia,
the milieu in which eka-rākṣasatvam emerged, dreams played a notable
positive role. The same is true of the Hindu traditions. In vaidika,
śaiva and pāñcarātrika tradition the dream is an important means of
religious communication or experience. The mantra-s received from a
brāhmaṇa man or woman in a dream do not need special initiation. They
are naturally sacred. But the typical dream can have a character
different from the hallucinations experienced by prophet; hence, keeping
with the process Mosaic exclusion it was very important for the
prathamonmatta-s to exclude the religious experience of dreams due its
potential to interfere with eka-rākṣasa-vāda. Indeed, Stroumsa points
out that the prathamonmatta-s and dvitīyonmatta-s saw dreams as the
handiwork of Shaitan.

Thus, mental illness is channelized through a memetic funnel of
monotheism with the Mosaic distinction to spawn a true unmatta. Inherent
to it is the construct that in addition to negating any heathen vision
it also negates other parallel monotheistic visions, i.e. parallel
Abrahamisms. Thus, dajjāl of the marūnmatta-s is seen as a
prathamonmatta. But a heathen should not be too caught with this because
it is purely an internal issue of Abrahamism that does change their
equation vis-a-vis the heathen.

The importance of this funneling becomes apparent when one considers the
systems that shared certain elements with Abrahamism but fell short of
the real thing. While not in chronological order, to start with we will
consider the case of Bardaisan, the Syrian scholar and his son
Harmonius. Bardaisan, likely born a Babylonian heathen, converted to the
pretamata in his youth. As a missionary in Edessa he met the Indian
embassy with brāhmaṇa-s and bauddha-s on their way to Rome. He is said
to have extensively interacted with them compiled what he learned in the
process into a book. He was impressed by the brāhmaṇa-s and was
particularly enamored by their worship of an image of a deva. He
declared that this image of the brāhmaṇa-s was actually that of the
cosmic Christ who was the same as the cosmic creator of Plato. He then
melded the ideas he heard from the brāhmaṇa-s with those of Plato to
create a new preta system:  
“*Above is god and below is darkness. In between are the four pure
elements, white light, red fire, blue wind, and green water. When chance
disturbed the primeval harmony of these pure elements, darkness entered
the mixture and evil came into the world. Only the coming of Christ, the
first thought or the Logos, was able to restore order in the resulting
chaos.*”

In addition he praised the laws of the brāhmaṇa-s, which avoided
unnecessary death sentences and provided the opportunity for repentance
via penance (in stark contrast to the prathamonmatta law) as being a
superior system.

Some modern pretācarin-s have seen Bardaisan as adopting these heathen
ideas as part of the usual preta strategy of acculturation of the
heathens before complete conversion, in particular of his Greek and
Iranian audience. However, clearly the early church did not see it as
anything like that – Bardaisan was not a major success as a missionary
with the Iranians or Greeks. The Romans quickly defeated the chief he
had converted and broke up the preta intrusion. He humbly surrendered to
the emperor and his own missionary activities met with hardly any
success. If anything the church itself found him to be a heretic.  
His compatriot pretācarin Ephrem firmly condemned him and sought to root
out his teaching:  
“*And if he thinks he has said the last thing*  
*He has reached heathenism,*  
*O Bar-Daisan,*  
*Son of the River Daisan,*  
*Whose mind is liquid like his name\!*”  
He went on to add: “*There is such a reasonable sound to the man’s
writings that common people do not see the madness beneath*.”

The “reasonable sound” is his professing the preta-mata whereas the
“madness” is the heathen thought he had adopted. If he was bad for the
śavasādhaka-s, his son Harmonius made things worse by wholly
incorporating reincarnation of the Indians, denial of the resurrection
of the preta and worship of planets and Zodiacal deities. Thus, his
“madness” failed Abrahamistic filter and fell precisely in the
category which Deuteronomy 13.2–6 sees as fit for execution. Thus,
Abrahamism has a certain internal “thermometer” which can sense whether
a doctrinal patina is strategic acculturation which is good for takeover
of heathens, or actually a dangerous counter-intrusion of heathenism
into their own doctrine. This sensory process had been perfected in the
midst of the prathamonmatta-s well before the pretācarin-s and
Bardaisan. [We know that with the rise of Neo-Platonism and Hermetic
traditions, prathamonmatta-s were being absorbed into syncretic or even
openly Hellenistic traditions on a
large-scale](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/a-greco-semitic-apollonian-ritual-and-the-heathen-assimilation-of-paleo-abrahamism/).
This led a quick response where the [errant were killed or cut
out](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/a-greco-semitic-apollonian-ritual-and-the-heathen-assimilation-of-paleo-abrahamism/).

Thus, Bardaisanism can be seen as a blunting of Abrahamism by heathenism
and it paved the way in the Iranic empire for yet another such cult,
which while acquiring partial Abrahamistic traits fell short of the real
thing – Manichaeism. It emerged in the Abrahamistic system closely
affiliated with a prathamonmatta-pretāśraya branch followed by Iranians.
By accepting the preta, the founder of dvitīyonmāda as a deity and
declaring himself as his follower, Mani started close to the
dvitīyonmāda. But he multiplied the preta into several clearly
distinct preta-s, a cosmic one like Bardaisan, an apocalyptic savior,
and also a martyr figure. He then adopted various figures outside the
prathamonmatta world as parallel prophets of other parts of the world
namely, the tathāgata, Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra and Zarathustra. Adopting Indic
reincarnation, like in Bardaisanism, Mani was declared to be the avatāra
of not just the preta but also the tathāgata, Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra and
Zarathustra. In those incarnations he had not revealed the whole stuff
but now as Mani he was delivering the final complete message.

Thus, Mani’s cult reeks of the classic Abrahamistic neuro-atypical
tendencies but contrary to its Abrahamistic roots it: 1) was willing to
concede prophet-hood to very distinct figures outside of the Abrahamic
prophetic lineage. 2) Rather than monotheistic funneling it embraced a
certain polytheism by multiplying the preta figures and creating a
hierarchy of divinities that moved it far away from the Mosaic
distinction. 3) As it moved from the West Asian epicenter eastwards it
increasingly adopted bauddha and āstika ideas rather than the other way
around.

However, what it retained in common with dvitīyonmāda was aggressive
proselytism and Mani had created the precursor of the idea of the “last
prophet” which was to be the capstone of tṛtīyonmāda which followed it.
However, lacking the key Mosaic distinction of Abrahamism it was
overwhelmed by the unmāda-s and in China where it lingered it was
absorbed by the Bauddhas – ironically in the only Manichaeist temple
that survives today in China Mani is worshiped as a tathāgata.

That leads us to the Bauddha-mata which at that time was an exuberantly
missionary religion – a notable departure from the Indo-European
religious archetype, with the notable exception of Zarathustra’s cult.
Its founder Siddhārtha probably had a neuro-atypical streak – his sudden
renunciation of a successful family life, which is lionized in their
tradition, looks suggestive, as also his extreme reactions to the known
downsides of the human condition. He was rather eager to deliver his
apparent insight to the lay, similar to a prophet or the preta from the
Abrahamistic world – a marked departure from an āstika śramaṇa. Indeed
this missionary zeal persisted strongly among his successors and they
sought to spread his cult both eastwards and westwards. In the east
there was considerable success in the domains of Burma, China, Korea,
Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. But what happened in the west? We
believe based on the available evidence that the symmetric missionary
activity did take place there. However, there it came up against
Abrahamism with which it resonated in part but only to get assimilated.
In the process it did cause some splintering, which we see in
Bardaisanism (only in part as the proper Hindu role is stronger there),
Manichaeism and other “failed” gnostic syncreticisms. Thus, while
sharing certain features with Abrahamism the Bauddha-mata failed in the
west in all likelihood due its inability to cut the Gordian knot of the
Mosaic distinction. Instead, it ended up conferring a new tool, namely
universalist ambitions via missionary action to the dvitīyonmāda.

Before the tathāgata, Zarathustra departed from the IE religious
archetype. Ironically, he rose within the Indo-Iranian tradition, which
was perhaps closest to the original traditions among all the branches of
IE, and he proudly declares his status as a zaotar (=hotṛ). While we
have little evidence to exactly determine his possible neurological
state, he did adopt an exclusivism, which parallels the Abrahamistic
exclusivism centered on the deities of the heathen Semitic pantheon
Yahveh or El. Importantly, he also displayed iconoclasm combined with a
missionary spirit, which unlike that of the Bauddha-s had a prominently
militant dimension. Here, indeed he came close to these Abrahamistic
traits. However, centering his devotion on the Varuṇa cognate Ahura
Mazda he could not escape the grip of their Āditya-background with the
coupling to Mithra being almost impossible to break. Thus, he fell short
of the Abrahamistic monotheism and ended up with a certain flavor of
henotheism. Moreover, his cult was heavily “re-initialized” by the older
Iranian religion after his death. Nevertheless, we posit that
Zoroastrianism, while falling short of real Abrahamism, contributed the
militant missionary facet (Holy war) and iconoclasm in the least to the
early Abrahamism of the prathamonmatta-s. Thus, we see what Jan Assmann
recognizes as the peculiar and even awkward juxtaposition of the older
priestly religion alongside monotheism with the Mosaic distinction in
the early prathamonmatta literature as being a possibly related to this
infection of ideas from the Iranic side. In conclusion, while the
monotheism of the prathamonmatta-s might have interacted with the cult
of Zarathustra and received some features from it, the root Abrahamism
can still be distinguished by the Mosaic distinction. Additionally it
was probably also influenced in its early history by the monolatory of
the Pharaoh Akhenaten. We posit that this distinction itself arose a
result of a specific neurological manifestation of its early prophets
that then like a memetic prion channelized emerging unmāda-s in its
mold. This explains the importance of having a proper Abrahamistic
lineage of prophets (common to all the three fundamental
eka-rākṣasa-vāda-s with none of the universalizing accommodation of
Mani).

In this regard, one should point out that on the ground this distinction
was clear in West Asia. The Zoroastrians, both Iranians and those desert
Arab groups who followed the Iranian religion, clearly distinguished
themselves from Abrahamism which they termed the “religion of the book”.
The pro-Iranian Arab heathens in Makka-viṣaya pointed to Mahāmada that
the Zoroastrians had already defeated one of the “peoples of the book”,
i.e. the Byzantines and they would likewise defeat the other such book
cult i.e. that of tṛtīyonmāda too. Conversely, as Iranicists (e.g.
Daryaee/Bosworth) have previously pointed out, al Ṭabarī mentions that
Mahāmada while being the first tṛtīyonmatta was unhappy that the
Zoroastrians had defeated the pretācarin-s because they were like him a
“people of the book” (note the primal preta-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi).
Accordingly, he called upon the ekarākṣasa to send him a prophesy that
the marūnmatta-s would destroy the Iranians.

Finally, we come to the secular manifestations of Abrahamism. As we have
noted earlier, in the European lands conquered by pretonmāda, heathen
knowledge made come back starting with the Renaissance down to the the
so-called enlightenment and was critical for the return of science in
the west. But this alarmed the bed rock of Abrahamism on which western
power had rested. The counter-attack by Abrahamism resulted in yet
another assimilation of the heathen comeback with formulation of western
secular thought, today often manifest in liberalism (a more extreme
version of it is the socialism spectrum). This liberalism and its many
branches are seen as very attractive by the deracinated Hindu elite. But
we posit that it maintains the critical inheritance of Abrahamism,
namely a secular version of the Abrahamistic foundational principle of
the Mosaic distinction.

Here we may quote Jan Assmann duly:  
“*I use the concept of the “Mosaic distinction” to designate the most
important aspect of this shift. What seems crucial to me is not the
distinction between the one God and many gods but the distinction
between truth and falsehood in religion, between the true god and false
gods, true doctrine and false doctrine, knowledge and ignorance, belief
and unbelief. This distinction is struck and then erased, only to be
reintroduced on later occasions in an exacerbated or attenuated form.*”

Accordingly, what we see is a comparable position in
secularism/liberalism where there is a clear distinction of truth and
falsehood. Any conversation with a secular/liberal will eventually throw
up this tendency, where the secular lets it known that his
position/doctrine is a the one true one with others being plainly and
self-evidently false. In particular, the secular might situate his sole
doctrinal truth vis-a-vis the heathen Hindu dharma. This may manifest as
what the Hindu activist Malhotra might term as “western universalism (in
reality secularized Abrahamism)” – it is universal because the
alternatives are seen as intolerably false. Thus, when a deracinated
Hindu accepts secularism/liberalism he has essentially opened the door
for Abrahamism, which will eventually result in his framework being seen
as false. As we we have discussed at length before [Abrahamisms also
have the quality of memetic
viruses](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/),
so these can be seen as part of their strategy of attenuating the host
response. Secularism/liberalism also captures the essence of the
“underdog-felicity” which forms one of the the psychological
underpinnings of Abrahamism – where you have tremendous feeling of
felicity by being a, rooting for, or seeing yourself as an oppressed
underdog. Physiologically, this feel-good effect might be explained by
this cluster of Abrahamistic memes triggering an endorphin release or
psychologically as easing your existing sense of guilt. In its extreme
this underdog-felicity manifests as the urge for or the lionization of
martyrdom, which is a strong unifying feature of Abrahamism.
Liberalism/secularism runs off generating such felicity in its
proponents when they enact its tenets.

Those who are attached to secularism/liberalism have wondered if such an
evolutionary track might be followed by marūnmāda. We posit that it has
already gone through such a phase over 1100-1200 years ago and has
largely overcome it. Thus, today Dr. Abu Bakr shows the way ahead. The
discovery of Sanskrit and its knowledge posed a heathen challenge to
Abrahamism in Europe which resulted in an unfolding which cannot be
easily discussed in public. Likewise Akbar’s apostasy and Dara Shukoh’s
syncreticism represent parallel challenges to the tṛtīyonmāda. But those
challenges were overcome too. So the heathen rather than clinging to
fond hopes should be prepared for the real battlefield of the
civilization clash where matters are decided by the blood of men.
