+++
title = "Of lives of men; of times ofxa0men-II"

+++
[Of lives of men; of times of
men-I](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/11/07/of-lives-of-men-of-times-of-men-i/)

Vidrum: “When we attended the discussions at the Right Wing Debate club
we heard the president Rammandir Mishra repeatedly emphasize that South
Asian civilization was not a ‘history-centric’ civilization and that
history-centricism in the form of the urge to fix dates for the veda-s,
itihāsa-s and the purāṇa-s is an imitation of Abrahamism among the
Indians. Another prolific author and debater Iraamaavadhaaran declared
that we had to move away from an outmoded history of kings, generals and
dates and talk more about the common people and their folk culture,
performing arts and food. He went on to add that this obsession with the
former had undermined history’s status as a science and relevance for
the people. Clearly you two seem to differ in this regard. You seem to
emphasize both history and that pivotal role of special individuals.”

Lootika: “Ah the evil phrase ‘South Asian’ – and right wing they call
themselves\! You have spent enough time with us by now to realize that
we plainly hold the view that a people which ignores the study of
history goes down in death unknowingly. If indeed we Hindus have ignored
history then it is not something to celebrate but to correct. It is
something which must even extend to scripture – be it the śruti or the
āgama – you may, hence, term us as aitihāsika-s. That is why, despite
all the fundamental flaws of the tāthāgata-matam and the author’s
biases, I have respect for the endeavors of the Tibetan lāmā Taranātha.
It should be obvious to the beholder that in the piloting of history
special individuals matter more than a whole mass of flotsam
individuals, as they vulgarly remark: ‘pūrṇa-kara iva kharaviṣṭāḥ’. In
understanding this comment there is need for nuance as no notable figure
lives in isolation. To give a rough mathematical analogy, real and
imaginary number by themselves can be pretty dry but a little bit of
both in the form of a complex number gives a lot more interesting stuff.
But then I should also state that we need to distinguish the science of
history from archaeology. In the latter, data on the mass and their
statistics can deeply inform. Thus, archaeology as a statistical study
of the bulk is of great significance to provide a backdrop for history,
where the case study of the exceptional dominates. Then there is also a
real place for the experience of the first person kind. It is something
which our ancestors in their study on aesthetics term the sthāyibhāva.
This is something only history in its narrative form can produce. Hence,
the great historian kavi of Kashmir remarked:

‘saṃkrānta-prāktanānanta-vyvahāraḥ sacetasaḥ |  
kasyedṛṣo na saṃdarbho yadi vā hṛdayaṃ gamaḥ ||’

Marching through endless happenings of history, is there a conscious
being  
whose heart such a narrative would not enter?

Thus, if history is about the lives of people, archaeology is about the
times of people.”

Sharvamanyu: “I get the part of the importance of history but on what
basis would you place such confidence in the importance of the
exceptional individual in the pivoting of events in history.”  
Somakhya: “If something is mappable to a mathematical principle it is
often difficult to escape its constraints. But of course one has to be
very careful in being sure about the applicability and correctness of
such a mapping, especially outside the domain of physics. To illustrate
the point of the force of mathematical principles imagine a ladder of
given length placed against the wall on one end and touching the ground
on the other. It is free to slide along the wall and the ground thereby
touching the wall and the ground at different heights and distances from
the base of the wall. Then we can ask the question that given a certain
height of the wall at which the ladder touches it at what distance from
the base of the wall will it touch the ground? As you know this is
determined by a mathematical principle, a curve known as the astroid.
For a ladder of given length, we cannot have a height on the wall or
distance on the ground from wall’s base that violates this mathematical
principle. Hence, if we map a comparable two-value optimization problem
on this principle then we have clear constraints. A more involved
example, which you may have studied a bit, is the remarkable central
limit theorem. For many distributions, irrespective of the shape of the
distribution, if you draw repeated samples and take their means they
would be normally distributed around the mean of that distribution.
Thus, the central tendency as estimated by mean might be inferred by
sampling, even if we have no clue of the shape of the distribution. Now,
there are other peculiar distributions which display an unusual
membership scenario – a well-known example is the distribution named
after the mathematician Cauchy – here the central events are more common
and the infrequent events are way more extreme than a ‘regular’
distribution like the normal distribution. Our investigation of
historical events and the effects of individuals suggest that they they
follow a distribution, like the former. Hence, they are constrained by
the properties of such a mathematical principle. A corollary to it is
the massive or pivotal role of the rare individuals whose effects are
way more extreme than the rare individuals in a normal distributed
scenario.”

Sharvamanyu: “OK, that’s an interesting argument. What about the nuance
regarding the mass which Lootika mentioned?”  
Lootika: “When there is an exceptional figure there needs to be enough
of those among the masses who can resonate with and act on behalf of
that figure for the exceptionality to shine through. The size of that
mass is what depends of the times of men.”  
Somakhya: “Think of a Boghorju, a Jelme or a Subedai, Chingiz Khan or
the men who rallied around the Mahārāja of the Marāṭha-s. Such exist way
more frequently but by themselves they cannot carry the power, but like
a conducting metal when there is a source of electricity they can do so.
Through the length and breadth of our land there existed local strongmen
like a Tānājī or a Sūryājī Mālusare but only under the exceptional
Mahārāja they could be fort-conquerors.”

Vidrum: “Regarding the point about sthāyibhāva, I can see the generation
of the states of vīrya and vairāgya from historical narratives of the
exceptional rājan-s. Which Hindu would not feel that on hearing a
narrative like the killing of the Mohammedan Afzal Khan by Śivājī or the
heroic struggle of Pratāpa Siṃha against the Mogol tyrant.”  
Sharvamanyu: “I felt it several times myself – there is nothing that
touches the core than the vīrya-rasa emanating from a well-narrated
account of a hero’s exploits.”  
Lootika: “It should not stop with just touching the core it should
produce that sthāyibhāva upon entering it (hṛdayam gamaḥ). Indeed, among
the those of the second varṇa or those performing that function, a major
function of itihāsa is the generation of such a state.”  
Sh: “Of course – I can say it has not merely touched my core but
transformed it. But what are the other rasa-s that might emerge?”  
Lootika: “Take hagiographies – at they core they are histories, albeit
exaggerated ones. For many people, especially followers of the
uttara-mīmāṃsā doctrine, digvijaya-s of foundational teachers, such as
Śaṃkara, and others produce not just a romaharṣaṇa but a deep
transmutation of the core much as a the digvijaya of a kṣatriya may
produce in V2s as well as some brāhmaṇa-s like us. This is an expression
of the adbhuta and some times the kāruṇya rasa. While I am not a
follower of the uttara-mīmāṃsā doctrines or those schools, I must say
certain hagiographies produce some effect, even in me, though not as
long- lasting or profound as those experienced by the adherents. For
them it lingers truly as sthāyibhāva-s. Thus, a important aspect of
history is the account of the lives and deeds of great people, which
produce such sthāyibhāva-s in the reader or listener. This was
importantly recognized by our kavi-prajāpati-s starting from
Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana.”

Vidrum: “But then you all have remarked before: ‘na tasya pratimā asti
yasya nāma mahad yaśaḥ’ In line with that, many of our key figures have
not left behind biographical material or memoirs. Nor are they
celebrated in such. Who ever celebrated the Aulikara Yaśodharman despite
his most heroic deeds or emperors of the Coḷa-s from the Draṃiḷa
country? So, do you think you are creating some new fancy of celebrating
the lives of men contrary to tradition, which you as brahmins defend.”  
Lootika: “Not at all. While it is not the practice of brāhmaṇa-s to
engage in svastuti, as ordained by the law-giver Manu, that statement
does not mean a proscription of biographical statements or memoirs. The
role of biography is well-recognized by the South Indian kavi Daṇḍin,
Bāṇa of Kānyakubja or the Kashmirian kavi Kalhaṇa. Since, the
brāhmaṇa was not prone to svastuti one might not see such but they
never shied from brief but clear expositions of their biographies
including statements on their intellectual prowess. They knew it was
their works (even as a kṣatriya’s conquests) which mattered and stood to
immortalize them, not an account of what they ate or their sexual
exploits. Who gets a biographical magnification has changed over time.
Some like emperor Trasadasyu, praised by my ancestors as a half-god in
the śruti itself, have passed out of the memory of all but the most
conscious practitioners of the śruti. But their successors like
Rāmacandra the Ikṣvāku or Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra have got theirs in the age
when we celebrated such heroes. Now they have transmogrified into gods.
Other heroes of the martial type, like Samudragupta, did not enter the
public imagination much but Candragupta-II Vikramāditya entered it with
almost a mythology. After this phase, the Hindu consciousness was seen
shifting towards hagiographies of religious rather than regal figures.
However, Bhoja was one last figure of the great rājarṣi archetype who
again nearly entered mythology. The coming of the Meccan demons
enshrined the two great Chahamāna-s, Pṛthivirāja and Hammira, in the
Hindu mind, as objects of kāvya, for their heroic last stands. But
defeat of the Hindu military order before the army of Islam, despite
prolonged fight backs, as in Vijayanagara, saw our people look more
towards hagiographies and forgot the heroic figures until much closer to
our times Śivājī restored the Hindu confidence. Thus, it is the changing
landscape of people’s outlooks that has selected for the caritra-s
rather than there being any tradition to keep away from them.”

Sh: “Lootika alluded to the brief biographical statements of the
brahmins. So do we learn anything of note at all from these brief
biographical statements you allude to?”  
Somakhya: “While the biographical details might be brief, one important
point we learn is that the old Hindu education system clearly had a
mechanism to fast-track scientific talent. We can cite examples from all
over the country, in different periods, and in different scientific
endeavors. Jīvaka a biologist/physician was professor at Ujjaini by 20.
Lolimbarāja in Maharashtra was physician who had compiled a new
pharmacopoeia by 25. Āryabhaṭa was professor of astronomy and
mathematics before 23 at Pataliputra. The Kashmiran astronomer
Vaṭeshvara was a professor by 19. Mañjula, the Magadhan astronomer,
who was one of the early users of differential calculus in Hindu
tradition, was a professor at 20. Jayanta Bhaṭṭa the Kashmirian wrote a
grammatical treatise at age 10. The great Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājin of
Cerapada was astronomer of note by 23. Gaṇesha daivajña in Maharashtra
derived his hyperbolic approximation of the sine function at
approximately the age of 14. Raghunātha paṇḍita of nava-nyāya was a
paṇḍita by 18. All authors are seen writing mature treatises by the
stated ages as we learn mostly from their autobiographical notes. We can
also look back at our historical greats and note that Bhāskara-II
writing his work at 36 was already quite senior compared to the rest. As
we can see from our own curricular educational experience, which
thankfully is finally coming to a close, this fast-tracking to make most
of people at the height of their intellectual and physical capacity is
something the modern system in our nation woefully lacks.”

Sh: “That’s indeed seems to lend support to your hypothesis that genius
mostly expresses itself early in life. Returning to narratives. I guess
the ‘hagiography’ of a scientist is mostly lacking in our tradition.
Perhaps, you might include the accounts on Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājin or
Āryabhaṭa but they might be termed by the undiscerning as too sparse to
produce sthāyibhāva-s. If you were to produce such a ‘hagiography’ of
one, whom would you pick one, say of our times of or close to it, which
will have the effects that Lootika quoted Kaḷhaṇa as mentioning – and
narrate it to us if you are so inclined.”  
Somakhya: “This is the tricky part. I don’t necessarily see a need to
produce a complete ‘hagiography’ most of the times. When we are looking
at a scientist it is often their own work which speaks. You would need
to grasp the science – once you do so, it speaks loudly and clearly –
something a hagiography may or may not ever achieve. When we take
mleccha scientists/mathematicians, like say a Leonhard Euler, Carl
Gauss, Bernhard Riemann, John Herschel or Charles Darwin not much of
their the routine caryā and vyavahāra may intersect with us or be worthy
of emulation. We truly belong to a different religio-cultural milieu and
there is no need to transplant theirs into ours. Indeed, we sometimes
see foolish scientific imitators among our people who transplant their
caryā in our midst rather than their sattva and think that it is the
real thing. But to us is mostly their work which speaks clearly and that
is all that matters to and intersects with our own sphere when we try to
reproduce or emulate that – it is that which produces a distinct
sthāyi-bhāva, which we would definitely place in the domain of the
adbhuta.

Yet, since you ask we would pick Śrinivāsa Ramānuja for a special
consideration among those of our own people. There is certainly none
like him in recent or distant memory and his life needs no special
narration to you all. Nevertheless, as you have given me the chance, I
will use it to give word to a few thoughts in his regard. The lay man
with very limited mathematical education or imagination gets only some
vague sense of his greatness, in most part because of the
romanticization of his story – the ‘hagiography’ – if you may. But those
with a moderate mathematical education, who attempt to even
superficially reproduce that part of his work which they can grasp, get
a glimpse of a supreme greatness, which can be latent in the human
brain, which one cannot but tend to associate with the realm of the
highest adbhuta – the daiva. If this is the experience of the moderately
educated, then what to say of the gaṇitajña who swims in the ocean of
that vidyā. It is clear that Ramānuja himself was aware of his access to
a higher channel – that is why, I would say, he termed his vidyā as
directly emanating from Śrī, the mistress of all opulence – a connection
to something deeply rich.

The once vigorous Hindu tradition of mathematics had lost its
subcontinent-wide connectivity with the irruption of the Meccan demons
in the late 1200s. But remarkable developments occurred due to a handful
of great intellectuals culminating in Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājin in Cerapada.
But after that it was almost as if the break was final. There was no
Hindu of note even as a Newton, an Euler, a Lagrange, and a Gauss piled
on among the mleccha-s. We were at our lowest ebb, when Ramānuja arose.
It is not that he came from a lineage of great intellectuals. His line
while belonging to a sect of vaiṣṇava V1s, which had a solid tradition
of the śastra-s like their other non-vaiṣṇava coethnics, was not
particularly accomplished in recent memory. Yet, he arose in their midst
like the god Vaiśvānara, slumbering in the logs, suddenly leaping forth
in all fury at the commencement of the ritual and establishing that
continuity with the earliest fires of Manu, the Bhṛgu-s, the Aṅgiras-es
and emperor Bharata. Single-handed, for a good part in isolation, he
literally spanned the gap between the brāhmaṇa-s of Cerapada and the
ground of Euler, Gauss and Riemann, like a stride of Viṣṇu in the battle
against the dānava-s. That is literally so because in school he
discovered for himself the infinite series for trigonometric functions,
thus rediscovering what the Cera V1s achieved. Before he left for the
isle of our erstwhile mleccha conquerors he discovered for himself some
version of the magical zeta function in connection with the prime
distribution problem, thus nearly reaching Bernhard Riemann, on the way
passing through some of Euler’s conquests. Then scaling beyond the
heights reached by none other than Jacobi, by the time close to his
early death he had reached a rarefied realm that gaṇitajña-s of the
highest order could catch up with only much later. And those findings
are linked to all manner of deep mysteries, which the lesser mortals,
like us, can get the barest shimmer of, like the ketu of Uṣas before the
rise of the eye of king Mitra. In his early death, even as he was
uncovering those great mysteries, we almost get a reflection of the tale
of the god Vāyu’s simian son. He soared too high and was threatening the
sun; hence, he had to be felled by Maghavan. Likewise, it almost appears
as though Ramānuja had reached a point where he was connecting to the
deepest mysteries, which the deva-s keep well-hidden from the martya,
and consequently had to die before that. Thus, even if one can only
fathom a little glimpse of his mathematics, one gets the barest view of
the high mysteries – so, can there be another tale which produces more
adbhuta and even some bhayānaka than this?”

[Of lives of men; of times of
men-III](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/12/06/of-lives-of-men-of-times-of-men-iii/)
