+++
title = "Leaves from thexa0scrapbook-2"

+++
As described
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/09/18/leaves-from-the-scrapbook/)
these entries are from the scrapbook of Somakhya.  
***Entry 11; Arasa, year Pramādin of the first cycle:*** It was our
first day at Kshayadrajanagara. I had exhausted all that was there to
talk with my cousins Mandara and Saumanasa by lunch that day. Somehow, I
got past the most unappetizing lunch that my aunt had cooked. Luckily, a
little after lunch the cousins wanted to study for one exam or another
even though it was the vacations. This gave me a chance to sneak out and
go to see my friend Indrasena and his brother Pinakasena. On reaching
there Indrasena first asked me about Vrishchika. I wondered why. I
realized that she had not told him that she and the rest of her family
had gone to Nepal even as I had left for K’nagara with my mother. With
much trepidation he wondered if Vrishchika had lost her feelings for
him. I had to assuage him that knowing the caturbhaginī well they were
not the ones who would communicate what was irrelevant to him. I had to
also tell him that they were after all the caturbhaginī and that
emotions should be secondary in relationship a true vīra might have with
them. This awakened him like Matsya by Gorakṣa.

Pinakasena was also doing stuff in preparation for that famous
mathematics competition that Mandara was studying for. He raised the
question of describing all the following curves with single equation in
a one parameter space: straight line, circle, parabola, hyperbola,
cardioid, lemniscate, tri-lemniscate, tri-hyperbola, 3-flower etc.
Because of the hours we had spent pondering about these curves we were
able to give him that right away as the following polar equation with a
single parameter a:  
![\\rho=\\left(\\cos \\left(a\\cdot \\theta
\\right)\\right)^{\\frac{1}{a}}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Crho%3D%5Cleft%28%5Ccos+%5Cleft%28a%5Ccdot+%5Ctheta+%5Cright%29%5Cright%29%5E%7B%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7Ba%7D%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\rho=\\left(\\cos \\left(a\\cdot \\theta \\right)\\right)^{\\frac{1}{a}}")

![common\_equation](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/common_equation.gif?w=640)

When a=1 it is a circle; a=-1, a line; a= 1/2, a cardioid; a=-1/2, a
parabola; a= 2, a lemniscate; a=-2, a hyperbola; a=3/2, a 3-flower; a=3,
a tri-lemniscate; a=-3/2 a tri-hyperbola with
![120^o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=120%5Eo&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"120^o") asymptotes; a=-3, a tri-hyperbola with
![60^o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=60%5Eo&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"60^o") asymptotes and so on (the n-gon conics). In general if
![a=\\frac{p}{q}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=a%3D%5Cfrac%7Bp%7D%7Bq%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"a=\\frac{p}{q}") where p and q are mutually prime integers then it is a
curve of p lobes or branches. If
![\\frac{p}{q}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cfrac%7Bp%7D%7Bq%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\frac{p}{q}") is negative then it is a diverging curve and if it is
positive it closes with maximal radius of a unit. If ![\\frac{p}{q};
p=1,
q\>1](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cfrac%7Bp%7D%7Bq%7D%3B+p%3D1%2C+q%3E1&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\frac{p}{q}; p=1, q\>1") then the curve internally loops with the
number of crossovers being the floor of the square root of q.

Both Indrasena and Pinakasena were sort of cursing themselves that it
could be so easy. I pointed out that it was indeed the easy part and
pulled out the theorem of the intersection of three ellipses with shared
foci on a triangle and informed the upātreya that it was the least of
the questions that the mahārathin-s were supposed to surmount in such
competitions.

![Neville\_theorem](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/neville_theorem1.png?w=640)

Prove the lines passing through the points of intersections of the three
ellipses with foci on a triangle are concurrent.

Another was to double the cube as the yavana-s did to Apollo [with
ellipses](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/05/23/doubling-the-cube-with-ellipses/).
Then I assuaged him that there was no point struggling for such
competitions – if one was truly a mahārathin one would know it and
competitions should not matter. If one were not a mahārathin one should
study such things just for mental entertainment or knowledge acquisition
and play those games as a professional of which one is a master.

Indrasena then revealed to me how he had figured out a way to find genes
that had really undergone selection in different Hindu populations. We
looked at the genes he identified for sometime and thought about what
they might imply.

**Entry 12; Bhauma, year Pramādin of the first cycle:** It was the day
of the manifestation of Vīrabhadra and Bhadrakālī. As planned in the
evening we went to the temple of Candreśvara where we saw the
electrician who had a shack near Indrasena’s house. He was of a
śūdra-jāti of artisans by origin and was dressed up like Vīrabhadra.
He held a heavy steel trident in his hand and a circle of people had
gathered around him. Even as Mars rose in the asterism of the Kṛttikā-s,
the deshika offered a bali to Bhava with the Puṣṭipati mantra from the
Taittirīya-śruti at the northern balipīṭha. At the fire pit in the front
courtyard of the shrine the deśika then made an offering with the
incantation rudrāya bhaumāya svāhā । as ordained by sage Bodhāyana. Then
the conchs blared and the chariot of Rudra and Rudrāṇī was taken forth.
By then we could see Mars dimly through the fringes of the trees above
the Eastern horizon. The electrician immediately broke out into a
frenzied dance and began to suddenly speak in Sanskrit. Impersonating
Vīrabhadra in his march against the deva-s at Rudra’s behest he began
to jump up and down and whirl his trident with great ferocity. He spoke
of striking Indra and Viṣṇu. He spoke of chopping off Sarasvatī-s
tongue. He roared that he had smashed the face of Pūṣaṇ\! And again he
yelled that he had torn out the eyes of Bhaga. Finally picking up the
skull of a goat he whirled around at a dizzying speed. Any other man
might have collapsed with all that whirling that he did. I watched
bewildered along with Indrasena and Pinakasena as he yelled again and
again beating his ḍamaru. Some of the people gathered there brought ash
fresh from the cremation ground and smeared it on his forehead and
dusted him with it. Then he began chanting: “ so’ham so’ham । jaya jaya
rudra mahāraudra bhadrāvatāra mahābhairava kālabhairava kalpāntabhairava
kapāla-mālā-dhara khaṭvāṅga-carma-khaḍga-dhara
pāśāṅkuśa-ḍamarū-śūla-cāpa-bāṇa-gadā-śakti-bhindipāla-tomara-musala-mudgara-pāśa-parigha-bhuśuṇḍī-śataghnī-cakrādy-āyudha-bhīṣaṇākāra
sahasra-mukha-daṃṣṭrā-karālavadana sarvatomukha viśvatomukha
vikaṭāṭṭahāsa visphārita brahmāṇḍa-maṇḍala viśvarūpa virūpākṣa
viśveśvara । bhadro’ham haribhadro’ham vīrabhadro’ham ।” Then continuing
to beat his drum and running around he began to narrate the incident of
Vīrabhadra emanating an enormous number of ferocious bhadra-s from all
parts of his body.

Then people started asking him questions for oracular prognostication.
He gave answers and they came to us and other V1s for having the answers
translated. Then I asked for a prognostication and he gave me a bad one.
Thankfully he pointed to Indrasena with his trident and said he would be
there to shore me up when that time comes. Pinakasena asked if he might
become a vīra like his brother. He gave a detailed response that after
undergoing rudrāveśa he would unite with a dūtī named Shallaki (śallakī)
and then he would become one. He further added that they would protect
our kula once I, Indrasena, Lootika and Vrishchika die. I found that
answer to be very strange in more than one way and wondered if my
apprehension of the “pattern” was incorrect – after all other than the
caturbhaginī there was never supposed to be another. It hinted at the
existence of an orthogonal kula.

**Entry 13; mṛtamīna:** We returned early next morning to collect
packets of bhasma when we saw the electrician still dancing unfazed. We
heard that he had continuously danced through the night and that he was
going to do so till midday. The sky was overcast and there was moisture
in the air but no rain. My mood matched the somber weather as I pondered
over the āviṣṭa’s prognostication; I was turning over in my mind the
kinds of mantra-prayoga-s that might be able to see me through it and
all the vighna-s that could come in the way. I pondered what
implications of the absence of Lootika might mean when the time came but
I told myself that in the ultimate struggle a man is always all by
himself. The ātreya-s seemed to sense my mood from my silence. Indrasena
suggested that we go to brāhmaṇāhāraśāla to give ourselves to the bhoga
of bhojana. I agreed and somehow convinced my aunt and mother that I
would rather not eat at home. As were walking to the āhāraśāla
Pinakasena wondered if āveśa was avaidika and whether we should give
much attention to it. Indrasena correctly told him that it was entirely
within the vaidika circle though not a codified practice performed by
brāhmaṇa-s as part of their system. He pointed to the āveśa-s had by
brāhmaṇa women during which my great ancient ancestor Kabandha
ātharvaṇa spoke using them as the medium.

Thereafter Pinakasena asked about Rudrāveśa and its foundations. I told
him of it deep Indo-European provenance. In Indo-Aryan tradition we had
the case of Rudra animating the corpse of a brāhmaṇa at the holy town of
Kāyāvarohaṇa in Gujarat and then he walked all the way to Ujjaini where
he is said to have initiated his student in the Pāśupata doctrine. They
say this animated brāhmaṇa was Lakulīśa. The muni in the ṛgveda hints at
possession by Rudra as he is flying in the air. This tradition of
Rudrāveśa continues down to the Bhairava-tantra-s. Even in the medieval
period the brāhmaṇa Appayya Dīkṣita underwent a muni-like possession
using dhattura. Among the yavana-s we have the tale of Aristeas of
Proconnesus who was dead when Apollo animated him and wandered in that
possession to the land of the Central Asian Iranics knows as the
arimaspa-s. Then under the possession of Apollo he is said to have
appeared as crow in Italy. Indeed, even yavana hero Odysseus’s travels
were made known to Demodocus in a possession by Apollo.

**Entry 14; mṛtamīna:** That evening I and the two ātreya-s went up to
the granitic eminence of the Vīrabhadrāśman. Having scaled the rock, for
a while we sat in silence stretching out our legs watching the blazing
eye of the god Vivasvān climbing down at the western horizon. We
pensively felt the weapons in our pockets for in this downward turn of
the Kali age one could never say from where a marūnmatta or some other
dasyu might dart out like a Malimluca who had been slain in the days of
yore by the great vajra-wielding Maghavan. Evidently, Indrasena was
thinking of the great god too for he was non-verbally intoning the
svara-s of the sūkta of Gṛtsamada śaunahotra. As this is something
brāhmaṇa-s do while testing each other on the śruti, I caught the
mantra:

dyāvā cid asmai pṛthivī namete  
śuṣmāc cid asya parvatā bhayante ।  
yaḥ somapā nicito vajrabāhur  
yo vajrahastaḥ sa janāsa indraḥ ॥

Even heaven and earth bow to him;  
indeed, the mountains fear of his fury.  
The soma-drinker who is praised as Vajrabāhu,  
he who has the Vajra in is hand, he, O folks, is Indra\!

Indrasena said that he was still thinking about the rudrāsveśa we had
witnessed and wondered about its general significance. I told him that
more generally we even encounter an equivalent of it in apparently
secular endeavor. So many times after spending a while rationally
attacking a mathematical problem and failing against it like the
vānara-s against the mighty Kumbhakarṇa there is a sudden dawning of
insight. Once you obtain that divya-dṛṣṭi you know you have the answer
even though you do not have all the intermediate steps to the solution.
Once, you have reached that state of insight you can work your way
through the conventional rational steps to fill in everything else to
reach the answer. However, before that, all the rational workout took
you nowhere. The same happens when you make a scientific discovery of a
theory. You see the same data over and over again turning it back and
forth in your mind but all you get in the best case is a foggy vision of
what lies behind everything. Suddenly, when you have that moment of
insight the fog clears. You do not know everything at that instance but
you see a clear path which leads to the correct formulation if you are
trained in the methods of your science. Of course if the mind is not
trained or one does not convert that deep insight immediately one can
lose in sometime by just sitting on it. This to us is not different from
the descent of śiva in to the sādhaka. Of course if he does not have the
recourse of the mantra-mārga he loses that temporary insight in some
time. That is why the “rational” side of religion is important, i.e.,
the serious technical study of the tradition in the Sanskrit language.
Of course our emphasis is on the tradition and not the theorems of
Pāṇini’s grammar. The latter are useful only insofar as they throw
correct light on religion and tradition as the root grammarians
themselves stated.

**Entry 15; abhijānat:** We were at dinner with my clansmen. Unlike the
carefree and completely informal affairs at my house, that of
Indrasena’s or Lootika’s here it was always a dour and serious affair
which matched the mood created by the culinary productions of my aunt. I
have always had some discomfort in their house though they are my
kinfolk and at dinnertime it was particularly so. Thankfully, it appears
as though subtly more consonant genetic combinations have formed among
my other coethnics like the gautamī-s and ātreya-s who, while separated
from me by around 7-9 generations, share some genes as lines of
descending from a common vipra community. That stressed to me the
importance of belonging as part of a larger coethnic community. Mandara
and Saumanasa (and apparently I too) were questioned by my uncle on
various topics of mathematics and physics as dinner proceeded. While I
could have smashed at least some of those questions without batting an
eyelid, I remained silent even as the god of the yavana-s Zeus allowed
Herakles to win in the wrestling match in the first Olympic games.

The conversation lit up a bit when Mandara announced his intention to
study and make robots. My uncle called him an idiot but thankfully did
not squelch the conversation as aunt incited it further. My aunt
questioned him about the dangers that might arise from it. She told him
that ours was a country which had a lot people who earn their living via
manual labor. The introduction of robots would destroy their means of
livelihood. Hence, it would lead to social instability that could be
easily exploited by mleccha-s. For example, there are potters who make
pots for the railways; vegetable sellers who sell vegetables from a
basket on the street corner; people who man the counters and stock
material at the supermarket: a robot could easily take their jobs: then
what will they do? Saumanasa argued that taking such a view would only
keep those who are in the lower economic rungs of society in the same
place rather than giving them a means to explore “better” and more
modern jobs. She felt this would only add to the good of the country
with more people doing “advanced” jobs than cleaning garbage or dredging
drains. Mandara argued that the industrial revolution in England could
be used as a model. The Marxists claimed a disaster would occur due to
the unskilled laborers being rendered irrelevant by the industrial
revolution. However, he argued that the opposite happened in terms of
their individual affluence. He said the market-liberalization in India
gave glimpses that such a thing could happen and we could cope and
prosper from robotization.

There are some key things I do not know precisely enough to make an
accurate prognosis. We first need to know what the human capital of
those who might be displaced by robots is. It is uneven in our nation.
While drain clearance, garbage disposal and the like would certainly
benefit from robotization, we do not believe that it is a given that
those freed from other forms of manual labor by robots can now
automatically perform more advanced tasks that would do greater good for
the country. Hence, robotization cannot work out in too humane a manner
unless it is carefully phased and goes hand in hand with huge political
restructuring that allows management of human capital.

We could look at the country which has had the greatest robotization to
date, Japan. People there have had long lives from at least the medieval
period and generally have been reported as having a low infection load.
There are exaggerated medieval tales transmitted by Europeans of
Japanese living hundreds of years\! This does suggest that there has
been an evolutionary shift in the Japanese population towards a more
K-strategy. In contrast, our nation is located partly in the tropics and
has at least in the past 700 years (aggravated by Islam and
Christianity) has had a much lower life-expectancy. This has selected a
r-strategy. Japan as an island is hard to reach from without and
conquer. Most major powers, after the initial conquest by East Asians, a
possible shaka elite conquest, and before the Americans, failed in doing
so; even then other than the first they could not make a serious genetic
imprint. Our land being a subcontinent can easily be overrun by large
land-bound migrating groups much like the major component of our
ancestry from the Eurasian steppes did. This meant a certain type of
insularity along with a mostly K strategy was much less likely to
develop. While some invasions can be good in infusing new blood, those
by Abrahamists can be disasters as is clear from our case. We believe
these factor have been major determinants of why robotization never
caught on despite proto-robotization having emerged among our ancestors
well-before the first surviving lines of Japanese literature were put
down. This again was felt in our engineering and text production while
both displaying high sophistication and magnitude always had a huge
manual/animal labor component (especially so with respect to text
production compared with the East Asian locus). This also potentially
affects commitment to accuracy and maintaining time (say in railways and
airways even during good weather) in the later Indian labor force.
Moreover, given the likely genetic component of the profound
differentiation in the people of Japan and India, robotization has to be
more carefully considered in our context.

**Entry 16; sambhān:** Lootika of pretty smiles gave me a call when I
was at Indrasena’s house. She told me that they had returned from Nepal
she said she acquired siddhi of the dūrasamparka-prayoga when she stood
before the idols of Kumāra and ṣaṣṭhī installed as per the old
mayūraśikhā and obtained tattvāveśa of peculiar kaumāra-mantra-s I had
imparted her. I asked her if Vrishchika was around as Indrasena might
want to talk to her. She said Vrishchika was very much around and was
wanting to say something very exciting. Vrishchika then came online and
asked if we had read the report about a famous recent conference in a
scientific tabloid. We had not. She then proceeded to read out what was
relevant to us. In summary, physics professor Scott Su from a famous
mleccha university who was leading a team to engineer genius had
announced that he had succeeded in making a super-Han. His colleague
Ming-Ming Dong in Cīnadeśa had managed to precisely turn down the
expression of CHD8 in the cortical neuron precursors along with a
controlled over-expression of Beta-catenin. The resulting super-Han
child was being monitored and was showing signs of genius and might well
have an IQ of 200 in his fourth year. Su excitedly described that scans
revealed that the gyri and sulci of his brain surface resembled that of
Carl Gauss. They were a bit concerned about his enlarged head size,
bloated lateral ventricles and lack of socializing capacity but
nevertheless he felt it was a small price for an otherwise successful
experiment.

Vrishchika and Indrasena were quite satisfied for they had just
published a paper where they found that an unusual gain of PAX6 binding
sites in the delta-catenin regulatory region in a family of brāhmaṇa-s
which had consistently produced several significantly big-headed and
intelligent individuals.
