+++
title = "A prefatory narrative"

+++
Jhilleeka and Prachetas were visiting Lootika and Somakhya. Prithika,
the daughter of the latter two was much excited as she resembled and was
to resemble her youngest aunt in more than one way – they seemed to have
a some special connection. Thus, she clung to Jhilleeka until she was
put in bed. Then the adults went up to the terrace of Somakhya and
Lootika’s house, where Jhilleeka started narrating the special matters
pertain to their visit even as the pleasant prathamī moon shone above
them: “A while back when you and Vrishchika were away Varoli and I had
conspired with Prachetas and Mitrayu to do our summer internships at
labs in Turushkarajanagara. One evening after dinner we went up to the
terrace of the house in which were staying and started plying the
planchette with the hope of snaring a vetāla. I must confess that I
wished to test Prachetas’ mettle to see if he was really up to my level
in prayoga matters. agrajā I wonder if you did something like that with
Somakhya? Lootika merely smiled and said: “I don’t want to break your
narrative with our exploits; pray continue.”

Jhilleeka: “After a while a vetāla did seize our bhūtacakra. He
announced his name Pṛthuroman. I immediately, deployed the mantra known
as Harahuṃkāram and made the vetāla seize Prachetas. He seemed to be
totally taken over by it. Varoli and Mitrayu wanted to intervene right
away but I bound both them with the Sarasvatī-bandha and they were
unable to intervene. Only late that night Varoli broke free and greatly
upbraided me. She even wanted to call Vrishchika and tell her what I had
done but I convinced her that I would ensure that no real harm comes to
Prachetas in the event he is unable to defend himself. He will now tell
you what happened next.”

Prachetas: “Thus, attacked by surprise by my future patnī I succumbed to
the seizure by the vetāla. I took a bus in that state to seizure and
went to what in those days was a little hamlet at the outskirts of
Turushkarajanagara. There, I walked at the dead of night to the boundary
of a cemetery. Despite being a just a hamlet there seemed to be a brisk
flow of corpses which were being fed to Kravyāda. I wandering under the
possession sneaked in through a hole in fence of the cemetery to enter
the grounds. Evidently the vetāla was guiding me there for some reason.
But whatever the reason, I suddenly realized what had happened to me. I
realized that it was my future patnī who had caused this possession –
but at that moment I was livid with anger and wanted to perform a
powerful prayoga to strike back at her. But first I had to get myself
free of the vetāla. My eyes had by then adjusted themselves to the dark
and I saw a corpse of a young man lying in the vicinity. He seemed to
have a noble bearing. I wondered who had left the corpse there without
it being cremated. With some effort I deployed the gandharva mantra and
performed svāveśa with a gandharva, who then drove out the vetāla.
Intended to dispatch the gandharva then at Jhilli so that she might
seized by him like Viśvāvasu seizing a young woman. The vetāla entered
the corpse that I had just seen. The corpse underwent a strange
transmogrification thereafter. The young man aged rapidly and his hair
fell off and what remained whitened. Then the corpse seated itself
cross-legged and began to speak: ‘That girl Jhilleeka who is your friend
is going to be your wife in the not so distant future so don’t let any
harm reach her due to your pratikriyā. I realized that when the vetāla
speaks we get a prognostication. To make him speak more I deployed the
Sarasvatī-pravāha.

He pranced about a bit and then grabbing one hand of his with another he
said sat down and scrapped some ashes and applied it on himself. I
observed him more closely and he looked strangely familiar giving me a
fright for the first time. He then said: “I was a brāhmaṇa like you. I
descended from the clan of a bhārgava or an aṅgirasa. I performed many
vaidika rituals and drank soma. One day when I traveled to
Turushakarajanagara to visit the \#$\*& institute. \[Prachetas:
strangely that happened to be the institute next to where Jhilli and I
worked\]. As I was talking to my host there suddenly a centrifuge spun
out of control in the floor below us and it smashed through our floor
and struck me. Thus, I expired. As I had no close relatives, my corpse
was dumped by the cops after their investigation at the cremation ground
for the general cremation which would take place at 4:00 AM. I glad you
have heard my story. In my pocket lies a letter for a girl who lives in
the Bhatahata sector the city. If you post it so that it might reach her
then good would come to you. But I tell you a death not different from
mine could be yours and your wife’s too unless you become the master of
tīkṣṇatuṇḍa. He then handed me the letter in his pocket and shrieking
loudly ran into the darkness and dropped down about 25 meters away from
me. I snapped out of the āveśa and withdrew the gandharva I had intended
to seize pretty Jhilli. I took the first bus I could get in the morning
and returned to our rental after posting the letter of the animated
corpse. I was brooding over the prognosis of our deaths and wondering
what tīkṣṇatuṇḍa was as I entered our dwelling. I and Mitrayu lived on
the ground floor while Jhilli and Varoli lived on the first floor. Even
as I came in Mitrayu had freed himself from the bandha and had joined
Varoli in screaming at Jhilli. I calmed them all down and even as I did
so I forgot about the strange prognosis.

Jhilleeka: “Last night I had a terrifying dream in which I saw a
spinning object come flying through the floor and kill a young man. I
then saw a young woman jump off a building and die. I narrated it to
Prachetas who told me it was a very deadly sign and mentioned that only
if we figured out what tīkṣṇatuṇḍa was we could be saved. You agrajā and
Somakhya are our elders and guides hence we place ourselves at your feet
so that you may help us cross the noose of Vaivasvata that the young
brāhmaṇa in Turushkarajanagara could not.

Somakhya: “By tīkṣṇatuṇḍa what is meant is the mantra-vidhi of
Śarabheśāna that we shall we reveal to you. It is hard to master even
by a good brāhmaṇa. Many have tried and failed but he who does so shall
be saved like Mārkaṇdeya of the race of the Bhṛgu-s when confronted by
Antaka at the dead of night when the powers of the Dānava-s are
exalted.”
