+++
title = "Mongolica: Chingiz Khan and thexa0rest"

+++
As we have remarked [many
times](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/08/19/the-death-of-chingiz-khakhan/)
on these pages there was Chingiz Khan and the rest. No ruler ever
achieved his kind of conquest before or after him. Hence, whenever I
hear of the latest claim regarding a discovery of the “cause” for the
success of the Chingizid Mongols I remain unimpressed. Yes, we do not
deny that those causes might have contributed in someway small way –
every man needs luck in life to get somewhere. The population of
Mongolia at the time of the great Khan is estimated to have been around
700,000 people, who were divided and lost in conflict. So the available
manpower that the Khan had at his disposal was to start with rather
limited. Further, one must factor in his situation at the start of his
career: whatever truth might have existed in the account that his
ancestors Qabul, Qutula and Ambaqai were notable local Khans Temüjin was
certainly reduced to dire straits upon the assassination of his father.
Hence, the Mongol phenomenon was for most part due to the genius of the
man himself.

Thus, the Jewish chronicler [Rashid
ad-Din](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/05/20/some-notes-on-rashid-ad-din-bin-imad-ud-dawla-abul-khair-and-his-times/)
remarked: “*What event or occurrence has been more notable than the
beginning of the government of Chingiz Khan, that it should be
considered a new era?*” translated by M. Biran based on D Morgan.

How do we place his achievements in the broader context of the earlier
empires of the steppe pertaining to Mongolic peoples? There were
pre-Chingizid Mongols and Turks who achieved many notable things that
contributed to the Mongol system:

1\) The Hun Khanates starting from Shanyu Motun (probably originally
pronounced as Shanyu Bagā’tur) learned the steppe Indo-Iranian style
mobile warfare and made it a mechanism that allowed the Altaic people to
overthrow the steppe Iranians and seize their steppe lands for
themselves. They were able deploy this mode of warfare effectively on
the Han Chinese empire and established a system where mobile steppe
warriors could defeat much larger armies raised by sedentary
populations. From the available record of conflicts in the meticulous
cīna records we see that first Hun Khanate (the Xiongnu) defeated the
Yueh-chih (including likely precursors of the Kuṣāṇa-s) to the west and
the Tung Hu to the east to establish themselves in the Mongolian center.
This was accompanied by the recognition of the region around the Ötükän
mountains near the Orkhon river in Central Mongolia as a holy territory
of the Khans. It is notable that the Chingiz Khan and his successors
recognized this region and established their capital of Qara Qorum in
this region. This supports the continuity hinted by Chingiz recognizing
the Shanyu the Xiongnu as a temporal predecessor in his letter to the
cīna sage Chiu Chuji. Thus, the foundational Hun empire defined the
religious geography of the later Mongolic homeland. Importantly, these
early Huns instituted the system of the imperial guard. This was to play
an important role under Chingiz Khan as the Kheshig commanded by Muqali,
Boghorju and Chormagan Noyan.

2\) The [Uighur
Turks](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/07/09/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-uighur-empire/),
who absorbed the earlier Indo-European Tocharian civilization, showed
how a genuine steppe potentate, which mixes militarism directed against
sedentary populations and trade with them, could emerge. Notably, they
laid the foundations for many aspects of the government of a steppe
empire, which the later Mongols would adopt. These included the first
script of the Chingizid Mongols. Ironically, they were a major bulwark
against the spread of Mohammedanism into the eastern steppes; thus, they
allowed the survival and subsequent efflorescence of heathen steppe
cultures.

3\) In their first phase the Khitans restored power of the Mongolic
people through the conquest of northern China and the remnants of the
Tang dynasty under their resourceful Khan Ambaqai (sinicized as Abaoji).
Thus, they brought to the Mongolic world key political, administrative
(e.g. the postal system) and knowledge developments that had occurred
during the high-point of Chinese civilization. In their second phase,
despite their loss of northern China to the Jurchen, they were able to
reestablish a strong kingdom in central Asia under Khan Yelü Dashi. This
kingdom played an important role in keeping in check Mohammedan terror
and also developing an administrative model which could adopted by
steppe people for the rule. One aspect of this was the development of a
cadre of meritocractic administrators by means of the imperial
examination system. Chingiz Khan drew many of his key administrators
from this pool. Yelü Dashi himself was appointed general of the Liao
kingdom after he passed the highest level imperial exam. After the loss
of the Liao kingdom and his capture by the Jurchen he cleverly escaped
from prison and managed to rally about 5-6000 men to his cause. He then
joined hands with the Uighurs and founded the Qara Khitai kingdom. Yelü
Dashi’s high-point came when he defeated Mahmud Qarakhani to take
Ferghana and Khujand and then a combined force of Mahmud Qarakhani and
Ahmad Sanjar the Seljuk Sultan at Qatwan. This marked the beginning of
the unraveling of the Seljuk kingdom.

These achievements of the Altaic peoples of the steppes had built up
over the years and were available for a sharp Khan to a bring together.
Indeed, we believe that the key Khitan leaders were such Khans. Both
their founder Ambaqai the Khitan and Yelü Dashi achieved much with a
relatively small start bringing together various useful elements from
Chinese civilization and the Uighurs. Ultimately, despite the loss to
the Jurchen Yelü Dashi might have been able to save the Liao kingdom had
his king listened to him. However, his king’s capture by the Jurchen
resulted in that avenue being sterile. So he pursued his own imperial
ambitions as an independent Khan in the west uniting other tribes to his
cause such as the Uighurs.

We generally accept Owen Lattimore’s model (also more recently
reiterated by M. Biran) that Mongolia itself was “prepared” for the
Mongols by the Khitan. As per this scenario they followed the Khitan
from a center in what is now Manchuria or close to it to move into
Mongolia once the Khitan had defeated various Turkic groups that existed
before before them. But how does this square with their link to the
earlier Xiongu Shanyu and the holy center at Qara Qorum? We hold that
after the break-up of the Rouran Khanate one of the tribes descending
from their old confederation but distinct from the Mongolic people, the
Turks (who to start might have had some Śaka ancestry), took power in
the form of the [Kök Türük (Gök Türk = Blue
Turk)](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/03/06/the-epic-on-stone/)
dynasty under Khan Bumin. The Blue Turks followed their predecessors in
accepting the Orkhon region as holy because that is where they erected
the famous Kül Tegin steles under their great leaders Bilge Kha’khan and
his brother Kül Tegin. However, Chingiz does not acknowledge these Türks
as his predecessors rather he skips them going back to the earlier Huns.
This suggests that at this point the Mongolic tribes were pushed to the
East but they did not forget their once glorious past. Following
Lattimore’s suggestion, it does appear that the Menggu/Mengwu tribe
appearing as a relatively minor power in the Tang annals were these
Mongols from among whom the Chingizid arose. The Khitan victory against
the Turkic groups allowed the Mongols proper as one of the related
tribes associated with them regain their foothold in Mongolia. The
Khitans introduced certain innovations to steppe warfare like the
establishment of fortified strongholds along the lines of the old
Indo-Europeans in certain fertile steppe patches. These served as
centers for greater production of materials such as metal for weapons,
some cultivation, brick-making and trade. Thus, when the Khitan power in
the East and China collapsed the Mongols were able to take control of a
much more productive set of networks in the steppe. From the famous
rock-carving on the cliff overlooking the Tuula river facing north
towards Ulan Bator dated to the 1000-1100s of CE depicting the
ancestress doe (Qoa Maral) and the ancestress Alan Qoa suggest that the
Mongols had re-established themselves in Mongolia by then.

Despite all this background the best of the earlier Uighur Kha’khans and
Khitan Khans were not Chingiz Khan. Thus, the backdrop of the buildup of
innovations among the Altaic people, rather than contradicting, actually
shows that Chingiz Khan stood apart from the best the steppe had
produced. There are two sides to this, military and administrative. The
military side is the one which most people have readily grasped. There
have been great kings throughout history but in terms of the power of
the enemies whom he defeated and the sheer extant of his empire the Khan
stands apart. We have described some snippets of that on these pages but
we shall again mention two examples of his military brilliance, one
strategic and one tactical: First, the strategic aspect is seen in his
configuration of his campaigns. The big enemies to the south, the Jin
and the Tangut were objects in need of serious action as settled people
but like the Khitans before him once engaged in combating settled people
he could have lost the base in Mongolia to others who had the advantage
like him, namely powerful mounted cavalry enemies like the Turkic groups
to the west and Islamized Turks even further west. So he proceed
systematically by : (i) defeating and absorbing the Turkic groups to the
immediate west; (ii) [clearing the eastern flank completely by
conquering the Koreans and eastern Khitan holdouts. Similarly, the
northern flank was cleared by defeating all tribal groups to the
north](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/04/22/some-discussion-on-the-siberian-conquests-of-the-mongols-and-the-ainu-in-history/);
(iii) then inflicting a serious blow on the Jin but not engaging them in
their own turf in an involved campaign of taking major fortified
centers; (iv) Conducting the great outflanking operation to the west by
clearing the forces of the Ghāzis and the Rus to a great distance. By
this configuration he ensured that he stabilized a well-defined
home-base for the Mongols. Then he stung the Jin strongly enough to
ensure that they would find it hard to threaten Mongolia while he dealt
with the west but did not engage them in depth right then. Then he
proceeded west to neutralize the serious threat from all other cavalry
powers which could fight by similar means as him. By this he created
strategic depth and a cast a pincer-grip on the Tangut to destroy them
in his final campaign. Through this period he kept the Jin on low burn
after the initial hammering he gave them. Thus he left for his
successors the stranglehold on them which they quickly tightened to put
an end to the mighty Jin. It was this strategic execution of patiently
engaging and eliminating foes that allowed the Mongols to succeed where
others got bogged down. Second, while there are many examples of
tactical brilliance through all his campaigns, one notable point is his
innovative development of military technology like firepower and
siege-craft to take fortified centers of settled zones. This was one
deficiency which Altaic steppe powers routinely had – the inability to
take fortified power-centers settled zones effectively. After Chingiz we
even see a relapse to this state among successor states like those of
the Oirats. However, his development of innovative siege-craft,
firepower, “biological warfare” and hydraulic works to divert rivers in
flooding cities allowed them smash these strongholds like no one before
them. Other innovations included the use of military booms (chains) on
rivers to block naval operations of enemies, like in the campaign to
bring down the Mohammedan Turk Temür Maliq.

In tracking these military achievements one often misses the overall
vision that the Khan had for the making of a new world. For someone who
became an emperor from a minor power center in a desolate land-locked
corner of the world this vision for remodeling the whole of the “known
world” is nothing short of breathtakingly audacious. While we find it
somewhat hard to create a complete description for, a few notable points
stemming from this vision can nevertheless be listed:

1\) Various steppe powers controlled the border of the steppe-land and
the settled zone. When previous steppe powers penetrated deep into
settled civilizational centers they either had to give up their steppe
centers or at best conduct some raids and retreat to their steppe-land
domain. Those groups that did establish themselves in the non-steppe
zone essentially gave up their connection to the steppe-land even if
they reproduced many aspects of it in their new homelands. This is
poignantly seen in the early Indo-European peoples including our own
Aryan ancestors who settled in India. The later waves of their
successors like the Śaka-s and subsequently groups like the Huns also
fall into the above pattern. The only possible exception were the
Kuṣāṇa-s who did achieve something like what the Chingizid Mongols
did albeit on a clearly smaller scale. Importantly, they could not hold
their original steppe centers close to Mongolia, which they lost to the
Altaic peoples. Further, they could bridge their successes in the
eastern and western steppes and India into a completely stable coherent
unit only for a brief period. In contrast, with Chingiz Khan and his
great successors we see a program for the complete conquest and control
of civilizational centers of the settled world into a system of rule
from the steppe. Importantly they were integrated into one common unit
from east to west – perhaps the first “world” system after the early
Indo-European times.

2\) It is clear that at some point while completing the conquest of
Mongolia the idea had crystallized in Chingiz that he should completely
remodel the relationship with other power centers. In operational terms
it is rather remarkable that he managed to get his new Mongol nation to
put his plan into practice. A key aspect of the plan was the kind of
accommodation he showed for different preexisting power structures: He
was rather clear about meritocracy and was willing to take in various
Uighur, other Turkic, Khitan, and Aran/Alan talent for his cause. For
instance he appointed the Khitans Yelü Ahai and Yelü Tuhua to rule over
the lands he took from the Mohammedans in Khwarizm. He was also quite
happy to support and facilitate the mercantile class across ethnicities
understanding the important economic role they played. However, he was
uncompromising towards the Mohammedan power holders and ulema. Likewise,
he showed no mercy for any level of the Jurchen or Tangut and their
sinitic or sinicized power-holders. These he simply destroyed and
replaced with his talent. This was followed by his successors with the
southern Han power centers. This was very different in form and action
from previous client-patron relationship that both steppe-land and
sedentary powers tried to establish. If there was one system that could
have eradicated the Jihad it was this one; the reason it did not
ultimately happen was because ultimately the Mongols were still
operating off a small demographic base – with a certain population of
\~700,000 only that much could be achieved in farther settled lands
(also see below).

3\) The tremendous prestige Chingiz Khan’s clan held long after his
death, also seen in the form of [their enormous genetic
footprint](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/12/23/founding-fathers-and-other-musings/)
directly stemmed from the charisma of the man. Even the Moslem Mogol
tyrants of India merely termed themselves [silsilā-i güregen or the
“line of the
in-laws”](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/10/22/some-vignettes-on-the-provenance-of-the-mogol-tyrants/)
\[of the Chingizids\]. In demolishing all local tribal allegiances and
transferring them to him and his clan he created a entirely new kind of
state that in someway might be seen as a version of some modern states
where the allegiance of the people is to a notional entity termed the
state rather than an ethnic or tribal configuration. Chingiz Khan’s
original vision was clearly one of the ultimate cakravartin – which
literally meant the conquest of the whole world. Hence, no other
independent power configuration was tolerated in any form – if they
resisted they were destroyed. While this destructive side has been much
described and sensationalized, an oft-missed point is the role of
Chingiz Khan as the lawgiver of his people. For the newly re-configured
Mongol nation he provided a comprehensive collection of laws and ritual
practices that were critical for the unity of the Mongol system – the
Ikh Yasag (the Great Yasa). It won the wide attention and wonder, even
if grudging and antagonistic, of several observers including the
Mohammedans Ibn Khaldun, Mirkhond and Juvaini, the Jew Rashid ad-din,
the Armenian Vardan, the Byzantine Georgius Pachymeres and the European
John of Plano Carpini. More than one of these mention the law: “*the
Kha’Khan necessarily needs to be elected for the throne from among
Chingizids by a grand Quriltai. The one who seizes the throne
independently of the Quriltai should be executed.*” The idea here was to
provide for an institutional structure to choose the best to be leader
for a unified Mongol nation. The first violation against it was by
Temüge, the brother of the great Khan, who tried to seize the status of
Kha’khan bypassing the grand quriltai. He was sentenced to death in
accordance with the yasag. It is notable that the yasag had an aspect
paralleled the dharma of the Hindus and maat of the Egyptians. Just as
dharma has the divine dimension of the laws laid down by the great gods
Mitra and Varuṇa (captured in the śruti) at the base of the yasag was
the old “divine law” of the Turks and Mongols known as the törü which is
said to have been promulgated by the god Köke Möngke Tengri. On this
rested the yasag of the great Khan which was like the smṛti brought to
humans by Yama and our law-giver father Manu. Among the Mongols it seems
to have inspired later reforms of law like the “Code of Altan Khan”
promulgated by Altan Khan in the 1500s. The yasag’s influence was so
powerful that even after the conversion of the western Mongols to
Mohammedanism it exerted its influence against the sharia. For example,
Muhammad Shaybani Khan in the 1500s overturned a decision of his Qāzi-s
by stating that the correct decision would follow the yasag of Chingiz
Khan. Similarly, after the execution of a brāhmaṇa (who had told the
marūnmatta-s that their founder was an unmatta) by a shaikh against the
Mogol tyrant Akbar’s wishes we see him increasingly remodeling his law
as per the yasag of Chingiz Khan and moving away from the sharia. This
culminated in Akbar commissioning the production of the illustrated
work, the Chingiz Khan Nāmā, in 1596 CE. Not surprisingly we see the
Mohammedan Badā’ūnī pour his scorn on the yasag. Finally, we may also
mention in passing that it included dimensions, like the tamgha system,
which played a key role in driving the economy of the unified “world
system” of the Mongols.

4\) A part of genius is how you develop what you learn from others. In
this the Chingiz Khan set a precedence which allowed his people to
clearly exceed the previous steppe powers including the Uighurs who in a
sense where their first teachers. Importantly, in the domain of
practical knowledge they were good at picking out things which were
critical and useful with great avidity – medicine and weaponry are two
cases – we see this starting with the great Khan himself taking a great
interest in assembling the best of the knowledge of the world at that
point. The quick adoption of printing and standardizing of text
production went on to allow extensive documentation of the newly
acquired knowledge. This trend continued among the successors of the
Chingiz Khan with Hülegü having Nasser ad-din al Tusi take the books
that mattered most, like those on astronomy and medicine, from the
Hāśīśin library upon the sack of their citadel. He also recognized
the value of a individual like Nasser for his knowledge while
demolishing the rest of the Mohammedan edifice. His brother Qublai
Khan’s astronomical observatory employing astronomers across the
empire was another example of the interest in knowledge in a more
general sense. Finally, Qublai’s chartering of several thousands of
schools throughout his realm allowed this knowledge to plowed back into
the population.

5\) This vision of the of the unified “world” system is encapsulated in
the idea of the Chingizids to have a single script to write all the
world’s languages, thus moving away from the trend of sinicizing which
the Khitans and others had fallen to. For this it is notable that
Qubilai chose the Phags-pa script based on Brāhmī family. This vision
was captured in the Italian painting of Jerome of Prague where he is
shown reading a text in Phags-pa. Along these lines we also see their
effort in composing the [first world
history](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/05/20/some-notes-on-rashid-ad-din-bin-imad-ud-dawla-abul-khair-and-his-times/)
having comprehensive volumes on each of the major civilizations of their
known world. Thus, this helped place their rise documented starting with
the Secret History in the larger canvas of other nations.

Finally, other than demography and internecine conflict a key factor in
the ultimate unraveling of the Mongol system was their approach to
religion. As archetypal heathens they clearly gravitated towards a
version of religion closest in spirit to their own namely the Indo-Aryan
religion. They received watered down versions of it from the Uighurs
first and then the Tibetans. This however, did not translate into a
robust religious policy. Like most archetypal heathens their natural
tendency was to adopt a “secular” (used in the weird Indian sense of the
usage) attitude towards the religion of their conquered peoples. While
Qubilai Khan banned certain abhorrent practices such as halal slaughter
of animals typical of Abrahamists as being against the yasag, the
Mongols mostly left everyone to their own religion, even as some of them
dabbled in various religious systems. As we have detailed before, this
proved fatal against the aggressive Abrahamisms, primarily in the form
of Mohammedanism. In this regard perhaps they were less vigilant than
their predecessors, the Qara Khitai who had mullas conducting Dāyi
activity in their realm promptly rounded up and executed.

In conclusion, one may strike some parallels with the Hindu potentates
of more recent memory. The Vijayanagarans who lead the comeback against
the Islamic Jihad had a fairly strong sense of comprehensively clearing
out the Mohammedans in their early years but lacked the geographically
strategic planning and use of outflanking in their campaigns that
Chingiz showed. This was their undoing in the end. Among the Hindus in
recent times Chatrapati Śivaji alone comes across as a parallel to
Chingiz in his energy and audacity. His geographical strategic planning
was impeccable in many ways like the great Khan. His successors showed
the same lack of the grasp of the religious dimension as the Chingizids.
Importantly, other than Śivajī and perhaps Hambirrāv Mohite and Moro
Tryambak Pingle they clearly lacked a pool of talent for independent
strategic and tactical virtuosity, which we see among the deputies of
the great Khan both from his family and the larger Mongol circle –
Qasar, Tolui, Boghorju, Muqali, Jebe, Subedai and Chormagan. Even with
Śivajī’s greatest successor Bajirāv-I we see among his deputies a
lesser commitment to the great cause – other than Pilājī Jādhav (at some
level also a mentor) and Rāṇoji Śinde the best of his other deputies
seem to have questionable in terms of loyalty. Thus, the achievements of
the Marāṭhā-s, while ensuring our survival to date, still fell short of
their intended goal of re-establishing the unified Hindu nation.
