+++
title = "Marching onward in the American spring but where to?"

+++
We hear in the news that the students (and whoever else) at the
University of California, Berkeley, are in state of ferment. This is
unsurprising in itself given that the it has for long been the center of
American student protests and riots. More generally several top American
universities are refugia of Marxian ideology, which was made irrelevant
in mainstream politics through intense action of the likes of McCarthy
and Hoover. This new round has coincided with the election of the new
mleccheśa and is centered on clashes between the supporters of the said
mleccheśa and the Marxian elements. A connection may also be seen
between these upheavals and earlier ones during the reign of the
previous kṛṣṇa-mleccheśa in the form of the Occupy movement.

We are no strangers to student rebellions. In our own school we were
active in inciting such against preta agents and in college against a
tyrannical head of the department. We had also witnessed with interest
the rebellion that took place among medical students in a military
medical school, which was swiftly squashed by the military authorities.
We might even concede that there might have been some organic elements
in the old Berkeley rebellions relating to the wars the US was fighting
far from its shores with little to gain and notable (by American
standards) loss of lives. However, rather than being an organic movement
the current ferment appears to be one which is underwritten and incited
by certain parties that are quite obvious to the discerning. First,
while we were a somewhat atypical student we still had to earn a degree
via grad school and one thing is certain – you cannot get too far by
wasting your time on extracurricular activities like setting fires on
the college campus or fighting Nazis. Second, we have visited several
American campuses including multiple UCs – one thing is clear – majority
of those students can hardly be described as the most needy or
oppressed. In fact foreign students, such as us, had much greater
pressures to bear due to the uncertainties and threats of the mleccha
immigration system and that we were in an alien land with nowhere to
really go in the event of failure. Yet, most foreign students in masters
and PhD programs lived comfortable lives, often larger than reality –
stacking up credit card bills, enjoying a peculiar kind of student life
with coethnics and others, sometimes mixing in sex, alcohol and other
oṣadhi-s as they gradually meandered their way to a PhD. If this was
their existence what to say of the American students?

Thus, we posit that in most of these schools these students are not
facing some existential crisis or serious want that they need to rebel
and riot. They are not facing any real invasion of Nazis or some other
great power that is going to obliterate whatever freedoms they currently
enjoy. Not that they are too aware that freedom in the Anglosphere is a
mirage which is carefully managed. Yet all in all one can hardly say
their lives are intolerable; quite the contrary. In fact what they seem
to be primarily demanding is shutting down the free speech of those who
do not fit their conception of propriety. As the American psychologist
Jonathan Haidt pointed out the students seem to come out of college more
fragile and less open to ideas. We would simply state that they are
exhibiting the usual convergence with their memetic cousin marūnmāda –
the same policing (e.g. ISIS or the hellhole of the Sauds) and parallel
“blasphemy” laws typical of the classic Abrahamisms.

The Marxian streak in the American academia has long had such culture.
As example one might cite the famous Dick Lewontin. He along with his
fellow Marxian authors Leon Kamin and Steven Rose introduce their book
titled “Not In Our Genes” thus:  
“Over the past decade and half we have watched with concern the rising
tide of biological determinist writing, with its increasingly grandiose
claims to be able to locate the causes of the inequalities of status,
wealth, and power between classes, genders, and races in Western society
in a reductionist theory of human nature. Each of us has been engaged
for much of this time in research, writing, speaking, teaching and
public political activity in opposition to the oppressive forms in which
determinist ideology manifests itself. We share a commitment to the
prospect of the creation of a more socially just – a socialist –
society. And we recognize that a critical science is an integral part of
the struggle to create that society, just as we also believe that the
social function of much of today’s science is to hinder the creation of
that society by acting to preserve the interests of the dominant class,
gender, and race. This belief – in the possibility of critical and
liberatory science – is why we have each in our separate ways and to
varying degrees been involved in the development of what has become
known over the 1970s and 1980s, in the United States and Britain, as the
radical science movement.”

Then the three authors go on to thank their colleagues: “But we would
like particularly to mention: members of the Dialectics of Biology Group
and the Campaign Aganist Racism, I.Q. and the Class Society, Martin
Barker… Stephen Gould…Richard Levins…Eli Messinger … Peter Sedgwick …
Ethel Tobach.” \[we have typed in only few names of their list to
illustrate some prominent Marxist figures: e.g. biologist Richard Levins
who ridiculously mentioned how work on evolution was closely inspired by
Marx\]

It should be noted that despite this allusion to being under oppression,
people like Lewontin lead a luxurious life, which older American
academics enjoy while preaching Marxian doctrines. For many of these
people who have not seen true hardship we cannot stop from
psychoanalyzing their revolutionary concerns as a craving for higher
“moral ground”. At the same time one can also see the secularized
Abrahamistic tendency of screaming about being persecuted while being
the persecutor himself.

The dominance of such academics epitomized by Dick Lewontin in American
academia over the past 50 years or more has set the ground for the
student mass to be indoctrinated in ways that make them putty ready for
shaping by the bigger players in rebellions that favor their causes.
While Lewontin is a case from biology, we have this phenomenon across
the academic spectrum with striking parallels. While the casual observer
might characterize their leanings as liberal or leftist (not wrong in
general terms), the more observant will notice a specific tendency,
which is clearest in the most finished versions of these players: a love
for something akin to what Aristotle called eristics. In old yavana
eristics one took both sides of an issue and alternately argued for the
side they took being correct. Thus, the truth or the consequences of the
observed data does not matter much for this academic; rather he would
simply take a particular stance he perceives as favorable to his
ideology and cause, a build a formal-looking framework for it
(“theory”), and argue for its correctness. Thankfully, objectivity
being a major factor in the sciences has curbed this practice outside of
areas of biology that directly intersect with human biodiversity.
However, in the so called social sciences it has been pursued
untrammeled.

The way such practices have gotten the upper hand in the American
academia is also interesting to observe. One area which illustrates this
point rather clearly is the endeavor of white indology. White indology
may be divided into three three broad sectors: 1) Old white indology of
the English-speaking world (Anglospheric indology). 2) Continental
European indology with a dominant German school. 3) Neo-American
indology. The first two are the older sectors of white indology which
declined in the years following the second world war due to the Hindus
getting rid of English rule and the catastrophic defeat of the German
state in the same war. The third sector was on the ascendant at the same
time as the other two declined, matching the rise of the USA as a
superpower. While white indology was always dominated by an anti-Hindu
streak, arising from the very forces which engendered it, its
neo-American manifestation, to start with, had a somewhat positive set
of founders like [Ingalls and
Brown](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/04/28/a-brief-note-on-spies-subversionists-white-indologists-and-regional-studies/).
However, it attracted in droves the same class of individuals as Dick
Lewontin and his cohorts during its first years. These then went on to
populate white indology in the coming years spreading the same class of
doctrines which were at work in the muzzling of sociobiology (e.g. the
attack on Ed Wilson). This, negated any positive start it might have had
and turned it towards an even more pernicious strain of prati-dharma
than the old flavors

So what is the form of these doctrines? As we have pointed out
repeatedly on these pages they stem from the old Abrahamisms but
masquerade under a secular mask. Their Abrahamistic roots are often
missed by the casual observer because the practitioners of this secular
strain are often seen attacking the older religiously expressed
Abrahamisms. But even here there is a certain distinction: while the
second Abrahamism is strongly attacked the proponents are milder on the
root Abrahamism and often even synergistic and admiring of the third
version. The resonance with the third stems from a certain essentialism
(i.e. back to the basics) that the two share. Indeed, the uncompromising
theoclasm of the third Abrahamism coupled with its message of “universal
brotherhood” resonates very strongly with the secular variant. More
generally this secular mutation shares with one or more of the religious
versions an urge to: 1) broadcast aggressively a pathway to a utopian
culmination; 2) “save” people against their wishes; 3) to claim rewards
for doing the broadcasting and saving among unbelievers; 4) theoclastic
frenzy; 5) to kill when the offerings are rebuffed or the doctrine is
criticized by unbelievers. If they cannot literally kill in the academic
environment they would do all within their means to silence the
unconverted. 6) to claim oppression (demand safe-spaces) while being the
oppressor himself (compare with Mohammedans demanding safe-spaces from
Hindus like Pakistan or Bangladesh while exterminating Hindus
themselves). Moreover, the process of conversion involves the normative
inversion parallel to the Mosaic distinction of the classical
Abrahamism. This can be observed most strikingly in the species
Mahometanus secularis, converts from to the secular meme from the 3rd
Abrahamism \[Appendix 1\].

Over 50 years of such indoctrination in American and more generally
occidental academia has produced whole lineages of such secular
practitioners that the unconverted barely exist any more. Importantly,
even as Abrahamism sees idolatry and polytheism as inconceivably sinful
wrongs (e.g. see statements from the Saud hellhole or their cousins in
the Islamic state) this body of academics and students view the
existence of the alternative views as similar inconceivable sins that
deserve a kind of punishment similar to the polytheist under Abrahamism;
likewise with apostates from the system.

Given this background, one may now look at the “March for Science” which
recently took place in capital of the USA and other cities. Was it all
about science or a ferment stemming from something else?

From first hand experience we can say that the funding and management of
science does face several serious problems. This should be cause of
concern of scientists since it directly affects what they do. Yet,
beyond the lip-service or an important-sounding position article I have
hardly seen anything being done to address the problems because those
problems simply do not affect those in power who are the sūtradhārin-s
in the system. Beyond funding and management there are indeed other real
issues too. While the conduct of science is closer to a meritocracy in
principle, in practice there are genuine discriminations against real
talent and rewards for the less-deserving. There are even more serious
issues of fraudulent activities driven by the high monetary stakes and
lust for extended-abstract-type tabloid publications. If scientists were
to agitate and swing into action for remedying these matters they would
certainly have my support. But these are not exactly the things spurring
them into the march it seems:  
1\) When you see early-career scientists (e.g. post-docs), who really
need to be putting their head down and racking up the results to find a
job in the ultra-competitive Euro-American market taking not just a
weekend off for the march but spending whole months on it, it raises a
red flag.  
2\) When you see issues, which should be peripheral to science, like
rare atypical sexualities, the 3rd Abrahamism, and women’s issues being
a major factor among the marchers one needs to look more closely.  
3\) As we have remarked, a good part of the “high-power” American
faculty lead large lives but when they talk of suffering one needs to
ask why?  
4\) Then when you see such people worrying about the environment when
they live in a country with one of the most pristine environments as
well as being one of the most inveterate user of fossil fuels one almost
recognizes the faux concern for the other typical of the Abrahamist
(e.g. the aspersion at Hindu cremation in India – why not stop using
your gas-guzzling car before worrying about Hindoos burning their
corpses).  
5\) Making noise about climate studies rather putting ones head down to
study the actual data along with falsifications that are in the same
league as those seen in cancer biology and high-profile molecular
biology publications makes one wonder the politics of the climate-change
group

In conclusion, the observant cannot miss the point that the occidental
academic, while having shed overt Abrahamisms due to clashes with
scientific empiricism, have only adopted a secular mutation thereof,
often ensuing in some form from the unkempt prophet Marx. With several
decades of preaching this religion in academia and converting students
by the droves they are now raw material for those wishing to enact more
widely the agenda of this religion and by the usual pulls the 3rd
Abrahamism. Now, one may point out that this is purely a struggle inside
Abrahamism, like between Shia and Sunni or Orthodox and the western
flavors of the preta-cult. But just as Sunni and Shia alike can be
united in the qatl al-kāfir, i.e. polytheist heathens that we are, so is
this secular cult. With a large number of the Hindu cognitive elite in
the US and their children, the ABCDs, undergoing rapid conversion at the
hands of these “dāyi-s” to be sent back as yenicheri to attack the
Hindus, this does pose a serious threat. Moreover, the Indian scientific
establishment closely apes the American one. The most important Indian
scientific institutes are filled with such converts who hold and
propagate the same views as their teachers in Ma’ssaland. As we have
said before, scientific success of a nation can come about only when it
has a nationalistic urge to succeed. All of this can be subverted by
these converts within the system. Hence, while it is an
intra-Abrahamistic struggle, it is not without consequences to Hindus.

***Appendix 1***  
We had a conversation in an academic context with a secular TSPian from
who acknowledges some problems with Mohammedanism and favors its
replacement by “attitudes characterized by a more rational scientific
outlook”:  
TSPian: “But on the Indian side the brāhmaṇ-paṇḍit people hate
Mussalmans and Islam. They discard the fact that it teaches universal
brotherhood. Would you not be supporting this hate?”

We: “See – hate for the other is something which is characteristic of
Abrahamistic religions like Mohammedanism. Why foist it on the
brāhmaṇa-s. Do Mussalman-s not hate the kaffr who simply does not
want to convert to and considers that religion as mostly being a
negative path? With this premise it is easy to see the other side which
simply want’s to defend its space as hateful.”

TSPian: “I know some people misunderstand Islam and unpleasant things
happen sometimes due to their actions in the name of Islam. That is why
I am myself for a totally modern path which recognizes human rights and
does not allow hate from either religion.”
