+++
title = "A rambling talk on the śaiva mantra tradition"

+++
A rambling talk we had given on the śaiva tradition. Talking is easier
but less precise than writing. So please be aware of the insufficiency
that goes with the domain of any talk while perusing this material.

**Part 1**; Introduction to mantra-s and pāśupata-s as a MP3 file:
<https://app.box.com/s/3wx313rfm8wijnpiv42f1q8r8z9zg2vu>

**Part 1, 1st addendum**; early legends and iconography of Rudra:
<https://app.box.com/s/iqt7g7vye7c9z9tvb314swljh3um9eem>

**Part 1, 2nd addendum**; Deployment of Rudra mantra-s in vaidika
rituals; give a brief account of rājagavī-homa the animal sacrifice to
rudra in the somayāga, the somārudrā ritual, the abhicāra ritual
invoking rudra against enemy’s cattle, apotropaic rituals for protection
again rudra’s attack (rudraḥ paśūn/prajāḥ śamāyeta), atharvavedīya
mṛgāreṣṭi, and paippalāda tuṃburu-yāga:
<https://app.box.com/s/zg2v7zr3b36ckps4xo1i6fzavmzow8qb>

**Part 2**; The emergence of a new mantra-śāstra: the beginnings of the
tāntrika lore. Touches upon 3 key features that contributed to the
emergence of the tāntrika mantra-śātra – 1) the sectarian traditions; 2)
the origins of iconic and maṇḍala worship; 3) The emergence of a new
mantra languages, i.e. mantra-s without semantic value, prose mantra-s
with onomatopoeic elements, and mantra-s emphasizing repetitive
action:  
<https://app.box.com/s/5l2tcpmrr07ohzh2worg2es4ml3xhmpu>

**Part 3**; The śaiva tāntrika tradition; the 3 categories of śaiva
tāntrika sādhakas: 1) the siddha-s and vidyādhara-s; 2) the sādhaka-s
and ācārya-s; 3) the nīrbījadīkṣita-s and lay followers; the
classification of knowledge in the śaiva tradition; the division of the
śaiva śāstra into the five srotāṃsi: garuḍa, bhūta, vāma, bhairava and
siddhānta; the gāruḍa tradition: Garuḍa, Śarabha and Nīlakaṇṭha; the
bhūta tradition: Khaḍgarāvaṇa and his parivāra, Caṇḍāsidhara,
Hayagrīva, Ardhanārīśvara and his dhyāna, Krodheśvara and Jvareśvara;
the vāma tradition: Tumburu and the catur-bhaginī; the dhyāna of Tumburu
in the Candradurdaṇda-maṇḍala; the transmission of vāma tantra-s and
their history; special dhyāna-s of the four sisters; vāma mantra-s and
yoga:  
<https://app.box.com/s/vd6xak6jqyuxoacv9nbesigm690de876>

**A very basic introduction to aspects of śaiva iconography with an
emphasis on the icons depicted in saiddhāntika sthāpana tradition.**  
<https://app.box.com/s/byb5yqght94gtqq9fnk867xbg6ca881q>

continued…
