+++
title = "The apparition of the Scottishxa0surgeon"

+++
On a late summer evening, at the twilight hour, Somakhya accompanied by
Lootika met Vidrum outside his home. Vidrum was supposed to show
Somakhya something special he had found during a visit to the limestone
excavations near his ancestral village. Vidrum did not seem happy on
sighting Lootika: “Lootika I was supposed to be showing this only to
Somakhya. I had not invited you to come and take a look\!”  
L: “Why the gruffness? What did I do?”  
Vidrum: “Your sister Vrishchika is so rude.”  
L: “OK. Now I was not the one who told her to be rude. What happened?”  
Vidrum: “I kindly showed her the object to see which is why you have
accompanied Somakhya and she laughed much and taunted me in front of the
other girls much as you all had done when I showed you my earlier
discovery.”  
L: “We did not taunt you before other girls. It was just the four of us
then.”  
Somakhya: “Hey what is behind this little drama between you two? In any
case think we should cut the crap and get to business.”  
Vidrum: “As I told you I have found evidence for a gigantic human who
lived in the prehistoric times in my ancestral village. I have recovered
a piece of the skull and another bone of this fossil man\! I showed it
to Vrishchika as she had come along with some of the other girls to take
a look at my discovery. She laughed and told them something like: ‘this
Vidrum is anxiously waiting to get admission into Med school. Even if he
does get in I think it is not going to be easy for him. How can it when
he shows off such things as human skulls?’ Then she added with a smirk
looking at everyone in the group: ‘Even *Scrotum humanum* seemed more
sensible.’ I don’t know what exactly that meant nor do I think the rest
but it certainly sounded rude and there was much ridicule at my
expense.”

L: “Oh Ṛbhu-s\! if that was what she said it is rude indeed. I will
certainly ask her to apologize the next time she sees you. But while
recounting this to us last night over dinner she said that you had
rudely shooed her away from studying the fossil. She added that she was
merely trying to correct your mistake – namely taking a remarkable
tortoise shell to be a giant human calvaria. I did not know she had told
it to you in this fashion. I was wondering why you were so brusque as to
not let her photograph it. By the way the *Scrotum humanum* was not a
risque reference to you – an old English gentleman had labeled the
distal fragment of the femoral head of the dinosaur Megalosaurus as that
for he thought it resembled the said human organ. So she was simply
striking the analogy with your own conflation.”

Vidrum now felt a bit soothed by Lootika’s presence as most men felt so
long as they did not have have to engage in a cerebral tournament with
her.

Somakhya: “Alright. Let us see it man\!”

Vidrum pulled out his box and proudly displayed his finds saying: “As
per your suggestion I recorded the precise coordinates of my finds and
have even brought a little piece of limestone from karst where I found.
Somakhya: “Good job”. Somakhya and Lootika quickly sized up the fragment
of the carapace and remarked that when complete in life it was a giant
tortoise with a shell along up to two meters in length. This was
confirmed by the stout femur which was the second bone Vidrum had
uncovered. Somakhya: “Vidrum, this is a glorious find. It is the great
tortoise Megalochelys. We need to be describing this properly if you let
us do so.” As they took some further measurements and photographs Vidrum
remarked: “You all are the masters of such recondite knowledge. So when
you say it is a tortoise shell and not a human skull I should be
believing you. I was thoroughly disappointed that it was not a giant
fossil man. But from what you say there is something redeeming here.”  
Lootika: “Certainly. Do not feel too bad about it. The famous English
anatomist Richard Owen, an enemy of Darwin, who was renowned in his age
for his anatomical expertise had mistaken a large turtle *Meiolania* for
a lizard. He was subject to even greater embarrassment than what you
suffered from Vrishchika’s words when his error was exposed by Darwin’s
friend Huxley.”

Vidrum: “That feels better. I never thought turtles could get that big.
I thought it was only in legend that we hear of Viṣṇu in the form of a
great turtle.”  
Somakhya: “I have had this hypothesis that perhaps our Ārya ancestors
found remains of *Megalochelys* which inspired the legend of the great
turtle which originally was a form of the great god Indra, Ākūpāra.
Later it was conceived as an avatāra of of his brother Viṣṇu.”  
Lootika: “Perhaps they found fossils of this reptile in the Siwalik
range which served as the inspiration.”  
Somakhya: “While a plausible hypothesis, we encounter the Ākūpāra even
earlier in the 8th maṇḍala of the Ṛgveda, which was likely composed
before they even entered the Siwalik region. So I really don’t know if
it was our subcontinental *Megalochelys* which inspired them.”

Somakhya: “It is late now and the we better get back home especially as
I need to cross the Jawaharlal Nehru street before the marūnmatta-s
spill out from the Friday sermon. We’ll be back tomorrow to study your
fossil at greater depth.”

◊◊◊◊

The next day Somakhya and Lootika again met with Vidrum at the appointed
hour. He seemed wan and forlorn: “Friends\! it is an utter disaster\!”  
Lootika: “What?”  
Vidrum: “My precious fossils were stolen by someone when I was playing
cricket today.”  
Somakhya: “Why the hell did you have to take it along to show off. For a
little attention from the girls you have now lost something colossally
important as this\! Who do you think stole it?”  
Vidrum: “I, Sharvamanyu and Golashiras tried hard to figure it out for
much of the day but we failed. You know the rougher elements of our
class like Sphichmukh who stole the infamous compass box or the mystery
thief who stole the green-covered chemistry book and the ball-bearing
that Somakhya had gifted you Lootika.”

Lootika in a weak voice remarked: “Ah\! the green-covered book and
ball-bearing. I won’t forget that day. Some of classmates are going to
be finished taskara-s even before they are adults.” Somakhya noticed a
tear drop beneath the normally unsentimental Lootika’s spectacles. It
was a book he had gifted her on the occasion of her birthday the year
they had come to know each other. He was internally happy to note that
they carried value for her but otherwise their moods had turned somber.
Somakhya, who was leaning on his bike, sprang on to it to leave when
Vidrum asked them: “Why go so soon. What where you two going to do?”
Lootika: “We had set the evening clear to study the fossils. But then …
And you?” Vidrum: “Sharvamanyu was to stop by and we were to play some
chess. I know you two hate that game but may be you could hang on and we
could do something else?”

As Somakhya and Lootika were wondering whether to stay on or go do some
sky-gazing Sharvamanyu arrived: “Hey we need not play chess. Since you
two are around I suggest we ply the planchette\! You have an uncanny
ability to get real ghosts into the machine.” Somakhya and Lootika
agreed that it might be a good thing for the gloomy evening.

Going up to Vidrum’s terrace they pulled out his Parsi planchette from
its case and for a while they plied it the usual way hoping for an
interesting specter to catch the pointer. A whole series of
nonsense-words were all that seemed to tumble out from the frivolously
wandering pointer. They were pretty soon convinced that it was more
eidolon than phantom. Vidrum and Sharvmanyu looked at their other two
friends quizzically: “Nothing seems to be working here. Why don’t you
two do your more magical prayoga-s?”. Lootika: “They usually work only
in the cemetery. Do we really want to head there right now?” After some
hesitation Somakhya decided to deploy another one right there. They
snuffed out the lamp and lit it again and began. It took sometime for
Somakhya to get his focus on the dhyāna right. Finally, when he had
settled into it and gone through the incantations he uttered the
terminal summoning call: “kumbhodharā mahodharā rudrasyānuyāyinaḥ
śmaśānvartinam ānaya ānayeheha svāhā |”. For a minute or so, which
almost seemed like an hour, nothing at all happened. Vidrum and
Sharvamanyu cast confused looks at Somakhya whose visage barely
concealed a sense of great triumph and expectation. Even Lootika did not
seem to get it and had to restrain herself more than once from saying
that something might have gone wrong in his spell. Then like a sudden
autumn mist descending upon them the air went absolutely silent and
against that backdrop they heard the footfalls and heavy breathing of
someone who seemed to be tiredly shuffling in. Vidrum was no stranger to
strange happenings and Sharvamanyu had seen their friends pull off the
outre more than once; yet, the novelty of it happening never ceased to
cause them amazement. The two were even more startled when the lamp on
the pointer violently flickered and went off and the pointer rattled a
bit on its own. They exclaimed in tense excitement and, though Somakhya
and Lootika remained quiet, they nervously asked: “Hey are you there?
Tell us your name?” The pointer clattered again as though to answer in
the affirmative.

But what happened next made Vidrum and Sharvamanyu almost jump up in
shock: an incorporeal voice seemed to emanate from the pointer speaking
with a clipped accent almost betraying a stiff upper lip: “I would
rather that you show me some respect. I am not to be ordered around”  
Sharvamanyu: “But who are you?” The bhūta spoke: “Why should that matter
to you.” Then the pointer rattled again and turned towards Somakhya and
Lootika: “These two Hindoos here have awoken me from my resting place at
my favorite peepul tree in Saharanpur and brought me all the way south
here\! I never knew someday a native would be talking about my tortoises
in the same words as me\!”  
Lootika: “Pray tell us the story of your tortoises. We are all ears.”  
The phantom: “My Hindoo collector had found a large shell as I was
prospecting in what your people called the lower steps to the abode of
the god Śiva. Having received them I decided to make a detailed
anatomical study and placed them in the baggage train which was being
plied by my muleteer – a Hindoo from the Punjab. I knew very well that
the Hindoo and the Mahometan were fundamentally embittered. Hence, I
asked my colleague Cautley to make sure that there was no rupture
between the two since he had a couple of Mahometans as assistants.
Despite my caution mayhem erupted that night and the two buggers hacked
my muleteer to death over some dispute that we never unraveled. They
also smashed the great tortoise shell we had obtained. I ordered my Sikh
sepoy Chukrum Sing to catch and discipline them. He handed over the
Mahometans to the Hindus of the village from which our muleteer hailed
and they immolated the poor wretches. Nevertheless, I managed to recover
some fragments of the tortoise shell and duly described it upon my
return to Britain. It was then that I had a conversation with my dear
friend ol’ Charles and the young naturalist Mr. Wallace. As we marveled
and meditated upon the anatomy of the great tortoise I informed them
that this tortoise was the one that had inspired the legends of of the
great tortoise among the Hindoos and the Pythagoreans. Hence, I was
stirred in my resting place at Saharanpur when I heard you natives talk
about this. I was even more interested to know as to what geological age
you would have ascribed that tortoise to be.”

Somakhya: “While remains could have have been reworked from a much older
sediment, based on the sediments among which our friend Vidrum found
them we would say that they are actually of very recent provenance –
from the later part of the Pleistocene – perhaps a mere 50,000 years
before present. Sadly we have lost the fossil and would not be able to
say more for now.”

The phantom: “That is certainly of some interest if true. Why\! it
pertains exactly to what I wished tell old Charles a couple of days
before I expired.”  
Somakhya: “Please make yourself comfortable and if you do not mind
kindly tell us what was it that you wished to convey to your friend?”  
The phantom: “Ah\! It is a long yarn. Due to a persistent illness I left
India and returned to Britain. It was then that I met my friend Charles
who confided with me his thoughts on the origin of species. It shook me
to the core and I was not sure for all its grandeur if it even had a
smidgen of truth to it. After all it conflicted thoroughly with my own
observations on the races of fossil animals in India. But the more I
thought of it the I began seeing the elements of truth in Charles’
thesis. When he published his grand essay on the origin of species I was
seeing more from his viewpoint than before. But one thing still bothered
me. My studies on the races of fossil mammals had suggested that there
were prolonged periods of stasis during which I saw little change unlike
what Charles’s theory would imply. Then all of a sudden we would see a
spurt of new animal forms. What Charles said made sense with respect to
his pigeons and all the little changes we saw with domestication and the
like. But in the actual fossil record that was not the way things
appeared. Hence, when I sent friend Charles my heavy memoir on the
prehistory of elephants I remarked to him that the glaciation was a
profound climatic shift which could have selected for anatomical changes
of the order of making his dear pigeons into ducks. Yet I saw nothing of
that sort with my elephants. I suspected that nothing like that happened
with my giant tortoises either. I wished to bring this to his attention
and see how his theory and my findings on the extinct races of animals
might be reconciled.”

The phantom paused and seemed to breath very heavily and groaned a bit.
Then he added: “I knew well that Charles was thinking deeply about this
too and trying to reconcile the matters. He wrote to me that weekend
inquiring of my health as I felt my body come apart and heard the toll
of the funeral bells. Seeing his letter I felt better the next day and
hoped to write back regarding the tortoises and also that splendid
Jurassic dinosaur *Archaeopteryx* which I had examined during my
ramblings in Germany.”

Somakhya: “That’s most remarkable. Biologists over the ages since your
weighty pronouncements have been struggling with that problem of
reconciliation. The proximal details have been worked out well since
your times but a fine point remains mostly unsaid. I and my friend
Lootika here have also been thinking about it intensely I believe we
might have a prolegomenon to a solution.”

The phantom: “Someday I might visit again to hear of that. But it is not
good for a gentleman to yarn much; hence, I desist from asking you
more.”

Lootika: “We would certainly let you return to your lair but please tell
us if you might care the story behind your residence in that aśvattha
tree in Saharanpur.”  
The phantom groaned and emitting the sound of labored breathing said:
“My aches still seem to pursue me into my phantomhood. But I should
not refuse a charming young lady her request. As I was making a study of
the plants in the east of the country, as a surgeon I was impressed by
the orderly presentation of information on medicine by the Hindoo of
yore. I was convinced that the spring-head of old knowledge in the arts,
grammar and the sciences lay in India. It was in your variety of the
Caucasian branch of the human family that highest capability for mental
improvement had taken root. Hence, to learn more during my second stint
in India I made acquaintance of the native physician Mudhoosooduna. In
course of our rambling conversations he recounted the many quaint
superstitions and fables of your peoples. In all earnestness he once
remarked that since I was a bachelor with no issues and a mleccha it was
conceivable that I would transmogrify into a bhoot upon my death as
there would be no one to offer turpana for me. I laughed off his
superstition but in a half-jocular vein remarked that if that were to
happen I would like to lead a dryadic existence on the peepul tree I had
planted in my groves at Saharanpur. Mudhoosooduna seemed to take it
seriously and even approve of it. He remarked something to the tune that
it might after all be my ultimate soteriological solution. Hence, the
last time we met before I had to return to Britain due to my rapidly
deteriorating health, old Mudhoosooduna handed me an amulet and asked me
to hold it even as I heard the harsh barking of Kerberos. I took it not
so much out of belief as much as adding another anthropological
curiosity to my vast collections. On the eve of my expiration for some
reason I used it as bookmark while reading friend Charles’ latest work –
and lo I passed away from the world of men clutching it. Indeed when the
pains of passing had passed I found myself upon that very peepul tree in
old Saharanpur. I rarely leave my haunt except on occasion to see old
Mudhoosooduna who is doing his time as a brahmuhrakshas on the banks of
the Ganges. He was sadly blown to smithereens by one of my former
patients from the Bengal army during the great mutiny of 57.”

The same quiet which came upon them when the phantom had come seemed to
return and a few seconds latter ebbed away into the cacophony of
orthopterans and other insect musicians.

Sharvamanyu: “This was most wondrous\! Had it not been for you all even
I might have felt some fright. This was unlike anything we ever felt in
the cemetery.”  
Lootika: “Yes indeed\! That was quite unexpected.”  
Vidrum: “This was a bhūta which actually spoke\! Thankfully the gorā
sāhib seems to have left without causing any trouble unlike those who
normally prowl here. But you all seemed to know him well.”  
Somakhya: “While one of the ākrānta he is a benign chap – in terms of
pure knowledge he was perhaps the most knowledgeable biologist of his
age\! Let me tell you what his friend Charles, whom he kept referring,
to remarked upon his death. Somakhya pulled out his tablet and read: “He
says ‘What a mountainous mass of admirable and accurate information dies
with our dear old friend. I shall miss him, not only personally, but as
a scientific man of unflinching and uncompromising integrity…’”  
Sharvamanyu: “But who was he?”  
Lootika: “I believe we should not be actively revealing his identity
anytime soon. But he told us enough that any discerning person can
identify him.”

◊◊◊◊

Somakhya came back early from the game of ghaṭika as his mother had told
him that Lootika’s mother was to come home for a certain strīkarman
along with her four daughters. When their mothers and some other women
became busy with the rite, Somakhya and the caturbhaginī huddled into
his lab-room. Somakhya allowed little Jhilleeka to use the box of sticks
with sockets, which his father had gifted him from a foreign land for
making polyhedra. He also gifted her a brown porcelain insulator. Varoli
told Somakhya of her visit to the dreadful city of Visphoṭaka and her
adventure of the astronomy quiz. Somakhya sensed some deeper excitement
in her which certainly could not come from the second place she had won
in the quiz – having trained her he knew that she was no less
competitive than Lootika or Vrishchika and cared little for a second
place in anything. With a sly smile Vrishchika announced to Somakhya
that she felt that Varoli had been afflicted by the caprine or the ovine
sprite of Kārttikeya. Lootika remarked that it was confirmed because as
they fed the old woman’s goat near the bastard poon tree at the foot of
the Caṇḍikā shrine on the way to his house it leapt up only to Varoli.
Lootika and Somakhya then told the rest about their singular encounter
with apparition of the Scottish surgeon.

Vrishchika: “Somakhya, you suspect these tortoises to have persisted
until rather recently. That is quite unusual I must say. For given those
dates their extinction comes suspiciously close to the early
colonization of the subcontinent by our species.”  
Somakhya: “Indeed I entertain the possibility that Homo stands accused
for the disappearance of Megalochelys from India and elsewhere. Evidence
for such extinction is rather strong for another group of giant turtles,
the marvelous basal meiolanids, which persisted for at least 60 million
years if not more. These turtles appear to have spread from the large
Gondwanan landmass of Australia to the remote Pacific islands like those
of Vanuatu, New Caledonia, and Fiji where they persisted until the
maritime Austronesians of the so called Lapita culture reached those
islands and ate them up just 2-3000 years ago.”  
Varoli: “I guess the hand of Homo looks quite plausible given that today
the giant tortoises are barely clinging on in the islands of Seychelles,
Zanzibar and Galapagos where the hand of Homo was rather late in
reaching. I just wish the Austronesians had not reached at least one
island where we might still see those meiolanids today.”  
Lootika: “Moreover, the range of Megalochelys was apparently vast even
on the eve of their extinction. With Vidrum’s lamentably lost find we
know they stretched throughout the subcontinent. They have been found in
Burma and Java across a fairly wide climatic range. This does make me
feel less comfortable with an explanation that invokes climate change
rather than the hand of Homo. It does seem the passage of Homo through
Asia into the Indo-Pacific islands was their death knell.”  
Somakhya: “As you know I am wholly sympathetic to this, but just to
present the counter-point the giant tortoises seem to have gone down the
drain much earlier on much of the African subcontinent – before any
representative of Homo or even our more immediate stem-ward predecessors
were around. Also the extinction of the Meiolanids on the South American
landmass had little to do with Homo. So there could be other factors too
– may be competition with other herbivores.”

Vrishchika: “The work we are doing with Indrasena suggests there was a
fairly prolonged presence of one or two archaic Homo clades in the
subcontinent. One of them were the Denisovans or there was just one
clade that had mixed a bit with the Denisovan clade. All this action was
even before our clade settled in. Based on your latest dates it would
seem that the tortoises did manage to survive these archaic Homo.”  
Somakhya: “Sadly, our dates are hardly precise enough to say this with
certainty. That would need more work both in the field and with
instrumentation beyond our reach currently. Yet, there is little doubt
that at least archaic Homo and the tortoises overlapped. But generally I
am inclined to the idea that the newer varieties of Homo – the clade
from which we sprang – were behind these extinctions. In Africa the
prolonged coevolution with Homo appears to have allowed much of the
fauna to survive until more recently. But elsewhere the sudden
appearance of the more modern variant of Homo seems to have been way
more destructive than earlier variants like the small-brained Homo from
Georgia or some of the other archaic versions.”  
Lootika: “The evidence in this regard seems rather strong for a faunal
contemporary of the giant tortoise found first by none other than our
Scottish phantom when he was still embodied, namely the ostrich. At
around 120000 YBP it was present in the Siwaliks along with the
tortoises and then spread widely to become pan-subcontinental by 65000
YBP. We encounter it in rock art and eggshell art suggesting that it
existed along side Homo for a quite a period. In fact its extinction was
only 25-20000 YBP, well after H.sapiens was ensconced in the
subcontinent.”  
Somakhya: “That rather late date suggests that the arrival of a newer
wave of Homo sapiens with projectile weapons or the spread of that
technology was perhaps the cause of the demise of the ostrich in our
lands.”  
Varoli: “I guess the extirpation of the ostrich need not have coincided
with the end of the tortoise since the slow-moving behemoth despite his
heavy shell could have been much easier to bring to the plate even with
a more primitive technology like a braining club.”  
Lootika: “In some places the giant flightless birds and tortoises seem
to have both collapsed quite quickly with the appearance of Homo but in
other places indeed the latter seem to have outlasted the tortoises
–like probably in Australia.”  
Somakhya: “Ain’t it notable that we see a parallel in the South American
continent? There at some point the niche vacated by the meiolanids was
taken over by their mammalian equivalents, the xenarthran glyptodonts.
These slow-moving armored behemoths show how successful this body plan
was against other bipedal attackers until the coming of Homo. There
again the rhea seems to have survived despite the existence of
rhea-hunting Amerindians.”

Vrishchika: “I am wondering if this anthropogenic extinction is
something unprecedented. I can chart up three other types of extinction
that clearly have a much wider presence in earth’s history: 1) the
background extinction which is always occurring; 2) the extrinsic mass
extinctions from extra-terrestrial collisions; 3) massive climatic
changes due to geochemical/geological processes resulting in what one
may term an intrinsic extinction. But do we see evidence for earlier
mass extinctions caused by a single faunal component like Homo?”  
Lootika: “I would merely place that as an extreme case of things that
did happen before. The land-bridge between the South and North American
landmasses triggered extinctions which were evidently due to appearance
of faunal elements with which the older isolated faunas could not
cope.”  
Varoli: “I wonder if the same thing happened to the old Gondwanan fauna
when the Indian plate crashed into Asia?”  
Somakhya: “That’s a good question. Our paleontological record has not
been studied closely enough and our tectonics still remains incompletely
understood to reach that conclusion. But it is indeed possible that it
is reason why do not have any archaic fauna of the type of Australia.
But the Vastan mine fauna suggests that other faunal inputs into India
could have also caused such extinctions even earlier – like a faunal
exchange via rafting from East Africa. Moreover, it might have happened
over a prolonged period. Lemur-like adapiformes survived in the
Pāñcanada till around 9 million YBP.”  
Lootika: “Ah\! Indraloris… Perhaps the longest survival outside of
island Madagascar.”  
Vrishchika: “And some nights I used dream that somewhere in the western
ghats we might still find an adapisoriculid mammal.”  
Lootika: “Despite the occasional find of a Gondwanan amphibian or snail
in those forests that’s unlikely to be ever happening at all\!”

Jhilleeka: “The final extinction of a late-persisting lineage like the
adapiformes brings to mind those simple mathematical models based on
tag-systems that you just asked me to write.”  
Varoli: “Jhilli, the trilobites and choristoderan reptiles like
Lazarussuchus too – they all went out the same way. Hence, I think those
causes which you listed out Vrishchika can sometimes conspire together
in precipitating extinction – a once speciose clade is numerically
dented in a great extinction and then it stochastically peters out to
become fully extinct.”  
Somakhya: “Perhaps, that is how, as we peter out into extinction, the
curtains would come down upon the planet of apes.”

Vrishchika: “There are so many mysteries regarding the prehistory of our
own piece of Gondwana real estate. Is it not a great tragedy that none
of our people, baring that relatively lackluster attempt by that
brāhmaṇa from the Pāñcanada, bothered to follow up on the path of
Scottish surgeon? OK, let us even take it that until the English arrived
no one was aware of what existed beneath their feet but there is no
excuse for what happened after that. Though he the surgeon himself
remarks that when the Sarasvati channel was being dug in the days of the
Mohammedan tyranny fossils were found. It is truly a failure of the
brahma.”  
Somakhya: “As I have remarked before to Lootika much more than the
failure of Hindu arms in 1857 the failure of Hindus lay in their ability
to develop men with a “mountainous mass of admirable and accurate
information” in their midst even when confronted by such.”  
Lootika: “Even our Scottish surgeon admitted that we were once the
spring-head of systematic knowledge. So it is indeed a tragedy, perhaps
a symptom of a civilization exhausted from nearly a millennium of
conflict with the evils of West Asia. Now indeed our peoples look more
like the rank idiots that the gorā sāhib started calling us after the
days of the Scottish surgeon who took a more positive view of us.”  
Somakhya: “Is the concentration not notable? It is not a matter of
coincidence that old Charles sprung up in the midst of our our śatru-s.
In addition to our Scottish physician contemporaneously there stood
Wallace and Huxley in their midst. Even Owen their detractor and Lyell,
both of whom our visitor when still embodied had skewered, were quite a
good, and then there were others like Spencer, Hooker and so on. There
was enough of good foil for old Charles to whet his edge. In
contrast…”  
Varoli: “We look homeopathic in our dilution\! Just imagine a parallel
universe where we were all born separately and never knew that the other
existed. Perhaps, plodding away in a little corner of Saharanpur with
nothing to inform us that Megalochelys even existed – surrounded by a
hundred who want to get a seat in med school without being able say what
lies below sulfur in the periodic table.”  
Jhilleeka chimed in smirking: “You know, may be it is our ‘belief’ in
ghosts. That is one of the reasons my history textbook lists as a cause
for the failure of the Marāṭhā before the English.”  
They all laughed adding: “Of course how can we forget that one\!”

Just then the caturbhaginī’s mother called out: “Kids we need to go
right now. I know well you love talking and will be doing so all day
left to yourselves.” Somakhya’s mother added: “As your father would say
it is good to talk less and do more.”  
Lootika and Somakhya struck up a parting hi-five laughing: “There you
go. May be that is the reason after all…”
