+++
title = "The great facelessxa0man"

+++
In the late Yajurvaidika upaniṣat, the Śvetāśvatara, which is the
foundational text of the śaiva-śāsana, the god Rudra is described thus:

na tasya pratimā asti yasya nāma mahad yaśaḥ।  
There is no one who his equal, whose name \[itself\] is great fame.

This sentence has also been taken to organically imply something else
among Hindus too: Statues are not made of the great people – their name
itself is great fame. Keeping with this we mostly do not have statues of
many of the great figures of Hindu tradition. For instance, we do not
know how Bodhāyana or Āpastamba or Āśvalāyana or Paippalāda looked,
though we take their names on a daily basis. So also with great men even
closer to our times, like say Vācaspati Miśrā. Now, speaking of other
heroes, like Rāma Aikṣvākava, whose name might be almost taken daily in
some of our households, we have some kind of a description in the
opening of the Rāmāyaṇa:

ikṣvāku-vaṃśa-prabhavo rāmo nāma janaiḥ śrutaḥ |  
niyatātmā mahāvīryo dyutimān dhṛtimān vaśī ||

Born in the Ikṣvāku clan, he is known among men by the name of Rāma. He
is self-controlled, of great manliness, radiant, resolute, and has his
senses under control.

buddhimān nītimān vāgmī śrīmāñ śatru-nibarhaṇaḥ |  
vipulāṃso mahābāhuḥ kambugrīvo mahāhanuḥ ||

He is intelligent, politically astute, eloquent, opulent, and an
extirpator of foes. He is broad-shouldered, of mighty arms, with a
conch-like neck, and strong-jawed.

mahorasko maheṣvāso gūḍhajatrur ariṃdamaḥ |  
ājānubāhuḥ suśirāḥ sulalāṭaḥ suvikramaḥ ||

His chest is broad, he is a great archer, his collar-bones are
well-concealed, and is a suppressor of foes. With arms reaching up to
his knees, with a good head, shapely forehead and good gait.

samaḥ sama-vibhaktāṅgaḥ snigdha-varṇaḥ pratāpavān |  
pīnavakṣā viśālākṣo lakṣmīvāñ śubha-lakṣaṇaḥ || 1.1.8-11

His body is well-proportioned, he is of smooth complexion and mighty.
His chest is rounded, his eyes large, he is prosperous and with
auspicious marks.

Similar accounts might be found elsewhere in the Rāmāyaṇa too. One thing
which comes out of this account is that it is fairly generic for a
mighty kṣatriya except for one specific, unusual feature namely
“ājānubāhuḥ” – i.e. that his arms reached down to his knees, which
might have been a peculiar characteristic of the man himself. Thus,
while one can build a generic image of emperor Rāma as a mighty
kṣatriya, we can still say we do not know how he \*exactly\* looked.
Now, this is in part keeping with a the broader issue we have discussed
earlier, [namely the iconic depictions of deities among the early
Hindus](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/23/early-temples-and-iconic-worship/).
As we argued before such existed but were not prominent and were perhaps
“primitive” keeping with the archaeological evidence from several early
Indian sites. In this sense the Indian iconography mirrored the
primitivism of the early Greek iconography.

This is in stark contrast to Egypt where their great Pharaohs are known
more from their portraits rather than epic narratives. When we see the
images of the lordly Pharaohs, while stylized, there is clearly an
element of individuality behind them. Over the ages of its heathen
existence, in addition to statues, Egypt developed an even more
realistic portraiture in other media. It is conceivable that this
Egyptian tradition of portraiture spread through West Asia and then
Europe influencing other cultures, first Semitic and then Indo-European.
Thus, we see it emerge first among the Hittites to some extent and then
eventually among the yavana-s (here collectively Greek and Macedonian)
and romāka-s. Thus, by the time of the Macedonian invasion of India we
we see a vigorous tradition of realistic royal portraiture on their
coins, medallions and mosaic work that has moved far away from their
ancestral primitivism. Early Indian coinage was abundant in symbolism
and even primitive iconography of Hindu deities but not royal portraits.
However, in the years following the Macedonian attack we see an emergent
tradition of such portraiture both on coins and in the form of larger
icons as seen in the case of Aśoka the mighty Maurya. This trend would
suggest that the impulse for portraiture eventually reached the Indian
world only via the Macedonians. Likewise, there have also been plausible
suggestions that the movement of yavana-s eastwards along with contacts
with the now fully portrait-using Hindus sparked the emergence realistic
portraiture among the cīna-s along side the unification by the Chin.
This manifest burst upon the scene on a truly cīna scale in the funerary
statuary of the Chin conquerors.

But is this the whole story? The mysterious Harappan civilization of
India produced rare but striking pieces of realistic human portraiture.
The most iconic of these is the famous bearded man with a
trefoil-patterned garment. There are also several terracottas but these
generally retain the primitivism typical of the Indo-European
productions. Thus, while portraiture existed in the Harappan world, it
was certainly rare relative to the coeval linked civilizations of West
Asia and Egypt. So in this sense the Harappan civilization was rather in
line with the Indo-European world (though we do not know right now if
they had any Indo-European component or influence at all). What about
the Indo-Aryan literature? There is nothing indicating a tradition of
realistic human iconography in śruti. The itithāsa-s too leave us with
at best with slim pickings in this regard – e.g. we hear of the iron
image of Bhīmasena used by Duryodhana for his mace-practice but this
need not have been realistic. However, in the paurāṇika tradition as it
has come down to us today we see that portraiture had a vigorous and
full blown expression. In between we have Patañjali who explains a sūtra
in the Aṣṭādhyāyi by stating that statues of the sage Kāśyapa were made.
Keeping with this, the early surviving vāstu text, the Mānasāra
describes how the statues of the the seven great brahminical sages were
made. We have evidence from the Skanda-sadbhāva tantra that indeed such
statues were made an installed in ancient Kaumāra temples. We even hear
of a statue of Pānini that was there in home town, which has evidently
been destroyed by the Mohammedans sometime after Xuan Zang recorded
seeing it in the 600s of CE. Importantly, despite the potential role of
a yavana impetus, the Hindu style remained conservative and distinct,
even in places of closest proximity to the yavana in the Northwest of
the subcontinent. Hence, on the whole we have some evidence that Hindus
had an independent early tradition of portraiture though much of that
has not survived and/or they did not emphasize it in any serious way.

However, it does remain a fact that the explosive spread of \*extant\*
portraiture mostly post-dates the Macedonian invasion, which could imply
a causal link between the two. Of this most traces have been erased
outside the peninsular tip by the evil hand of the Army of Islam. In
Nepal however some early specimens survive such as the image of king
Jayavarma-deva from śaka 105= 185 CE. In a 3 century time window from
that point we also see traces portraiture among the Śuṅga-s, Andhra-s,
and Iranic rulers (Kuṣāṇa, Pahālava, Śaka) in India. In discovering and
describing the image of king Jayavarman of Nepal, Tara-ananda Mishra has
given an excellent account of the evolution of portraiture including
several points we have independently arrived at. Other than royal
portraiture there appears to have been a vigorous tradition of the
imagery of persons endowing religious images and constructions.
Moreover, śaiva teachers of both the mantra-mārga and atimārga,
extraordinary śaiva and vaiṣṇava devotees, and siddha-s were also
prominent objects of whole-body portraits. Statues of such were once
common throughout India but have been mostly damaged or demolished in
the north. Thus, in south India we can still see statues of emperor
Kṛśṇadeva or Govinda Dīkṣita but we do not have the original image
of the great Bhoja-deva or Lalitāditya.

Yet, despite all of this, on the whole the the majority of our great
figures have not survived in portraiture, perhaps indicating a real
Hindu tendency for the statement: na tasya pratimā asti yasya nāma mahad
yaśaḥ। . We too seem to be resonant with this Hindu tendency and take it
in a broad sense as was possibly understood by many of our greats of the
past. In large part we believe that a man’s visual image or for that
matter several details of his life should not matter at all. All that
should matter are the words he leaves behind – do you find something in
them or not – that’s all. Indeed, this is how it is for Āryabhaṭa-I or
Bhāskara or Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājin. They are their words not their
portraits or even biographies. Now one may ask: “Have you not said there
is great value in studying the biographies of past intellectuals?” I
still hold that view but have always held that not all of their
biography really matters. Indeed most Hindu notables have left behind
colophonic biographies that only stress the needful in the best case
scenario. For instance, they are not shy of revealing their youthful
genius, like bhaṭṭa Jayanta recording his advanced grammatical research
as a kid or mathematician-astronomer Gaṇeśa recording his discoveries
like the hyperbolic approximation of trigonometric functions in his
teens or Vaṭeśvara his discovery of mathematical recipes for astronomy
in his twenties.

This contrasts what we observed among the mleccha-s today and its
back-flow to the Hindus. The person, his appearance and certain
incidental aspects of his biography (e.g. ones sex, sexual escapades or
sexual orientation) seem to matter a lot. Indeed, the appearance of a
person has a serious correlation to his/her intellectual influence
especially in a lokābhimukha sense. There is a drive to get people who
look acceptable in a mleccha sense as the face of even an intellectual
matter, like physics. I was amazed by how certain bhārata-s known to me
converged to a similar style of appearance after hitting the talking
circuit in the mleccha world. More than a person’s intellectual
substance what matters is that they lie at one extreme of the bell-curve
in terms of the mleccha-defined (partly universal) measure of
appearance, appeal, etc. Almost as though out of guilt, the mleccha-s
would then balance it with a few chosen tokens from the other extreme of
the normal distribution (e.g. the diseased, the handicapped and the rare
ethnicities) and pepper it with elements of what matters in the mleccha
facade: e.g. aberrant sexuality. Finally, in the biographic sense, often
what the person holds on matters well-beyond his/her expertise is of
great importance in his/her projection as an icon: s/he better mouth
liberal platitudes along the lines of how they are out to save the
world, save the disadvantaged, and other feel-good messages quite
removed from reality and sometimes even biology all while looking ‘cool’
at the same time. This would have even been half-understandable where it
not for the concomitant insistence of the mleccha system being “equal
opportunity”.

In face of this facade we think great father Manu had a point – the
brāhmaṇa intellectuals are best off being low-key in such dimensions –
the faceless intellectual whose biographic peculiarities matter little.
In conclusion, perhaps keeping with the Hindu tepidity towards
portraiture, we subscribe to the view that it is better for a man’s
words than his portraits to linger on after Vaivasvata takes him away –
indeed what use is it to be like the mysterious brāhmaṇa from what is
today Afghanistan, the fragment of whose portrait is placed for auction
in a mleccha market.
