+++
title = "Astronomical experiments: a preliminary look at globularxa0clusters"

+++
While Alexander von Humboldt was exploring South America he observed a
fuzzy object in the constellation of Centaurus and thought that it was a
new comet. However, it turned out that it was the globular cluster
![\\omega](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\omega") Centauri. It had already been noticed long before his times
by Edmond Halley of comet fame with his primitive telescope as a fuzzy
object which was not a star. Long before Halley, Ptolemaios the yavana
astronomer observing from Egypt thought it was a star in Centaurus.
Halley soon discovered a second such object in the constellation of
Hercules, which was to be later known as M13. Charles Messier following
up on these observations discovered that there were several more such
objects and obtained the first hints that they were made up of stars.
This was confirmed finally by Wilhelm Herschel, who was a prolific
discoverer of globular clusters (GCs).

![Globular\_figure1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure1.jpg?w=507&h=477)Figure
1
![\\omega](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\omega") Centauri

We obtained one of the clearest views of
![\\omega](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\omega") Centauri from a fort of the erstwhile Marāṭha admiral Angre
on an exceptionally clear night — it was truly one of those sights which
cause a romaharṣaṇa in the beholder. We have had several fruitful nights
of GC sighting using various instruments from a 20×75 binoculars to a 12
inch telescope. Indeed, GCs remain objects of great fascination to
everyone from the casual observer to the astronomers at the edge of
their science. They have ramifications for everything from the age of
the universe, the origin of galaxies, the detection of dark matter to
gas physics.

A GC is unmistakable for anyone who has seen one – a dense globular
conglomeration of stars with up to a several million stars packed in a
close oblate spheroid of few parsecs (1 parsec
![\\approx](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx") 3.26 light years). We had the desire of illustrating some
basic features of them using the data from 147 GCs of the Milky Way.
This number is not far from the total number of GCs in our Galaxy. The
brightest in our set is of course
![\\omega](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\omega") Centauri with integrated visual magnitude,
![m\_V=3.68](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V%3D3.68&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V=3.68") and the faintest is UKS 1 with
![m\_V=17.29](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V%3D17.29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V=17.29"), which is beyond any telescope we have personally operated.
![\\omega](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\omega") Centauri is also the brightest in absolute visual magnitude
![M\_V=-10.24](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-10.24&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-10.24"), whereas the absolutely faintest GC in our set is AM 4
with
![M\_V=-1.55](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-1.55&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-1.55").

![Globular\_Figure2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure2.png?w=645&h=447)Figure
2

One of the first things an observer notices is that GCs are not
uniformly distributed in the sky. Even the brightest GCs, those from the
Messier catalog, make this apparent — there are 7 each in Ophiuchus and
Sagittarius; thus, they seem to be clustered close to the center of the
Milky Way which lies in Sagittarius. If we take all the GCs in our data
and convert their coordinates to galactic coordinates using some
spherical trigonometry we can plot them with respect to the galactic
equator. Figure 2 shows such a plot using the Eisenlohr projection with
the Milky Way outline in green. The GCs are colored red for higher than
average metallicity an blue for lower than average metallicity (see
below for discussion on metallicity). One can clearly see that they are
clustered in just one part of the sky with the galactic center as the
focal point. This observation establishes their presence around the core
of the Galaxy in the halo.

![Globular\_Figure3](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure3.png?w=640)Figure
3

We can also visualize their distribution by directly plotting their
inferred distance from the galactic center (Figure 3). Their density
rapidly falls off with distance and
![\\tfrac{2}{3}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7B2%7D%7B3%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\tfrac{2}{3}") of the total number of GCs in the Milky Way lie within
10 kiloparsecs(Kpc) of the galactic center.

![Globular\_Figure4](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure4.png?w=640)Figure
4

We next examine the distribution of the absolute magnitudes
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") of the GCs (Figure 4). We find a clear central tendency;
![\\mu=-7.022](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3D-7.022&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=-7.022") (vertical line),
![\\sigma=1.54631](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csigma%3D1.54631&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sigma=1.54631"). The observed distribution has a sharp peak close to
the mean. Thus, the GCs seem to come with a clearly preferred
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V"). This has been exploited to use the magnitude of GCs in other
galaxies as a standard candle to measure their distances.

![Globular\_Figure5](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure5.png?w=640)Figure
5

The radii of GCs is measured in two ways. First, it has been observed
that luminosity of a globular drops off when one moves from the center
of the GC toward the periphery. The radius at which luminosity drops by
half of what it is in the center is defined as the core radius
![R\_c](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=R_c&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"R_c"). Another measure of radius is based on gravity: The distance from
the center of the GC beyond which the gravity of the galaxy has a
greater influence than that of the GC itself is termed the tidal radius
![R\_t](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=R_t&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"R_t"). Based on these radii the central concentration index is defined
as
![c=log\_10(\\tfrac{R\_t}{R\_c})](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c%3Dlog_10%28%5Ctfrac%7BR_t%7D%7BR_c%7D%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"c=log_10(\\tfrac{R_t}{R_c})"). The distribution of
![c](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "c") is
shown in Figure 5. Its most interesting feature is the situation above
![c=2.0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c%3D2.0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"c=2.0") — we see a significant over-representation at the very end of
the range
![c\\approx2.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c%5Capprox2.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"c\\approx2.5"), which is greater than even that at the mean. What does
this signify? As one moves towards the center of the GC in a typical GC
they luminosity rises and then plateaus. However, about 20 percent of
the GCs which show
![c=2.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c%3D2.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"c=2.5") behave differently. In these high
![c](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "c")
GCs the brightness just keeps rising right to the center. Hence, they
are described as having undergone core collapse wherein stars clump more
closely at the center than what is seen in typical GCs. This is believed
to happen due to the dynamics of the cluster wherein sorting of stars
due to close encounters reduces the central kinetic energy and favors
the closer clumping of stars as gravity dominates.

![Globular\_Figure6](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure6.png?w=640)Figure
6

We next examine a key property of GCs, their metallicity (Figure 6). The
early universe was almost solely made up of Hydrogen and Helium, which
still remain the dominant elements. But since then stellar
nucleosynthesis and supernovae have generated other heavier elements.
The fraction of elements other than H and He is absolute metallicity of
an astronomical object. In practice it is measured using spectroscopy as
the ratio of Iron to Hydrogen. Typically, the metallicity of an
astronomical object as relative to the sun:

![\\left\[\\dfrac{Fe}{H}\\right\]=\\log\\left\[\\dfrac{N\_{Fe}}{N\_{H}}\\right\]-\\log\\left\[\\dfrac{N\_{Fe}}{N\_{H}}\\right\]\_{Sun}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cleft%5B%5Cdfrac%7BFe%7D%7BH%7D%5Cright%5D%3D%5Clog%5Cleft%5B%5Cdfrac%7BN_%7BFe%7D%7D%7BN_%7BH%7D%7D%5Cright%5D-%5Clog%5Cleft%5B%5Cdfrac%7BN_%7BFe%7D%7D%7BN_%7BH%7D%7D%5Cright%5D_%7BSun%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\left[\\dfrac{Fe}{H}\\right]=\\log\\left[\\dfrac{N_{Fe}}{N_{H}}\\right]-\\log\\left[\\dfrac{N_{Fe}}{N_{H}}\\right]_{Sun}")

Where N is the number of atoms of Iron or Hydrogen inferred from the
spectrum. Thus, stars with
![\[Fe/H\]\>0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D%3E0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H]\>0") are more metallic than the sun and those with
![\[Fe/H\]\<0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D%3C0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H]\<0") are less metallic than the sun. The stars with greater
metallicity tend to be redder and those with lower metallicity are
bluer, all other things being equal. All GCs in the Milky Way, barring
Liller 1 (
![\[Fe/H\]=0.22](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D%3D0.22&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H]=0.22")), have lower metallicity than the sun. The distribution
of GC metallicities however interestingly shows a bimodal pattern
(Figure 6). One peak, the dominant one, is seen at
![\[Fe/H\]=-1.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D%3D-1.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H]=-1.5") and another at
![\[Fe/H\]=-0.7](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D%3D-0.7&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H]=-0.7"). Notably, in the past 2 decades studies on several other
galaxies have recapitulated this bimodal distribution we see in the
Milky Way. The dominant peak in this distribution points to a prevalence
of low metallicity GCs, which in turns implies that they are
predominated by population-II stars or those that formed early in the
Galaxy’s history. The second peak could represent the formation of later
clusters during galactic merger/cannabalism events. Indeed, the Hubble
space telescope observations suggest that large-scale gas clumping in
galactic collisions might allow formation of new GCs. A differential
history of the GCs with different metallicities is supported by their
spatial distribution (Figure 1). One observes that clusters with lower
than average metallicity are more widely distributed and dominant at
higher galactic latitudes. This suggests that they are indeed likely to
be “fossils” from the early era of star formation in the galactic halo
and contain some of the earliest surviving stars in our galaxy.
Consistent with this, more recent studies show that galaxies with bigger
central bulges have more GCs.

![Globular\_Figure7](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure7.png?w=636&h=301)Figure
7

Now we can look at some correlations between the between the above
discussed variables. First, we look at the correlation between
metallicity and distance from the galactic center (Figure 7) as a follow
up to the above discussion on Figure 1. Each GC in Figure 7 is
color-coded according to its metallicity as in Figure 6 and the
distribution of the metallicity on the y-axis is indicated by the rug.
We observe a trend of decreasing metallicity at greater distances from
the center of the galaxy. Importantly, there are hardly any GCs with
![\[Fe/H\] \>
-1](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5BFe%2FH%5D+%3E+-1&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"[Fe/H] \> -1") at distances greater than 8 kpc from the galatic center.

![Globular\_Figure8](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure8.png?w=648&h=307)Figure
8

If we discount the GCs which have undergone core collapse, we also
observe a positive correlation between central concentration
![c](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "c") of
the GC and its absolute magnitude
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") (Figure 8). This suggests that as long as a GC does not undergo
core collapse its brightness increases with the central concentration.
Notably, this plot also shows that there are few GCs, which have
undergone core collapse which are brighter than
![M\_V=-7.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-7.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-7.5"). Astronomers propose that this might mean that the time
required for the most luminous GCs to undergo core collapse is greater
than the current age of the universe. Notably, we also see that in a
plot of ![c](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=c&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"c") versus distance from the galactic center (Figure 9), nearly all
GCs, which have undergone core collapse, occur closer to the center of
the Galaxy ( ![\<8
kpc](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%3C8+kpc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\<8 kpc")).

![Globular\_Figure9](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/12/globular_figure9.png?w=644&h=305)Figure
9

This preliminary glance of at GCs is just to obtain a flavor of the
mysteries they hold regarding the origin and evolution of the universe.
Recent studies (e.g. that of WE Harris published last year) have shown a
particular relationship between the luminosity of the host galaxy and
number of GCs they have. While the Milky Way has close to the 147 GCs we
have explored here, giant galaxies like the great Virgo galaxy of M87
have over 10,000 GCs. Over the years astronomers have also obtained
evidenced for another interesting relationship. Let
![M\_h=M\_b+M\_d](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_h%3DM_b%2BM_d&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_h=M_b+M_d") (where
![M\_h](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_h&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_h") is the total mass of a galaxy, which is the sum of the total mass
in baryonic matter
![M\_b](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_b&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_b") and the total dark matter
![M\_d](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_d&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_d")), then
![\\eta=\\frac{N\_{GC}}{M\_h}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta%3D%5Cfrac%7BN_%7BGC%7D%7D%7BM_h%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta=\\frac{N_{GC}}{M_h}") (where
![N\_{GC}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=N_%7BGC%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"N_{GC}") is the total number of GCs associated with the galaxy). This
![\\eta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta") has been found to be nearly constant for galaxies ranging from
dwarfs to giants. Why is this the case remains a mystery.

Recent studies with the Hubble space telescope have show other types of
associations of GCs. In the great galactic assemblage Abell 1689, there
is swarm of approximately 160,000 GCs a sphere of diameter of 2.4
million light-years close to center of this galaxy cluster. These are
apparently not GCs associated with one galaxy but seem to be a common
pool of GCs from the entire galactic cluster that have aggregated close
to its center, which is rich in the mysterious dark matter. It such
indirect clues regarding dark matter that give us faint hints regarding
one the greatest mysteries of the universe. What exactly is the link
between GCs formation and dark matter and how did they form in the first
place. These are questions which show that as ever astronomy leads the
way to where the frontiers of physics lie.
