+++
title = "A note on Cepheid variables: reproducing the study of the period-luminosity laws"

+++
In the 13th year of our life, when the skies of our city were still
tolerably dark, we observed two stars
![\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\beta") Persei (Algol) and
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Cephei from our balcony which faced north on every night they
were visible. Thus, we reproduced the beginnings of one of the great,
but less-appreciated, stories in science that took place in the late
1700s. The story of variable stars, i.e. stars whose brightness changes
over time, goes back even earlier. Bullialdus in the late 1600s observed
the star
![o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=o&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "o")
Ceti (Mira) for 6 years and established that it varies dramatically in
its brightness (magnitude) over a period of 333 days. Presciently he
declared that the variability was because of dark regions on the star
that periodically presented themselves to the earth even as the
sunspots. Newton in his Principia adopted the same explanation for the
variability in Mira and subsequently after further observations Wilhelm
Herschel too believed this to be the cause for stellar variability.
Today we know that it is not the case for the Mira variables but then
star spots do play a role for rotating variables like BY Draconis.

The first evidence for other mechanisms of variability came up over 100
years later when the astronomers Edward Pigott and young, deaf Goodricke
studied
![\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\beta") Persei (Algol) and
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Cephei. They concluded that the variability of the former
might be due to an eclipse by a darker body. Thus, the theory of
eclipsing binaries was born and was subsequently confirmed for
Algol-type variables. For
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Cephei Goodricke proposed the starspot mechanism.
![\\eta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta") Aquilae and
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Cephei discovered by Pigott and Goodricke were the founder
members of a whole class of regularly varying stars like it which were
subsequently discovered: the Cepheids. The Cepheids, unlike the Miras
tended to be of shorter period — several days rather than of an order
closer to an year. Further, the Miras, unlike the Cepheids, while having
a general periodicity did not strictly adhere to it both in terms of
temporal period and actual magnitudes attained at maxima or minima. Like
the Algol-type variables the Cepheids instead showed a strict
periodicity in their light variation (the light curve) and also the
maximum and minimum brightness they attained (amplitude). However,
unlike the Algol-type variables but like the Miras they continuously
varied in their brightness. This form of variability completely baffled
the astronomers and physicists, who nevertheless came to believe in some
kind of eclipse mechanism shortly after their discovery based on the
strict periodicity they shared with the Algol and
![\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\beta") Lyrae type eclipsing variables. This idea remained in force
for more than a century. In the late 1800s the German physicist August
Ritter carried out one of the first detailed studies on gas spheres. In
course of that he almost prophetically predicted an alternative
mechanism for variability of stars i.e. pulsation; however, it was
totally ignored by astronomers.

But at the turn of that century Schwarzschild’s study of the Cepheid
![\\eta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta") Aquilae showed that its visual light variability was also
accompanied by color (spectral type) variability. In 1908 Leavitt, while
studying variables from the Small Magellanic cloud, discovered that for
some variables with a regularly periodic light curves their period was
directly correlated with their apparent luminosity (given that all stars
in a Magellanic cloud were expected to be at roughly the same distance
from our solar system). By 1912 she had established that this
period-luminosity law specifically applied to Cepheids. Shortly
thereafter Shapley marshalled various lines of evidence to suggest that
the variability of Cepheids was likely not due to eclipses but due to
pulsations. In the coming years Eddington developed the first physical
theory for pulsating Cepheids by modeling them as thermodynamic engines
that operate by pulsation, wherein the energy gain and dissipation
compensate each other. Subsequent observations of the radial velocity of
Cepheid derived from spectroscopy by Baade and others helped confirm the
pulsation theory and also refined it further even as the physics of the
stars was being better understood. In this context we should point out
the key contribution of the sadly forgotten Hindu astronomer Hari Keshab
Sen from Prayag, who was also a student of Vedic literature and studied
the origin of the Hindu concepts of infinity in the upaniṣad-s. In 1948
while at the Harvard observatory, which was the great center of variable
star research, he presented the first refined model for Cepheid
variability: He showed that to explain the Cepheid variability one
needed to develop a correct model for the internal structure of the
star. He showed that for a star the ratio of the central gas density to
its mean gas density was of key importance to explain variability. His
work showed that this is particularly high Cepheids and using this in
the model could explain the asymmetric amplitude of the Cepheid
variability.

In years following the discovery of the period-luminosity law it was
used by Hertzsprung to calculate the distance of the Magellanic clouds
from the solar system. While this attempt had its errors it was the
beginning of one of the most important developments in all of science:
the use of Cepheids to measure the size of our universe, starting from
the realization that the Magellanic clouds lay outside our own galaxy.
The first step in correctly applying the period-luminosity law to
measure the universe was the realization that the Cepheids were not a
monolithic group but included a range of distinct families each obeying
their own period-luminosity relationship:  
1\) W Virginis or type-II Cepheid stars: These are old stars with mass
equal to or lower than the Sun but are distended having radii tens of
times the Sun. They tend to be of the spectral types from mid F to early
K and about -.5:-2.5 in absolute magnitude. They are mostly found in the
central galactic spherical component and globular clusters.

2\) RV Tauri variables: These tend to be more luminous giant versions of
the W Virginis stars with an absolute magnitude in the -4:-5 range and
are redder with more G to later K-type spectrum. Their light curves show
alternating deep and shallow minima and concomitantly their
period-luminosity laws are much more lax than the classic or type-II
Cepheids.

3\) The RR Lyrae variables: They are sub-giants usually of the A-F
spectral class again with a low mass of about half the Sun. They too are
old stars which have previously lost gas as red giants before climbing
down to just above the main-sequence in the Hertzprung-Russell diagram.
They too are present in the spherical center of the galaxy and globular
clusters.

4\)
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Scuti variables: These are whitish stars in the A to early F
spectral class and are characterized by a low amplitude and short-period
pulsation (roughly \< 7 hours). They are close to the main-sequence.

5\) Classic Cepheids (DCEP): These are also known as type-I Cepheids and
are prototyped by the original members like
![\\eta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta") Aquilae and
![\\delta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdelta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\delta") Cephei. They are massive, giant stars: 4-20 Sun masses and
with typical absolute magnitudes of -1.75:-6.4, i.e \~500:31,000 times
the brightness of the Sun (the brightest being 200,000 times as bright
as the Sun). They are young, metal-rich stars which in galaxies like
ours are mostly in regular elliptical orbits around the galactic center.
Within the classical Cepheids, we might further recognize the DCEPS
group which includes representatives like the current Pole Star
![\\alpha](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Calpha&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\alpha") Ursae Minoris which show an amplitude of visual magnitude
pulsation less than .5 with generally symmetric light curves.

These Cepheid-like stars define a strip across of the
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram known as the instability strip which mark
the region in it where an evolving star develops period-luminosity
law-type pulsation. Like any oscillator a pulsating variable star can
pulsate in the fundamental mode of oscillation or as a higher overtone.
The mode can be understood thus: if it is pulsating in the fundamental
mode then all of the stellar sphere moves in and out at the same time
-i.e. all of the star contracts and expands in unison. If it is
pulsating the first overtone then we imagine a central shell, the nodal
sphere, within the star where the gas is at rest. When the gas inside
that shell is contracting then gas outside it expands and vice versa. In
the second overtone pulsation we have two concentric nodal spheres with
the gas inside the outer and innermost shells contracting when that
inside the middle shell expands and vice versa. Both fundamental mode
and overtone pulsation are seen across Cepheids types.

In the remainder of this note we shall explore the period-luminosity law
for classical Cepheids using the wealth of modern data from ground- and
satellite-based observations. To start we take a data-set of 674
Cepheids from the Milky Way for which we have reliable period, mean
visual (V band,
![m\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V")) magnitude and parallax-derived distance information. Using the
distance in parsecs
![d](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=d&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "d") we
calculate the absolute magnitude (
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V")) of the stars using the formula:  
![M\_V=m\_V+5-5\\log\_{10}(d)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3Dm_V%2B5-5%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28d%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=m_V+5-5\\log_{10}(d)")

We then plot
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") against the base 10 logarithm of the period (in days) of the star
to see if we can recapitulate the period-luminosity law (Figure 1). In
Figure 1 the regular classic Cepheids are in blue. The DCEPS group is
further shown in red. Those DCEP that do have an overtone pulsation are
colored violet and those DCEPS with overtone pulsation are colored
green.

[![Cepheids\_Figure1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure1.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure1.png)Figure
1

What we see in Figure 1 is that there is a general positive
period-luminosity correlation. But by no means it can be termed a strong
law  
with a low correlation,
![r^2=.22](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D.22&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=.22"). Nevertheless we can observe a few interesting things: the
DCEPS are not found at the high end of the luminosity range but they are
dominant at the lower end of the luminosity range. Similarly, the
overtone pulsators are more at the lower side of the range. In any case
with a correlation like this one can hardly expect to use Cepheids as an
accurate measure of distance. So what is the issue here? The answer to
this lies in the observation that was first made in the late 1800s that
light from a star does not reach us unimpeded: it is scattered by dust
in interstellar space. This dust selectively scatters the lower
wavelength light towards the blue end of the spectrum more than that
from red end. Details of this extinction of starlight were worked out
only in the last century. It can be quantified by using the measure
![E\_{B-V}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=E_%7BB-V%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"E_{B-V}") which is the observed excess of the difference between the B
band and the V band filter magnitudes relative to the real
![B-V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=B-V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"B-V") color index.

We have these
![E\_{B-V}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=E_%7BB-V%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"E_{B-V}") values for a high-quality data-set which is a subset of 383
brighter stars of our starting data-set. For this we additionally have
the magnitudes measured in several photometric bands in addition to the
V band. Hence, to start we make the same plot as above of
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") computed from distance in parsecs (Figure 2).

[![Cepheids\_Figure2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure2.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure2.png)Figure
2

We note that even though we have only half the data as in the first plot
and we have lost some of the lower luminosity stars the results are
similar. This suggests that the what we observed above is generally
consistent across the data: a low correlation
![r^2=.23](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D.23&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=.23").

Now we make use of the
![E\_{B-V}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=E_%7BB-V%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"E_{B-V}") values for these stars applying a multiplication factor of
3.23 and using the below formula:  
![M\_V=m\_V-3.23E\_{B-V}+5-5\\log\_{10}(d)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3Dm_V-3.23E_%7BB-V%7D%2B5-5%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28d%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=m_V-3.23E_{B-V}+5-5\\log_{10}(d)")

Now we plot this extinction corrected
![M\_v](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_v&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_v") against base 10 logarithm of the period (Figure 3).

[![Cepheids\_Figure3](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure3.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure3.png)Figure
3

Now with a correlation of
![r^2=.92](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D.92&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=.92") we get an unambiguous period-luminosity law for the classical
Cepheids ranging from -1.75:-6.4
![M\_v](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_v&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_v"). The tendency of the low-amplitude DCEPS to be excluded from the
high end of the magnitude-period range is also clear.

In the above approach we solved the issue of extinction of starlight by
interstellar dust on a star-by-star basis using
![E\_{B-V}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=E_%7BB-V%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"E_{B-V}") for each star. To tackle this directly rather than for each
case the astronomer Madore defined a new magnitude function called
Wesenheit
![W](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=W&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "W")
that is free of the extinction effect. Wesenheit can be calculated by
measuring the magnitude in multiple photometric bands e.g. V and and the
near-infrared I band (806 nm midpoint). For illustration with our
current data-set we shall use the V and I band Wesenheit. For that we
first calculate the near-infrared absolute magnitude from the apparent
![m\_I](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_I&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_I") magnitude of the star which has been obtained using the I band
filter:  
![M\_I=m\_I+5-5\\log\_{10}(d)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_I%3Dm_I%2B5-5%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28d%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_I=m_I+5-5\\log_{10}(d)")

We then couple this with the uncorrected
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") calculated from
![m\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V") as above using the below Wesenheit formula:  
![W=M\_I-1.55(M\_V-M\_I)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=W%3DM_I-1.55%28M_V-M_I%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"W=M_I-1.55(M_V-M_I)")

We then plot this against
![\\log\_{10}(P)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}(P)") as before (Figure 4).

[![Cepheids\_Figure4](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure4.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure4.png)Figure
4

We see that we now get an even better period-Wesenheit law than with the
case-by-case extinction correction:
![r^2=.98](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D.98&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=.98"). Thus Wesenheit is a very effective means of capturing the
Cepheid period-luminosity relationship in an extinction independent
manner.

[![Cepheids\_Figure5](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure5.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure5.png)Figure
5

Finally, if we look at a histogram of extinction-corrected absolute
magnitudes for these Milky Way Cepheids (Figure 5) we find an
interesting distribution with a clear right skew and hint of bimodality
or a thick right tail. The skew is likely in part an artefact of losing
the lower luminosity overtone pulsators. There is a clear peak at
![M\_V=-3](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-3&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-3"), second peak or shoulder at around
![M\_V=-3.8](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-3.8&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-3.8") that leads to a fat tail. This suggests that at least in
this dataset classical Cepheids themselves might have at two
sub-categories based on luminosity.

We next turn to classical Cepheids in the Large Magellanic cloud and the
Tarantula nebula. For this we use the data collected by the ground-based
Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy with a 4.1 meter
mirror operating from Chile and released in 2012. This data-set contains
334 Cepheid stars from the LMC and the Tarantula Nebula with high
quality period and magnitude data in the V, I and the
![K\_s](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=K_s&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"K_s") (deeper near-infrared: 2190 nm midpoint) bands. It also has
information regarding whether the star is pulsating in the fundamental
mode or has overtone pulsation. However, there is no direct distance
data: the LMC being extra-galactic is out range for direct parallax
measurement. Hence, we shall use this data to perform a modern
recapitulation of the efforts starting with Hertzsprung. However, in
this case like Leavitt did we can assume that all the stars are at a
generally similar distance from our solar system as they are from a
single external galaxy. Thus, to investigate the period-luminosity law
we may directly plot apparent magnitude
![m\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V") against
![\\log\_{10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}") period (Figure 6).

[![Cepheids\_Figure6](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure6.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure6.png)Figure
6

We see some interesting points right away: 1) We get a much better
period-luminosity relationship even with no correction for starlight
extinction: correlation
![r^2=.58](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D.58&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=.58"). The LMC being an external galaxy would be subject to roughly
similar extinction across all its stars. Hence, the deviations caused by
extinction have less consequence for the basic period-luminosity
relationship in this case. 2) As we saw in the case of the Milky Way,
the overtone pulsators (plotted as red asterisks) occupy the lower-end
of period-luminosity range while fundamental tone pulsators the higher
end (blue dots). Notably they share a clear zone of overlap in the
middle of the range. 3) Closer examination of the two pulsation modes
hints that the two groups of stars might actually lie on separate lines.

We next utilize the
![K\_s](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=K_s&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"K_s") magnitude to plot a period-luminosity for it (Figure 7). Being in
the deeper near-infrared we expect it to suffer much less extinction
than the visual band of the spectrum.

[![Cepheids\_Figure7](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure7.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure7.png)Figure
7

Sure enough we see that the
![K\_s](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=K_s&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"K_s") magnitude shows much less dispersion than the V band magnitude.
Strikingly, what we saw as less-clearly with the visual magnitude, comes
out plainly in the
![K\_s](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=K_s&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"K_s") band: not only are the overtone (red asterisks) and fundamental
mode (blue) pulsators separated by the range occupied in the
period-luminosity relationship, they also lie on two distinct, roughly
parallel lines which appear shifted by an approximately constant factor.

We next utilize the V-I Wesenheit as per the above-stated formula to
study the same thing (Figure 8).

[![Cepheids\_Figure8](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure8.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure8.png)Figure
8

Again, Wesenheit being free of the extinction factor gives a clean
period-luminosity relationship and clearly shows the separation of the
fundamental and overtone mode pulsators into two nearly parallel
period-luminosity relationships.

Now that we have the period-luminosity laws for the LMC Cepheids in
place we next use it calculate the distance of the LMC. For this we
first need to calculate the absolute magnitude M for these stars from
the period. For this we can try out any of a number of formulae:

![M\_V=-2.43(\\log\_{10}(P)-1)-4.05](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D-2.43%28%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29-1%29-4.05&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=-2.43(\\log_{10}(P)-1)-4.05")  
This formula was based on relatively small sample of Cepheids studied
using the Hubble space telescope.

![M\_V=
-2.76(\\log\_{10}(P)-1)-4.16](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D+-2.76%28%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29-1%29-4.16&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V= -2.76(\\log_{10}(P)-1)-4.16")  
This formula using the visual band magnitude was derived by Madore and
Freedman in their seminal article on classical Cepheids.

![M\_I=
-3.06(\\log\_{10}(P)-1)-4.87](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_I%3D+-3.06%28%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29-1%29-4.87&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_I= -3.06(\\log_{10}(P)-1)-4.87")  
This formula was provided for the infrared I band by Madore and Freedman
in the same article.

![M\_V=\\dfrac{-\\log\_{10}(P)+.657}{.394}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V%3D%5Cdfrac%7B-%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29%2B.657%7D%7B.394%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V=\\dfrac{-\\log_{10}(P)+.657}{.394}")  
This formula was based on calibration of Milky Way Cepheids using the
Hipparchos space observatory’s parallax measurements.

Once we get
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") or
![M\_I](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_I&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_I") with these formulae we next compute the distance modulus:  
![\\mu=m\_V-M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3Dm_V-M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=m_V-M_V")  
From the distance modulus we can easily get distance in parsecs as:  
![d=10^{\\tfrac{\\mu+5}{5}}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=d%3D10%5E%7B%5Ctfrac%7B%5Cmu%2B5%7D%7B5%7D%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"d=10^{\\tfrac{\\mu+5}{5}}")

Since we saw considerable dispersion of the
![m\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V") values (Figure 6) and given that the corresponding
![M\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=M_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"M_V") computation by these formulae will have the issues of extinction
we shall instead resort other formulae that can correct for this using
both
![m\_V](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_V&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_V") and
![m\_I](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=m_I&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"m_I") to compute distance modulus directly:  
![\\mu=m\_V+3.746(\\log\_{10}(P)-1)-2.523(m\_V-m\_I)+5.959](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3Dm_V%2B3.746%28%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29-1%29-2.523%28m_V-m_I%29%2B5.959&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=m_V+3.746(\\log_{10}(P)-1)-2.523(m_V-m_I)+5.959")  
This is the formula of the team of the astronomer Sandage. It seems to
underestimate
![\\mu](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu").

![\\mu=m\_V+3.255(\\log\_{10}(P)-1)-2.45(m\_V-m\_I)+5.899+.08](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3Dm_V%2B3.255%28%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29-1%29-2.45%28m_V-m_I%29%2B5.899%2B.08&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=m_V+3.255(\\log_{10}(P)-1)-2.45(m_V-m_I)+5.899+.08")  
This is the formula of the Freedman team which is what we shall use for
our purpose. Having calculated
![\\mu](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu") we get distances for the stars from it and plot the distribution
(Figure 9).

[![Cepheids\_Figure9](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure9.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure9.png)Figure
9

Thus, we get the median distance modulus
![\\mu=18.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3D18.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=18.5") and median distance for the LMC as 50,086.8 parsecs.
However, we notice that there is a clear bimodal distribution of the
computed distances with peaks around 54,000 and 42,000 parsecs. Why do
we see this and which of these is correct? The answer lies in the
earlier period-luminosity plots where we saw two distinct laws for
fundamental mode and overtone pulsators. This was the key finding
detailed by the astronomer Böhm-Vítense who suggested the overtone
pulsators are shifted by ![\\Delta \\log\_{10}(P) \\approx
.15](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5CDelta+%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29+%5Capprox+.15&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\Delta \\log_{10}(P) \\approx .15") with respect to the fundamental
mode Cepheids. Hence, to apply a uniform period-luminosity law we have
to transform the observed period
![P](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "P") of
the overtone pulsators to their fundamental mode period
![P\_0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P_0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P_0") by the formula:  
![P\_0=\\dfrac{P}{.716-0.027\\log\_{10}(P)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P_0%3D%5Cdfrac%7BP%7D%7B.716-0.027%5Clog_%7B10%7D%28P%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P_0=\\dfrac{P}{.716-0.027\\log_{10}(P)}")

If we use this transformation in the above formula of the Freedman team
we get the distance distribution plot seen in Figure 10.

[![Cepheids\_Figure10](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure10.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/cepheids_figure10.png)Figure
10

We now get a sharp, single-peaked distribution with a mean distance
modulus of
![\\mu=18.64](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3D18.64&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=18.64") and median distance of 53660 parsecs for the LMC. These
values are within the range of values published in the last two decades.
Most authors these days favor a distance modulus of
![\\mu=18.5](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cmu%3D18.5&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\mu=18.5"). Thus, even though the period-luminosity law looks like an
obvious way to measure the distance of the universe and even estimate
the expansion rate of the universe in the form of Hubble’s constant,
actually doing so presents several challenges some of which we have just
seen in the above experiments.
