+++
title = "“Like the vidyādhara’s sword”"

+++
In old Hindu tradition a man who attained siddhi in his mantra practice
was believed to become a vidyādhara whose might was manifest in the form
his beautiful female partner who flew beside him embodying the power of
fertility and the sword he held in his hand embodying the essence of
might itself. We had remarked to a clump of modern Hindus that unless
his might and that of his nation is manifest like the vidyādhara’s sword
which lays opponents low all their opulence will come to naught and not
be set in history. They did not get anything of what we had said. We
said: “Never mind. Nothing matters. Like the what happened to the
archosaurs of the Mesozoic everything comes to an end so why care for
anything at all?”

◊◊◊◊

A clump of Hindus were seated at a table on a somber afternoon in the
big mleccha-land. The meal which was being consumed seemed so
unremarkable that most would have not even realized that they had
finished lunch. Yet most seemed to be quite contended. We do not know
why that was the case for the rest but at least in our case it was
simply because we do not think too much into the future and at that
moment the gods had kept us free of pain. Some where positively
exultant, talking of their successes with grants or businesses. Others
were triumphantly talking of the monetary success story of the Hindus as
a group in mleccha-land. They were duly comparing themselves with the
prathamaikarāksasavādin-s. Then someone brought up the topic of politics
in mleccha-land. Suddenly there was a bit of shift in the mood. Most
expressed surprise and anguish over the crowning of the new
mlecchādhipati. They went about the Russian conspiracy as though they
were senior agents of the mleccha-spaśālaya. Some of them started the
discussion of whether the outgoing ardhakṛṣṇa-mlecchendra was one of the
or the greatest mleccheśvara-s. With three exceptions most in the clump
seemed to settle on him being at least one of the greatest
mlecchendra-s. Basking the pleasant warmth of that feeling their calm
was restored a bit as though in the gentle twilight glow of the setting
sun of the mlecchapa. Soothed, they began to talk again of the great
monetary achievements of the Hindus of mleccha-land.

Some of them noticed our silence and asked what we had to say on the
matter. After some attempts at deflection we simply presented our view
of the reality. Most found it utterly unpalatable and were unable to
come to terms with it. The only two in the room who had voted for the
jayitṛ rather than the favored candidate turned to us and said: “You
have a point. We have learned this the hard way after stumbling through
the mleccha-maze for 35 years. How did you get there? We have always
thought of you as not being a man of the world lost in impractical
arcana.” One of them continued: “We have always felt bad for you given
what people would think of you for your pursuit of the recondite. This
vision you present is deeply depressing to some of us. How could you
live with it without going insane?” We simply smiled and said if it were
to make them go insane then it was better they disregarded what we had
said and move on. As for us we told them perhaps a bit too bluntly that
their supposed commiseration was of utterly no use.

In the background decadent Hindi film music was gently playing. Lulled
by it and the unmemorable meal drawing blood to the belly, we thought
they would return to their state contentment. The only word we
registered from the wafting song was ‘halcal’ and it was a ‘halcal’ our
words seem to have set off a in their midst. One of them went to shut
off the music. nM’s perpetual state of self-certainty in the service of
the mleccha seemed to have been challenged. Barbarin who had survived
certain crises by the skin of his teeth seemed to be torn between two
opposites. Unlike before, the crises had taught him that he was not
pratiṣṭhāvān in the midst of the mleccha as he thought he was. He
wondered about the real significance of the fall of tailakeśa, and was
probably apprehending faint flashes of the truth. Another brought up the
case of the professor who was defrauded in toto by his pāṇḍūrikā
indologist former wife, all while purchasing expensive antique Hindu
images only to be used as props and doorstops in her study. Suddenly,
some were talking about the mysterious “injustice” they had faced in
life. Repressed and unspeakable tales of liberal allies turning against
them spurted out of the mouth of one or the other – how the super-nice
friend John or colleague Dick or boss Harry had turned against them when
“push had come to shove”. Some murmurings passed around of sons or
daughters finding mleccha sexual partners and losing all vestiges of
“values” and “culture”.

But others started vaguely fighting back against the current which was
sweeping the room. Yet they could not apprehend precise targets. One
began with a windy denouncement of our insistence on using cousin
primates, rodents, isopterans and hymenopterans as models to understand
the human condition, and concluded with the reassuring statement: “We
are humans with a free will to do what we want in a free country that
protects our rights by law. Its all in our hands. Only losers go about
blaming others for their failures.” Someone followed up speaking of
William “semiconductor” Shockley though we did not get the drift of why
they had gone all the way there. In all this nM found his footing again
and set forth to defend various “truths” that were suddenly being
doubted. He went on to narrate how he has given had received a niṣka at
the hallowed hands of the ardhakṛṣṇeśvara himself. Then palitatvac
chimed in saying how after long years of service to a great mleccha lord
he was given a mudra too. Defensively he added that there was nothing
wrong in transmogrifying his name with a Sanskrit root into meaningless
garbage for we have to be understanding of the mleccha-s who cannot
pronounce “complex” names. Perhaps pricked by the smirk on our face he
turned to us and condolingly added us: “You were always smarter than us
from school days. But you are not getting ahead because you have been
disrespectful of the mleccha-s who matter, just like to the teachers in
school and college. Remember in our culture we respect the guru-s.”
Bringing back the focus to the financial someone quipped that it was not
long before “a Bill Gates, an Elon Musk or those google guys emerged in
our midst.” Another said: “arrey\! It has already happened. See google
and Microsoft\!” But then Krodhavaśa who seemed to have flipped
retorted: “I do think we should distinguish working for an established
company or starting yet another floppy start-up from what those guys
have done. We have some way to go. So may be there is \[a point to what
we had said\].” Like with passing moon the tides eventually ebbed and a
different kind of uneasy quite prevailed in the room.

◊◊◊◊

To palaver about what we have said in many ways on these pages, even as
our ancestors were said to speak of the same sat in many ways.  
\-Most of these Hindus do not get it that they will never become a
śveta-tvaca-mleccha even though their chief desire seems to be to earn
respect from such.

\-Whatever great deeds the Hindu achieves on the academic front he is
not going to be acknowledged for those and his conquests will be
attributed to the mleccha. So if he is pursuing such conquests primarily
to be recognized and awarded by the mleccha system he has little hope of
getting there. This leads to tremendous frustration among those who do
not get it and simultaneously an inability appreciate the genuine
conquests of their own people because they are constantly using false
yardsticks.

\-In a subset it sparks the temptation to get into the “cartel” by
cheating on matters of substance which usually results in even bigger
damage.

\-However good the Hindu is \*on an average\* he is going to be paid
less and given fewer resources than a mleccha with lower or equal
capacity to him. Unless he puts this in proper perspective, there will
always be discontent and misunderstand regarding why he has not yet
entered the “club”. This is because he has internalized the mleccha
framework as the truth and is struck by why things are not working as
enunciated within it. It is like tackling a problem in non-Euclidean
geometry within a framework assuming the 5th postulate as true.

\-Those who gloat over monetary success do not realize that king
Vaiśravaṇa’s nidhi without his million-slaying antardhānāstra is of no
consequence. The Hindu does not put his money into things that
strengthen his memetic ramparts against the other. Instead, he pours it
as āhuti-s of Triśiras Tvāṣṭra for the dānava-s and hopes that the
deva-s would lift him up. The strengthening of the \*Hindu\* nation is
very far from their minds. They content with their monetary success or
of theirs as a group for the sake of boasting but do not translate that
into efforts that will actually strengthen them as a nation. Instead
they expend it either on mleccha causes or in plain hedonistic pursuits:
do you really need a roomful of unused electronics etc etc…

\-So is all this the whimpering of the losers? So let us take a look at
the winners – may be we can learn something from them. There they are
seated on their resplendent vāhana-s bearing niṣka-s and mudra-s
conferred by great mleccha lords. How did they get there and what have
the achieved? They got there by faithfully serving the mleccha or
marrying a mleccha and the proud niṣka-s they sport are merely the
biscuit Tim has tossed to his cur Tom. They might pass their whole life
in great ease and in a cocoon of recognition from the mleccha. But at
the end will they have set themselves in history? Not at all. The best
they would be is a footnote in small print. What about their demography?
As a part of the great “becoming” they will now be merged with mleccha
and be swept away by the dysgenic memetic infections they eagerly
inoculate themselves.

\-Only he is an abhijit in the world of men who is backed by the
possession of the mighty sword like that of that of the vidyādhara.

\-ity alaṃ vistāreṇa
