+++
title = "A note on tales of fratricide, warfare, cannibalism andxa0incest"

+++
The Osman conqueror of Constantinople, Mehmet-II, bothered by the civil
wars his predecessors had to fight to take the throne, institutionalized
the system of fratricide. In this system, the rival brothers of the
sultan, who took the throne, were all imprisoned and the moment he had
fathered a live son in his harem, he had his brothers strangled with a
silk rope. The Mohammedan tyrant of South India, Adil Shah, is said to
be one such brother who escaped execution. In the 1600s the sultan Ahmed
commuted the death to and imprisonment, usually with access only sterile
mates. In another Mohammedan potentate, that of the Mogols of India, the
tyrant Shah Jahan fathered several sons and daughters in his harem where
he cocooned himself and went on the indulge in incestuous couplings with
the latter. His sons were locked in a fratricidal conflict in which
Awrangzeb emerged victorious after killing his brothers and deposed Shah
Jahan. It is almost a truism: “Much of what we have seen in Homo has
been seen before in hymenoptera”, and things can get pretty ‘lurid’
there. That is what we shall be taking a brief look at here.

We had early discussed the case of the male competition among the
[chalcidoid fig
wasps](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/03/16/ramblings-on-sitters-and-foragers-multiplicity-of-males-caste-and-transnationality/)
where the males fight unto death in the natal fig in order mate with
their sisters. A similar scenario with its own complexities can be seen
in another chalcidoid lineage of the Eulophidae; e.g. the parasitoid
Melittobia and Anastatus wasps. The Mellitobia are tiny wasps (1-2 mm)
which are unlikely to have been noticed by anyone other than those with
a biological interest. They are parasitoids which lay their eggs mainly
on the prepupal stages of solitary wasps and solitary bees. Popular
hosts are: the organ-pipe mud-dauber wasp (Trypoxylon), which makes
tubular nests from mud and provisions its larvae with spiders; certain
bumblebees; leaf-cutter bees; wool-carder bees. They may also attack any
other larvae that are cohabiting the nest of the said bees/wasps or
other insects like blowflies. Typically, the flying female with long
wings on locating a suitable host, makes its way through the host nest
reach the developing host and stings it. The toxins from the sting
paralyze the host and arrest its development to go no further than the
pupa. Then the female uses its mandibles to suck the haemolymph of the
host from the wound and thus it gains nutrients in anticipation for
egg-laying.

![wasp\_morphs](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_morphs.jpg?w=640)Figure
1: Mellitobia morphs from Biology of the Parasitoid Melittobia
(Hymenoptera: Eulophidae) by Matthews, Gonzalez, Matthews, Deyrup.

What follows depends on the kind of host she gets. If it is a small
host, then she lays as many eggs as is possible for such a host, which
then develop into a small number of males and a much larger number of
flying females with long wings like the mother. These females need to
feed before they can lay eggs themselves and are capable to flight to a
new host. If it is a big host then she might lay about \<3 haploid
(unfertilized) eggs that becomes males and roughly 30 or fewer diploid
eggs that develop into a different kind of female. These initial larvae
develop rapidly from the egg and, like their mother, feed primarily off
the haemolymph of the host. The females developing from these diploid
eggs have short vestigial wings and do not need to feed before laying
eggs. They mate with the small-number of brothers who emerge and start
laying a new round of eggs right away to amplify the egg count. These
males might also mate with their mother if she is still alive and
around. The new round of offspring feature larvae that are equipped for
directly eating the host tissues rather than merely drinking haemolymph.
Thus, they consume the host and mature into adults – this generation of
females are like the foundress – they have long wings and are capable of
flight. They mate with their brothers and then make their way out of the
host cocoon. For this, a pioneer female stings the host cocoon at a spot
and its venom itself apparently acts as a pheromone to attract other
females. Then the females assemble as a circle and cooperatively chew at
the wall till they break an opening and then crawl out. They move by
crawling, jumping or flying in search of a new host.

There is no evidence the males ever leave their natal nest and die after
mating with their sisters or on occasions their mother (see below). But
the most striking aspects of the life of the male is their lethal combat
with siblings and their elaborate mating ritual (dance). An interesting
consequence of this lethal combat is that the females might be left as
virgins if all their brothers are killed in combat before mating with
them. If this were happen then the long-winged females fly away as
virgins to find a new host and feed on it. Then they lay a small number
of unfertilized hence haploid eggs on the host. She then carefully tends
to these eggs closely guarding them and stroking them with her antennae.
In roughly 2 weeks they develop into adult males and emerge from the
pupal cocoon. She mates with her first son who emerges and when her eggs
are fertilized she proceeds to lay a regular clutch of eggs as before.

![wasp\_transbergamotene](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_transbergamotene.jpg?w=640)

Figure 2 Alpha trans-bergamotene

For blind incestuous males the mating ritual in Melittobia is rather
elaborate. Virgin females appear to be first be attracted by towards
males by the male pheromone trans-bergamotene which has a “woody warm
tea”-like odor. Once the two have paired the male mounts the female and
perform a “dance” by fanning their wings and wagging their middle and
hind legs. They stroke the females antennae and then clasp her antennae
with theirs. This ritual has been described as the most complex among
chalcid wasps. The females queue up behind the mating pair and once the
male is done he moves on to the next female. This peculiar courtship
ritual of the male is puzzling. Why invest in an elaborate courtship
ritual when you have all the opportunity to mate with your sisters and
they have no major alternatives to choose as mates?

![wasp\_fratricide](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_fratricide.jpg?w=640)

Figure 3. brother killing brother from Feeding and siblicidal
cannibalism in a male parasitic wasp (Hymenoptera: Eulophidae) by
Deyrup, Matthews, Deyrup

The lethal combat with their brothers is conducted primarily using their
scythe-shaped mandibles and might involve decapitation and amputation of
appendages. Entomologists have obtained images of decapitated males
trying to incapacitate their rivals even in death by holding fast to
their appendages by means of the severed head alone. Yet males even
after suffering damage are quite capable of sustained copulations.
Further, the males upon killing their brothers, suck their blood and
feeding on their blood appears to make them live longer and mate to
their fullest potential. Typically, males which are bigger emerge as
winners. Males which are born first again have an advantage over their
later emerging brothers whom they quickly attack and dispatch However,
this propensity for violence is different among different species: In
Melittobia femorata it has been reported that the male violence is muted
rarely resulting in death. However, in this species the females engage
in combat and inflict serious injuries on each other. Thereby they
apparently establish small exclusive territories. In other species the
number of violent incidents between males decrease if the number of
females is more. However, in other genera like Anastatus apparently this
situation accentuated male violence leading to more deaths in a winner
take all struggle for mating with the sisters. While most male violence
in Melittobia is directed against the brothers on rare occasions they
might abruptly convert a copulatory attempt into an attack to kill the
sister or mother they are mating with and feed on their haemolymph. This
extreme male aggression with fratricide and cannibalistic imbibition of
the blood of brothers is puzzling for inbred and hence apparently
closely related males. Also puzzling is the rare but reproducibly
observed violence against sisters and mothers. This does not appear like
a simple mistake in recognition because the males proceed to copulate
and then suddenly turn to attack their potential mate.

![wasp\_killing\_mate](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_killing_mate.jpg?w=395&h=391)

Figure 4: Male killing female from Biology of the Parasitoid Melittobia
(Hymenoptera: Eulophidae) by Matthews, Gonzalez, Matthews, Deyrup.

We can draw comparisons between this violence and that seen in other
hymenopterans and arthropods. First we we may look at the more generally
parallels seen outside of hymenoptera: 1) The colonial fungus eating
thrip, Hoplothrips karnyi, engages in lethal male combat using its
weaponized forelegs and also the abdomen as a club. Thus, they take over
and guard the egg-clusters at sites where female lay eggs. Here, like
with the parasitoids, the bigger males win outright. But it differs in
that the small non-guarding males sneak matings with females away from
the egg clusters – suggesting a certain inter-male polymorphism.
Further, this conflict is not exclusively between sibling males. 2) The
cannibalistic redback spiders show strong male-male aggression for
getting access to virgins because of a strong first male-sperm
preference among females. Here too big males are favored in combat but
it is rarely lethal. The females also attack the males but only when
multiple males are competing. Smaller males tend to adopt the sneaky
quick coitus strategy. However, their success is lowered by them being
cannibalized by the female with whom they initiate a quick mating. In
contrast, the victorious big males initiate a long-drawn coitus with
high success of insemination.

![wasp\_copidosoma](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_copidosoma.jpg?w=640)

Figure 5. The encyrtid wasp Copidosoma

Closer parallels are seen in other hymenopterans: 3) [We have earlier
discussed the comparable violence seen in certain fig
wasps](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/03/16/ramblings-on-sitters-and-foragers-multiplicity-of-males-caste-and-transnationality/)
but here there two male morphs those that fight and tend to inbreed and
those that fly away. 4) The fighting male morphs of the Cardiocondyla
ants are (nearly) blind and engage in fierce fighting including killing
of their still developing brothers. In different Cardiocondyla species
72-84% of the emergent queens mate with their brothers. Thus, in this
hymenopteran there are many convergent similarities to Melittobia and
Anastatus. However, they are different in having a distinct flying male
morph like the fig-wasps that facilitates out-breeding. 5) The case of
the parasitoid encyrtid wasps like the Copidosoma lineage which attack
plusiine moth caterpillars features comparable conflicts in the context
of the remarkable process of polyembryony. This process begins with the
mother laying a single or two (one haploid and one diploid) egg in a
moth egg. The egg then undergoes early divisions to give rise to a
primary morula embryo, which then partitions into up to 3000 separate
secondary morulae – polyembryony. These then separately develop into
adults. Up to 24% of embryos develop into special larvae of the soldier
caste which do not develop into adults instead dying when their
reproductive siblings complete development and eat up the caterpillar.
The soldier larvae engages to two types of conflict: (i) conflict
against non-kin larvae which have been inserted into the same
caterpillar. This in observed both in Copidosoma bakeri and C.
floridanum where they recognize non-kin via their surrounding membrane.
(ii) Only in C.floridanum the females soldiers additionally attack the
male embryos and kill their brothers. This reduces their numbers in
order to establish a highly female-biased sex-ratio at end of
development resulting in a situation similar to Melittobia and
Anastatus. These few surviving brothers both mate with their sisters in
the natal caterpillar and also fly off to seek external copulations.
Thus, here the male numbers are reduced not by male-male conflict but by
the non-reproductive female soldiers that kill them.

Looking at things from the other side of the biological conflict, we
find that the hosts of Mellitobia, being locked in a life-and death
conflict, are not passive either. They use multiple remarkable means to
defend themselves: The mud-dauber wasp Chalybion californicum secretes a
poorly-studied aliphatic waxy compound from the underside of its abdomen
which it rubs against the nest walls; this repels the invading
Mellitobia effectively. The vespid keyhole wasp Pachodynerus nasidens
appears to visually or olfactorily detect invading Mellitobia and
directly bites them. The wool-carder bee, Anthidium manicatum, one of
the victims of Mellitobia, collects plant hairs from the leaves and
stems of certain species to make a “wool” in a form resembling cotton
balls as its brood chamber. Then it uses specialized hairs on it tarsi
to collect a secretion from the extrafloral trichomes of a totally
different set of plants and smears them on the wool. These secretions
inhibit parasitization by Mellitobia and other parasitoid wasps. Thus,
this mechanism is similar that used by the bee-killing beewolf wasp that
involves treatment of nests with Streptomyces bacteria. The antibiotic
produced by the bacterium kills fungi which might infect the nest.

![wasp\_mites](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/wasp_mites.jpg?w=610&h=455)

Figure 6 Acarinaria from Mutualism: Wasp Keeps Watchdogs to Protect
Young by Kronauer

Certain wasps like the eumenine wasp Allodynerus delphinalis and bees
like the yellow-banded carpenter bee, Mesotrichia caffra, have
specialized pockets on their thoracic and first/second abdominal
segments, called acarinaria in which they carry symbiotic mites. In the
case of the former wasp the mite is Ensliniella parasitica while in the
case of the latter bee it is Dinogamasus braunsi. In the case of the
Allodynerus-Ensliniella system studies have shown that the mites are
transmitted to the nest from the acarinaria of the mother and they
develop alongside her larvae feeding both off the provisioned
caterpillar and later the wasp larvae themselves. Thus, at first sight
they look like parasites, but their real use becomes apparent only when
the Allodynerus wasp is attacked by the parasitoid Mellitobia. When this
happens the mites launch an attack on the parasitoid biting it and it
fights back by biting them. But if there are about 10 mites they are
mostly sufficient to overwhelm the wasp and abort the parasitization.
Acarinaria are present, in addition to eumenid wasps, in different bees
of the families Apidae (carpenter bees), Halictidae (sweat bees) and
Stenotritidae (Australian burrowing bees) suggesting that the mites
might be a widely recruited watchdogs against Mellitobia and other
parasitoids. A very curious twist of this symbiosis is seen in the mite
Kennethiella trisetosa and the potter wasp Ancistrocerus antilope, which
makes a mud nest in tubular cavities. Here, the mites develop with both
female and male eggs, but once the females mature they kill the mites in
their brood cell and emerge mite-free. However, males continue to carry
them. At the time of mating they are transmitted from the male to the
female acarinaria in the anal region. This makes one wonder if the mites
impose some cost, which the females mitigate by killing them.

In general, the mite-hymenopteran symbiosis resemble the association of
the reduced endosymbiotic bacterium Hamiltonella defensa with aphids
which helps defend the latter against parasitoids. Few years ago we
discovered some of the enzymatic toxins that might be used in this
defense. Notably, many lizards also have mite pockets (sometimes also
housing ticks) but their function remains rather unclear. However,
another group of vertebrates, the rodents known as packrats, seem to
house pseudoscorpions in their nest and even transport them on their fur
when they disperse. These arachnids have been observed killing and
eating fleas which are parasites on the packrats suggesting a comparable
association to the mites of the wasps and bees. Over all the military
use of mites by the wasps and bees against Melittobia is comparable to
the human military dependence on the horse, elephant and to some extent
the dog.

The incest- and fratricide-filled lives of these little wasps interface
with many basic evolutionary questions of interest. In his initial study
of this phenomenon among hymenopterans, the great biologist Hamilton,
theorized that, when there is natally contained sib-mating, selection
would cause biased sex ratio with greater number of females than males.
This is because a female maximizes her fitness by producing only as many
sons as minimally require to fertilize all her daughters. Expenditure in
any further sons would be waste because they die in their natal nest
with no further mating, whereas the daughters fly away to found new
broods. So more the daughters, more the new offspring. This would also
reduce male competition among the sons in the natal patch. Further,
Hamilton noted that the hymenopterans are haplodiploid in
sex-determination with the males developing from unfertilized eggs. This
means that a female does not even need fertilized eggs for making males
suggesting that the sex-ratio could be slightly more female-biased.
Hamilton’s theory suggested that as the number of distinct females
laying their eggs in the same site (number of foundresses) increases
then the sex ratio would increase towards 0.5 because the males have
more opportunities for matings with daughters of other foundresses and
thereby increase the male-derived fitness of a given foundress. However,
in practice this has not been observed in Melittobia, with the sex-ratio
not responding to the number of foundresses in same site.

In the final part we will take a little detour to talk about a problem
that goes back the Charles Darwin’s pioneering studies on inbreeding. In
his work on this topic he stated (perhaps inspired by the deaths in his
own family probably arising from his marriage with a first cousin):  
“It often occurred to me that it would be advisable to try whether
seedlings from cross-fertilized flowers were in any way superior to
those from self-fertilized flowers.”

Accordingly, for 11 years he meticulously studied the effects of
inbreeding on various plants. In course of his study he did a series of
careful experiments with the plant Ipomea purpurea where he found that
inbreeding resulted in a reduced height, and reduced number of fruits
and seeds in the plants. However, after 6 generations of inbreeding he
got a plant he named “Hero” which was unexpectedly vigorous and its
descendants continued to be so. This marked the beginning of the study
of a phenomenon that has occupied geneticists since. The initial loss of
fitness is termed as inbreeding depression (ID) and is explained in
terms of genetic load possessed by a population in the form of the
deleterious recessive alleles masked by heterozygosity at those loci.
These alleles get exposed by inbreeding because of selfing producing
homozygosity at those loci with a consequent loss of fitness. Then when
these alleles are eventually removed by purifying selection upon
persistent inbreeding – termed purging – we are left with organisms like
“Hero”. These show an increased vigor due to the removal of these
deleterious alleles and now being a purified line with only the good
alleles at those loci. Since Darwin there has been a vigorous
experimental and theoretical debate on the role of purging on
stabilization of long-term inbreeding in plants and animals with no
universal consensus for diploid organisms. However, one intuitive
prediction of this idea has been that haplodiploid organisms, like
hymenopterans, would be more amenable to the development of long-term
inbreeding because the deleterious recessive alleles are obligately
exposed in haploid males for purging. Thus, the haplodiploid organisms
are seen as been already pre-purged; hence, are thought to pass through
the initial phase of persistent inbreeding without a major fall in
fitness due to ID which could under some circumstances lead to
extinction. This seems to be borne out by the emergence of long-term
stable inbreeding in parasitoid wasps like the above chalcidoid eulophid
wasps, the fig wasps, and certain mites with haplodiploidy.

However, in practice, even in hymenopterans the issue of purging remains
complicated. Notably, studies have suggested that persistent inbreeding
in Cardiocondyla, where queens mate with fighting males for several
generations, results in ID manifesting as shortened queen life span, and
higher brood mortality. Further, even in Melittobia it has been observed
that multiple unrelated foundresses parasitize the same host individual.
This suggests that there is potential for outbreeding, and even here, as
in the fig wasps, Cardiocondyla or Copidosoma, inbreeding might not be
complete. This suggests that the same danger of ID which has been
reported in Cardiocondyla and some parasitoids might exist for wasps
like Melittobia. This calls to question the theoretical prediction that
haplodiploidy facilitates persistent inbreeding as apparently seen in
the parasitoids via pre-purging in the haploid male. Given these
observations we wonder if after all there is a degree of ID that does
not escape purging even in the chalcidoid eulophid parasitoids. Further,
we have reported effectors encoded by endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria
that can either directly mutate DNA (deaminases) or induce breaks in DNA
(restriction endonuclease fold DNases) which on being repaired results
in mutations (a principle exploited in the now popular application of
the Cas9 CRISPR systems). Given that Wolbachia are present in these
parasitoids they could increase the genetic load by causing mutations
via these effectors. We wonder if the male lethal combat, the mating
dance, and even female killing, might be mechanisms by which this
genetic load is reduced as these actions help purge accrued mutations.

*Some literature:*  
\-Evolution of social wasps; Hunt.  
\-Wasp Keeps Watchdogs to Protect Young; Kronauer  
\-Parasitic mites as part-time bodyguards of a host wasp; Okabe and
Makino  
\-Biology of the Parasitoid Melittobia (Hymenoptera: Eulophidae);
Matthews, Gonzalez, Matthews, Deyrup  
\-Feeding and siblicidal cannibalism in a male parasitic wasp
(Hymenoptera: Eulophidae); Deyrup, Matthews, Deyrup  
\-Plant secretions prevent wasp parasitism in nests of wool-carder bees,
with implications for the diversiﬁcation of nesting materials in
Megachilidae; Eltz, Küttner,Lunau and Tollrian  
\-Ecological and evolutionary significance of phoresy in the Astigmata;
Houck and OConnor  
\-Sex determination and inbreeding depression in an ant with regular
sib-mating; Schrempf and Heinze  
\-Symbiotic relationships between pseudoscorpions and packrats
(Rodentia); Francke and Villegas-Guzmán  
\-A review of the biology of species in the genus Melittobia
(Hymenoptera: Eulophidae) with interpretations and additions using
observations on Melittobia australica; Dahms EC  
\-Extremely female-biased sex ratio and lethal male-male combat in a
parasitoid wasp, Melittobia australica (Eulophidae) Abe, Kamimura,
Kondo, Shimada  
\-Alternative mating tactics and fatal fighting in male fig wasps;
Cook  
\-Wingless and fighting males in fig wasps and other insects; Hamilton  
\-Females reward courtship by competing males in a cannibalistic spider;
Stoltz, Elias and Andrade  
\-Asymmetry in male lethal fight between parapatric forms of a social
spider mite; Sato, Sabelis and Mochizuki  
\-Risks and benefits of lethal male fighting in the colonial, polygynous
thrips Hoplothrips karnyi (Insecta: Thysanoptera); Crespi  
\-Phenotypically plastic traits regulate caste formation and soldier
function in polyembryonic wasps; Smith, Milton, and Strand  
\-Do plant populations purge their genetic load? Effects of population
size and mating history on inbreeding depression; Byers and Waller  
\-Inbreeding depression and haplodiploidy: experimental measures in a
parasitoid and comparisons across diploid and haplodiploid insect taxa;
Henter
