+++
title = "Some pictures relating to incidence of tuberculosis andxa0AIDS"

+++
[This another note of the type mentioned
earlier.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/05/20/a-superficial-look-at-national-population-density-and-some-life-history-features/)
The earlier mentioned caveats apply here too. These are simplistic and
superficial examinations of the issues being considered.

Tuberculosis is caused by *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* an
actinobacterium and is predominantly transmitted by means of aerosol
expelled from the respiratory tract of patients with pulmonary
infection. Very few live bacteria are sufficient to establish infection
in a new host. AIDS is caused by HIV-1 and HIV-2 which are related
retroviruses of lentivirus clade. It is predominantly sexually
transmitted although other kinds of transmission via blood products and
mother to child are also possible. TB is a disease known from the
earliest human record. In Hindu tradition we find its earliest mention
in the Atharvan collection (the yakṣma-sūkta-s; e.g. AV-vulgate 2.33)
and might have been discovered by the great brāhmaṇa Kaśyapa. The
disease balāsa described by the Atharvan-s also seems likely to have
been osseous TB, which has also been noted in approximately coeval
Egyptians. AIDS has a more murky medical history. Its origins can be
squarely placed in Africa where both forms appear to have emerged from
related retroviruses infecting chimpanzees (HIV-1) and the mangabey
monkey (HIV-2). Its world-wide spread is something which has happened
very recently in the aftermath of the European penetration of
sub-Saharan Africa. Yet these two diseases are believed to have gotten
entangled because HIV suppresses immune system of the host by targeting
the CD4+ T cells, macrophages and dendritic cells which are cells
central to the immune response itself. This is an interesting
evolutionary phenomenon with some deep ramifications. The weakening of
the immune system by AIDS is said to facilitate opportunistic infection
by *M.tuberculosis*.

This supposed connection between the two diseases made us check out the
actual data:  
\-The incidence of TB is from WHO for year 2012  
\-The incidence of HIV is from WHO for year 2012  
\-The other data is from UN for the latest available year.  
\-The incidence of HIV is based on those being recorded as going for
antiretroviral treatment drugs, so it is an underestimate of the actual
number( e.g. Bangladesh in this data).

[![TB\_vs\_AIDS](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/tb_vs_aids.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/tb_vs_aids.png)  
Figure 1

The number of TB and HIV incidences are positively correlated across 175
countries in a log-log plot of this data (Figure 1). The correlation has
![r^2=0.456](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.456&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.456") and slope is 0.662 (indicating scaling as roughly power
2/3). This is consistent with the pathological entanglement of the two
diseases but the correlation is not very high suggesting that they have
their own independent spheres of action. Indeed, TB was already a
widespread disease with large pool of infections ages before AIDS became
a global issue and retained that network even after the somewhat
effective vaccination and debilitating antibiotic treatments emerged for
it.

[![TB\_vs\_Pop](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/tb_vs_pop.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/tb_vs_pop.png)  
Figure 2

We next looked at how the incidences of TB scale with population of a
country (Figure 2) in a log-log plot. One notices that the two are
strongly positively correlated
(![r^2=0.774](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.774&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.774")) and slope 1.14722 indicating a nearly linear relationship
between the two. This suggests that irrespective of the population size
and continent the country comes from there an approximately fixed
incidence of TB for a unit of human population (median value of ratio of
TB incidences to population ![\\approx 4.5 \\times 10^{-4}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+4.5+%5Ctimes+10%5E%7B-4%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx 4.5 \\times 10^{-4} ")).

[![AIDS\_vs\_Pop](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/aids_vs_pop.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/aids_vs_pop.png)  
Figure 3

When we do the same for AIDS we seen an interesting difference (Figure
3). The two are again positively correlated in the log-log plot with a
slope of 0.93 suggesting an approximately linear correlation of the
number of incidences of AIDS with population size. However, the
correlation is much weaker than what is seen for TB:
(![r^2=0.454](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.454&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.454")). What could be the reasons for this? We chose to take a
closer look at these two diseases because currently they can infect
people pretty much anywhere via “regular” human activities such as
coughing, spitting or sex. They are not dependent on a special
predisposing factors like malaria which needs a vector with a
geographically localized distribution. Hence, we would say that the
weaker correlation for AIDS reflects a fundamental differences in the
“regular” human activities like sex. Right away one can see that
African countries have pretty much distinctly higher incidences of AIDS
that Asian countries with comparable populations. A major factor in this
could be the greater tendency for risky sexual behavior arising from the
promiscuous mating systems in Africa as compared to Asia. This
contention is supported by the two exceptions in Asia, Thailand and
Cambodia, which are known to be centers of risky sexual activities.

Thus these plots are a good example of how a simple illustration can
lead one to key factors in the differential epidemiology of diseases if
one keeps ones eyes open.

[![LE\_vs\_TB](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/le_vs_tb.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/le_vs_tb.png)  
Figure 4

[![LE\_vs\_HIV](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/le_vs_hiv.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/le_vs_hiv.png)  
Figure 5

One would expect that the incidences of these diseases are negatively
correlated with life-expectancy. The above two figures (Figure 4 and 5)
show this correlation on a log-log plot with life-expectancy. Yes, there
is negative correlation, but it is weak based data which we used. When
we look at the world at large it is slightly more pronounced for TB than
for AIDS. However, when we consider the continent of Africa alone the
correlation jumps up for AIDS (![r^2=0.323\\; vs \\;
r^2=0.153](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.323%5C%3B+vs+%5C%3B+r%5E2%3D0.153&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.323\\; vs \\; r^2=0.153"))and falls for TB (![r^2=0.165\\; vs \\;
r^2=0.224](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.165%5C%3B+vs+%5C%3B+r%5E2%3D0.224&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.165\\; vs \\; r^2=0.224")) relative to the global correlation
suggesting that specifically HIV infection is a notable factor in
reducing life-expectancy in the African continent.
