+++
title = "A brief overview of the last campaign of Chingiz Khan and the issue of succession in the Mongol empire"

+++
Succession is always an important issue in history. The legacy of a
mighty ruler and/or founder of an empire might quickly unravel if the
issue of succession is left unresolved. In Hindu history the Gupta-s
were marked with glory because following Candragupta-I they managed to
maintain a line of highly successful rulers with relatively smooth
succession: Samudragupta-\> Candragupta-II Vikramāditya-\>
Kumāragupta-\> Skandagupta-\>Budhagupta. Before them, the Maurya-s had
several succession problems but managed to put out a line three mighty
rulers. However, sometime during the reign of Aśoka things started going
bad and they never able to produce one within their own line who could
restore their power. In the case of the house of Śivajī, many of the
troubles for the fledgling neo-Hindu empire came as a result of problems
with succession. Among the Hindus, primogeniture meant that Śivajī’s
eldest son Śambhu would ascend the throne. However, he had shown bad
behavior and betrayed the cause of svarājya about a couple of years
before the great rajan’s death. Hence, he had been kept under detention
at the Panhala fort and some of Śivajī’s veteran ministers Moro Piṇgaḷe
and Aṇṇāji Datto had turned against him. His stepmother was trying to
place her young son Rājārāma on the throne. The ensuing conflict
seriously damaged svarājya at a critical juncture in the struggle of the
Hindus against the Mohammedans. Chingiz Khan faced a parallel situation
of indiscipline and possible disloyalty from this eldest son. His eldest
son Jochi was born shortly after he recovered his wife Börte who was in
captivity of his enemies for few months. A conflict broke out between
Jochi and his brother Chagadai and given the timing of his birth his
legitimacy as the son of Chingiz was called into question. A council was
called and Chingiz and his generals like Chormagun Noyan worked on
patching up the issue between his sons. While his father declared him to
be a legitimate son to the rest of his sons, the tensions persisted and
towards the end of his life he remained away in own ulus disobeying his
father’s orders when called to meet him. It appears that the great Khan
might have sent his sons Chagadai and Ögödei to bring Jochi to him to be
disciplined. The tensions ensuing from this could have affected the
succession issue but two factors played a role in resolving it. First,
among Altaic peoples ultimogeniture was the generally accepted rule
unless it was overruled by some clause of the previous Khan. Second,
Jochi died shortly before Chagadai and Ögödei set out to bring him to
the Khan, thus taking him out of the contention for succession. But that
aside, the success of the Mongol empire was in part how the succession
to Chingiz Khan was handled.

In 1223 CE, shortly after Jebe and Sübe’edei had crushed the combined
army of the Russians and Qipchak Khanate on the Kalka River, Chingiz
Khan in a council of senior Mongol commanders and officials declared
that Ögödei would succeed him as the great Khan. In making his choice he
considered the following: His first son Jochi was a competent general
who had distinguished himself early in his career in the Siberian
conquests, in the annexation of the Kirghiz horde, and later during the
attack on the Mohammedans while seizing the fortified settlements of
Signakhi, Yanikand (the capital of Oghuz Turks) and Jand. However,
during the siege of Urgench, his strategy and pace of the campaign were
criticized by his brothers Chagadai and Ögödei. Finally, it was Ögödei
who stormed the city though it was promised already by the great Khan to
Jochi. This was followed by his conflict with Chagadai during which his
legitimacy as the son of the Khan was doubted. He restored his military
credentials by aiding Sübe’edei after the death of Jebe. However, after
this, he disobeyed his father and retired to his ulus and never met him
again. Thus, he was ruled out. Chagadai, the next son, was also a
competent warrior; however, his quarrels with Jochi, his temper, and
recklessness in the quriltai-s did not please the Khan. Hence, he too
was passed over for being the great Khan.

The next son Ögödei was seen as a man of balanced temper but at the same
time a fierce warrior who proved himself in the thick of battle. When in
his early years Chingiz fought the alliance of Jamuqa and Toghrul Wang
Khan of the Kerait Turks, Ögödei, still in his teens, was seriously
injured by an arrow that hit his neck. He was then saved by Chingiz’s
foster-brother Boroqul. Surviving this injury, he led the Mongol forces
again the Jin (Jürchen) to conquer the city of Ordos in Inner Mongolia.
In the campaign against the Mohammedans of Khwarizm, he along with
Chagadai seized the fortified city of Utrar and then took Urgench. In
Afghanistan, he smashed the Mohammedans of Ghazni and massacred them
(truly their karma was being paid). Thus, Chingiz Khan chose Ögödei as
his preferred successor to the post of the great Khan of the unified
empire. At the same time, the other sons were to get their own ulus-es.
They were to hold a quriltai to confirm if Ögödei was competent and if
members from each of the lines elected him then he could ascend as the
great Khan, with all of them pledging their solidarity to him. In the
interim, the default state of Altaic ultimogeniture was to come into
play with Chingiz’s last son Tolui serving as acting Khan until the
quriltai could be called. This tradition of ultimogeniture appears to
have been adopted by the Altaic peoples from the steppe Iranians who
were the lords of the land before them. Keeping with the old tradition
of ultimogeniture the Khan’s [youngest son
Tolui](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/)
was awarded the biggest share in the Khan’s personal inheritance. This
also included the largest share of the military which eventually allowed
the ascendancy of his lineage.

To take a look at the succession as it happened we shall briefly revisit
the final years of Chingiz Khan. When Chingiz Khan left to campaign
against the Mohammedans, his Chinese campaign had to proceed at a slow
pace as most of his forces were deployed in the west. He had left his
friend from youth and able general Muqali to conduct this campaign
against the Jin. Muqali with his limited forces managed to preserve to
Mongol conquests in China and also keep the Jin on their feet with
regular raids into their territory. Then he conducted an audacious
campaign with his small Mongol forces by launching an invasion of the
Wei River valley at the southern bend of the Yellow River. Thus, he kept
the pressure on the Jin till his death in 1223 CE. Then his son Boro and
grandson Tash continued the campaign against the Jin. They expanded the
campaigns to attack the Han Chinese empire of the Song who came to aid
the Jin. However, with their limited army, they could in no way conquer
these vast domains completely. In 1225 CE, having smashed the
Mohammedans of Khwarizm, Chingiz Khan returned to Mongolia to review the
Chinese situation.

Around the time of Muqali’s death, the Tangut of Xixia empire got a new
aggressive emperor Li Dewang. He decided to launch a massive attack on
his old enemies, the Mongols. For this, he formed an alliance with the
Jin and also mobilized the Yellow Uighurs against the Mongols. The
Mongol generals Boro and Tash staved off the immediate attacks till
Chingiz Khan returned. The Khan strategized that to conquer the vast
realm of China he had to first outflank the two Eastern Chinese empires
from the west by destroying the smaller western empire of the Xixia. The
Tangut expected him to stiffen Muqali’s successors by marching from the
east but the Khan surprised them by assembling a large Mongol force to
the west and attacking them from Gansu corridor in 1225 CE. The great
Khan marched with close to 120000 men with the largest division of
several tümen-s (\~80000) personally led by him, with the rest led by
his brother Qasar whose health was declining due to gout, the ace
general Sübe’edei baghatur, and the general Chaga’an. Sübe’edei first
crushed the Yellow Uighurs and took them out of their way. Chingiz Khan
directed him to systematically conquer the western towns of the empire
and facilitate the penetration by Chingiz and Qasar deep into the Xixia
territory. Taking their old capital, Qara-Qoto, the Khan steadily
advanced eastwards and by August of 1226 CE despite fierce resistance
from the Tangut aided by the Jin from the East the Khan forced their
second largest city, Wuwei to surrender.

At this point, Li Dewang died and Li Xian ascended the throne as the
emperor. Li Xian claimed he was the Buddha of the Age but that did not
seem to help much. Advancing further Chingiz Khan then besieged the fort
of Lingwu which was just a short distance from the capital Yinchuan. Li
Xian sent a massive army of 300000 Tanguts hoping that he could
comprehensively overwhelm the Mongol army. But in the battle fought on
the banks of the Yellow River the outnumbered Mongol forces under the
inspired leadership of the great Khan nearly completely annihilated this
Tangut army in November of 1226 CE. In 1227 CE the Mongol army besieged
Yinchuan the capital of the Tangut. The Jin tried to help the Xixia
empire survive by sending aid from the east. But Chingiz Khan sent his
mobile squadrons to punish them. One rapidly moving Mongol force
launched an audacious assault deep into Jin territory to strike their
capital Kaifeng and return. Shaken by this attack, the Jin asked for
peace but Chingiz turned down the offer and already prepared an
invasionary force to next deal with the Jin. However, as the siege of
Yinchuan was drawing to a close the Khan fell from his horse evidently
during a hunt and probably sustained an injury that resulted in an
infection. Others believe that he might have contracted some infection
independently of a fall. He was taken in a closed bullock cart to a
secret hideout the Mongols set up in the forests of the Liupan
mountains. He realized he was on his deathbed and called his clansmen
and generals around him. He gave them a final lecture in which he laid
out the lines of action to expand the Mongol empire he had founded both
to the east and west. He then stressed the issue of unity between the
different lines of his clansmen with the famous example of the single
arrow and bundle of arrows. He asked his people to follow his plan
regard his successor and told them: “*Let not my end disarm you, and on
no account weep or long for me.*” Before dying he also seems to have
made his long-term succession plans clear. The status of the great Khan
was not to remain with the house of Ögödei forever. He said that his
grandson through Tolui, [the wise
Qubilai](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/),
would someday adorn his throne. Then he died aged something between 65
to 70 on either on 18th or 25th August 1227 CE as per different
reckonings.

The Mongols kept the news secret and his youngest son Tolui became the
acting Khan to allow the campaign to proceed. In September 1227 CE Li
Xian unable to hold the capital surrendered to the Mongols. They had is
name changed from the Buddha of the Age to Shidurgu – the one who has
been made a vassal. Thus, having stripped him of his divinity they
immediately executed him as a treacherous vassal. Then they erased the
city of Yinchuan with its citizens except for the bauddha teachers of
the Karma Kagyu tradition and their monastery. The Mongols demolished
and dug up all the graves of the Tangut emperors and dispersed their
remains. The Tangut had ties with the Pāla and Sena dynasties of Vaṇga
before the devastation of their land by the Mohammedans. Thus, several
of Li Xian’s surviving relatives fled towards Vaṇga but with the ongoing
Mohammedan depredations throughout the region, they settled in the more
inaccessible domain of Sikkim.

Over the year 1228 CE, Tolui assembled members of all the branches of
the house of Chingiz for a quriltai. Before they joined in Mongolia, a
quick campaign was conducted in the west beyond the banks of the Volga
pulverize and subjugate the Volga Bulgars who had staved off the earlier
raid of the Mongols during their attack on the Russians and the Qipchak
Khanate. The quriltai met at Köde’e Island on the Kerülen River in
Mongolia. There the majority of the lines voted in favor of Ögödei
becoming the next great Khan and his brother Tolui dutifully handed over
the throne to him. Jochi’s most prominent son Batu also pledged complete
solidarity to his uncle. Thus, the unity of the Mongol empire was
retained under Ögödei and he ascended the throne taking on the title of
Dalai-yin Khan. This title was likely semantically equivalent to Chingiz
Khan and means the oceanic ruler. A derivative of it was later also
conferred by the Mongols to the chief Lama – the Dalai-lama. It is
likely that this event was marked by the production of the famous seal
bearing the words:  
*Möngke Tengri-yin Küchün-tür Yeke Monggol Ulus-un Dalai-yin Khan-u
jarligh il bulqa irgen- tür kürbesü büsiretügüi ayutughai*  
*By the Power of the great god of heaven, the Edict of the oceanic Khan
of the Great Mongol ulus. If this reaches a pacified or a rebellious
people, it must respect \[it\] \[and\] it must fear* (Text and
Translation from Igor de Rachwiltz).

He immediately commissioned what become the core of the Secret History
based on the records kept by Shigi-qutuqu, the adopted son of Chingiz
Khan. It is not entirely clear if Shigi-qutuku also wrote the core of
the Secret History. The phrase “khan ecige minu” meaning “khan, father
of mine” is seen occasionally in the text suggesting that it might have
been him. However, some historians think that in general Chingiz was
referred to as the father of the Mongol nation at some point during the
redaction of the text (Today there is evidence for some biological basis
for that).

Ögödei immediately got around to stabilizing the newly won empire. As
per the wishes of his brother Tolui he appointed Sübe’edei Baghatur as
the supreme military adviser of the Mongol empire. This brilliant
general had campaigned across the whole of Eurasia and was beyond doubt
one of the greatest military leaders of all times. Tolui was given the
title Yeke-noyan (some say the yeke was added after his death) meaning
the great lord and advised the great Khan on all matters. Chormagun
noyan was appointed to lead a Mongol army to finish off immediate
unsettled issues in the west like the destruction of Jalal-al din and
conquering Armenia, Georgia, Chechnya, and Azerbaijan. Shigi-qutuqu was
appointed to handle the implementation of the yasa of Chingiz Khan and
set up the administrative structure for the whole empire. The gigantic
Khitan (an earlier branch of Mongolic people) scholar [Yelü
Chucai](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2018/01/22/mongolica-knowledge-preservation-and-generationbulad-aqa-and-the-like/)
had been brought out from his early retirement as a Zen bauddha monk by
Chingiz Khan and appointed to his advisory council, especially for his
meteorological knowledge. He was left back by the Mongols after the
campaigns in the West to organize their rule there. It was then that
Yelü Chucai obtained an Indian rhinoceros and showed it to the Mongols
(The śākya buddha had in a former birth seen a rhinoceros directly
attain buddhatva). The Mongols declared that the animal was a sign of
the great god Möngke Tengri and that India should not be invaded as it
was the holy land graced by this divine animal. This gave him a great
aura of respectability and he was called by the great Khan to help him
with the administration in the last year of his life. Tolui while the
acting Khan asked Yelü Chucai settle the major religious conflicts which
were taking place between bauddha-s and Taoists in Mongol China. He also
actively participated in getting everyone to agree on electing Ögödei
and was accordingly rewarded by Ögödei with an appointment as the
supreme official of the revenue department of the Mongol empire.

An important point that is often not stated is the role of Ögödei in
stabilizing the Mongol empire. At Chingiz Khan’s death the treasury was
in precarious condition. The Khan had put everything into the Xixia
campaign. Temporarily the situation was stable from the enormous booty
obtained with the destruction of Xixia empire and the raids on the Jin.
However, Ögödei needed to quickly stabilize things for the long term
before further major campaigns could be undertaken. Hence, he
constituted a senior council drawn from the keshikten (the Khan’s inner
guard) along with Yelü Chucai to develop a comprehensive taxation system
across all conquered territories with revenues assessed as per the
nature of productivity of each territory. A whole series of Mongol and
local officials were raised and the system put in place throughout the
vast empire within a matter of four to five years. This went
hand-in-hand with a courier system to allow communications throughout
the empire. This administrative achievement pulled off by Ögödei is
probably the most underrated but important facet of the development of
the Mongol empire. Beyond that, he also was proactive in his diplomacy
to get the houses of all his brothers to stand firmly with him and
cooperate as part of the unified Mongol empire for future campaigns.

Thus, key aspects of the success of the Mongol Empire were Chingiz
Khan’s clear succession plans, their orderly and quick enactment, and
finally the successor Ögödei’s effective administrative action. He first
settled and firmed up fiscal and organizational issues of the empire in
great detail before launching the next major phase of distant military
activity. As this was under way he commissioned the campaigns under
Chormagun Noyan to create the strategic base for big distant ones which
were to follow. Only thereafter the great invasion of the lands of the
White Christians in Europe and the mopping up of the Jin empire in China
were launched. It is in comparison to this that the Maraṭhā succession
was rather poorly executed. Though Śambhu took power rather quickly, it
came at the cost of the brutal execution of senior ministers like Annājī
Datto. He also was hardly effective in terms attending to fiscal,
administrative and strategic issues. While his early campaigns were
well-executed, they were not followed up with the vigor and swiftness
his father showed. When Ögödei was facing doubts in how the Chinese
campaign should proceed his senior strategist Sübe’edei showed the way
forward and led them to spectacular victories. Śambhu however showed
little interest in supporting his astute military adviser [Hambirrāv
Mohite](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/13/the-end-of-sambhaji/)‘s
plans at a critical juncture. These considerably strained the Maraṭhā-s
and they eventually survived only due to Śivajī’s farsighted plans and
ministers like [Rāmacandra
amātya](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/04/25/the-scope-of-shivajis-plan-of-svarajya/).
