+++
title = "A note on āmreḍita-s in the Ṛgveda and issues of wordxa0distribution"

+++
sa darśataśrīr atithir gṛhe-gṛhe  
vane-vane śiśriye takvavīr iva ।  
janaṃ-janaṃ janyo nāti manyate  
viśa ā kṣeti viśyo viśaṃ-viśam ॥ RV 10.91.2 by Aruṇa Vaitahavya

He, with visible auspiciousness, a guest in house after house,  
in forest after forest lurking like a hunting falcon,  
people after people, no people are overlooked by him,  
The clan among the clans, he dwells in clan after clan.

The āmreḍita or the iterative is a duplicated compound like those seen
in the above ṛk: gṛhe-gṛhe etc. While the variety of āmreḍita-s seen in
the RV is no longer seen in modern Sanskrit, some forms have persisted
from that time e.g. punaḥ-punaḥ or anyam-anyam. Their variants are also
seen in other extant Indo-Āryan languages. This form of a compound is
attested to my knowledge in the earliest branching lineage of
Indo-European, Anatolian. It is also seen in Tocharian which probably
branched off next. Forms equivalent to the “pra-pra” (forward and
forward) found in the RV are also attested in Homeric Greek and are
termed prepositional complements of verbs. However, the āmreḍita, with
the involvement of all elements of speech, is most developed only in
Indo-Iranian. Old Iranian in the form of Avestan displays forms like:  
nmānē-nmānē = Skt: dhāmni-dhāmni; house after house (i.e. every
household)  
vīsi-vīsi = Skt: viśe-viśe; clan after clan (i.e. every clan)

Given their parallels in Sanskrit, it is clear that this expanded system
of āmreḍita -s was already present in the ancestral Indo-Iranian
tradition. Here we briefly examine the āmreḍita-s in the Ṛgveda. Given
the temporal position of the RV, it likely presents a picture of the
usage of such compounds close to the beginning of the Indo-Iranian
tradition.

There can be anywhere between 1 to 4 āmreḍita-s in a given ṛk. The
number of ṛks-s with each number of āmreḍita-s per ṛk is shown in Table
1.

![AMreDita\_tab](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_tab.jpg?w=215&h=213)Table
1

The maximum number of āmreḍita-s in the RV is four, which is seen in a
single ṛk, the one given in the opening lines of this article. By far
the most common āmreḍita is dive-dive (day after day), which occurs 47
times in the RV (the next most common, the ancient pra-pra, occurs only
12 times). A related usage ahar-ahaḥ meaning the same as dive-dive
occurs 6 times. Thus, the āmreḍita used in the sense of ‘daily
occurrence’ seems to be a characteristic feature of the Vedic language.
Another temporal āmreḍita is yuge-yuge (6x), which famously occurs in
later literature in the Bhagavadgītā. Whereas in that text it means ‘eon
after eon’, in the RV it likely means some version of the
pañcasaṃvatsara-yuga, which is explained by Lagadha in the Vedāñga
Jyotiṣa. Some other temporal āmreḍita-s are also used on rare occasions
in the RV: māsi-māsi (every month) and parvaṇā-parvaṇā (every
fortnight).

Other āmreḍita-s tell us about the old Āryan way of life and religion.
Several of them indicate the sense ‘in every household’: dame-dame (6x),
gṛhe-gṛhe/gṛhaṃ-gṛham (7x), vastor-vastoH (2x). Others denote the sense
‘in every clan’: viśe-viśe and variants (7x),
jane-jane/janaṃ-janam/jāto-jātaḥ (5x). These meanings are shared with
the most common Iranian āmreḍita-s, suggesting that they were
significant for the Indo-Iranians at large. Specifically, these terms
indicate that the households and the clans were the primary
organizational units of society. There is no mention of towns or even
villages in any āmreḍita-s although forests and trees are alluded to
vane-vane/vṛkṣe-vṛkṣe. This is reflective of the semi-mobile life in the
forest-steppe zone with its characteristic confederation of clans.

As we have noted before, [the people of the RV were a warlike
people](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/08/06/a-note-on-the-cow-the-horse-and-the-chariot-in-the-%E1%B9%9Bgveda/).
Thus, the āmreḍita-s meaning something like ‘in every battle’ or ‘in
every contest’ are common: bhare-bhare (6x), vāje-vāje (4x), raṇe-raṇe
(2x). There is also a śatroḥ-śatroḥ, i.e. ‘of every enemy’. This
indicates that frequent military encounters were a feature of the lives
of the early Indo-Āryans.

We also have many terms relating to the Vedic religion as would befit a
primarily religious text. First, we have
devaṃ-devam/devasya-devasya/devo-devaḥ (10x) implying the worship of
every god in the pantheon. We also here of groups or troops of gods:
gaṇaṃ-gaṇam/śardham-śardham (3x). These are clear expression of the
polycentric polytheism of the Ārya-s. Second, the soma- pressing and
drinking sessions, which are part of the high Vedic rite, are alluded to
in the terms made-made/sute-sute/some-some (7x). Third, rites and
related terms are referred to multiply. The fire ritual: yajñe-yajñe and
variants (8x); the ritual fires: agnim-agnim (3x); Ritual observances
and actions: vrātaṃ-vrātaṃ (2x), karman-karman and variants (3x); ritual
offerings: havir-haviḥ, samit-samit (2x); Incantations, recitations and
invocations: dhiyaṃ-dhiyaṃ, girā-girā, have-have, brahma-brahma (5x)

To better understand the distribution of āmreḍita-s in the RV we shall
first take a detour to look at some basic statistics of the RV:

![RV\_stats\_tab](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/rv_stats_tab.jpg?w=651&h=409)Table
2. Some basic numbers for RV including number of āmreḍita-s occurring
per maṇḍala

Figure 1 shows the number of words per hemistich (ardhark) with the
alternate hemistichs colored in blue and red. The maṇḍala boundaries are
marked with vertical dotted lines.

[![AMreDita\_words\_half\_Rk](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_words_half_rk.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_words_half_rk.png)Figure
1

This plot shows that the RV has a generally consistent average behavior
across most maNDala-s keeping with the relatively tight repertoire of
Chandas (meters) used by most clans. However, the anomalies are also
immediately apparent. The maṇḍala-8 dominated by Kāṇva-s clearly stands
out as having a distinct structure. Moreover, this pattern is also seen
in the initial part of maṇḍala-1 where multiple Kāṇva-s are represented.
Further, in maṇḍala-1 we see an anomalous spike corresponding to the
ultra-long meter, the atyaṣṭi used by prince Parucchepa Daivodāsi. In
maṇḍāla-9, the soma-maṇḍala we again see an anomaly. Here there is a
strong separation of the short meters (gāyatrī-s) in the first part and
the long meters closer to the end. This reflects this distinct
aggregation history of the maṇḍala-9, which unlike the family books
tends to collect the sūkta-s used in the soma ritual from different
clans around a Kāśyapa core. These anomalies again come out clearly in
the first two panels of Figure 2, which show the average number of words
per hemistich and the average number of words per sūkta across the 10
maṇḍala-s.

[![AMreDita\_plots](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_plots.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_plots.png)Figure
2 shows some of the statistics for the RV with relation to the āmreḍita
distribution.

These features are related in part to peculiarities discussed by [in our
earlier analysis of related issues pertaining to the
RV](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/08/some-trivia-concering-the-adi-shruti/).
We observe that the maṇḍala-s 8 and 9 have the lowest average number of
words per hemistich, keeping with the dominance of the shorter meters in
these maṇḍala-s (panel 1). However, we can see that Kāṇva-s tend to
compose long sūkta-s; hence, they figure a higher number of words per
sūkta on an average (Panel 2). However, in contrast, maṇḍala-9, which
also has the lower average number of words per sūkta, has no such
compensation and is dominated by short sūkta-s. These are peculiar to
the soma ritual and the sāman-s composed on them. We also note that the
Atri-s and Vasiṣṭha-s tend to compose more short sūkta-s than the
others. Barring these anomalies, the RV is quite uniform, especially in
terms of the average number of words per hemistich. This gives us the
general background to investigate the distribution of āmreḍita-s.

Panel 3 for Figure 2 shows the āmreḍita-s in a sliding window of 2000
words through the length of the RV. The maṇḍala boundaries are marked by
a vertical dotted line. We observe that the āmreḍita-s are not uniformly
distributed. There are whole regions with a low count and others with
notable spikes. We find that the maṇḍala-s differ in their use of
āmreḍita-s (Panel 4 of Figure 2): maṇḍala-s 3 and 6 of the
Vaiśvāmitra-s and Bhāradvāja-s are rich in āmreḍita-s, whereas those
of Vāmadeva, the Vāsiṣṭha-s and the soma maṇḍala are particularly poor.
In the case of the soma maṇḍala, the metrical structure with a low
average number of words per hemistich probably discriminates against
āmreḍita-s. However, in the case of the other maṇḍala the difference in
āmreḍita counts is in spite of their mostly average behavior in terms of
word count per hemistich (compare panel 4 and panel 1).

To understand if this difference might have any significance, we
simulated the distribution of āmreḍita-s as a random process using the
total number of āmreḍita-s in the RV (Table 2). We created 10000
artificial sets corresponding to the size of each maṇḍala, checked the
number āmreḍita-s reached in each replicate and computed the Z-scores
for the observed number of āmreḍita-s and the probability of getting the
observed number or more/less by chance alone (Figure 3).

[![AMreDita\_simulation](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_simulation.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/amredita_simulation.png)Figure
3

This experiment suggests that maṇḍala-s 1 and 10 have more or less the
average number of āmreḍita-s one would expect by chance alone. This
probably reflects their composite nature rather than being the product
of one dominant clan. However, maṇḍala-s 3 and 6 have greater than
expected number āmreḍita-s (p=0.016 and 0.014 respectively), whereas
maṇḍala-s 7 and 9 have lower than expected number of āmreḍita-s
(p=0.035 and 0.037 respectively). This observation suggests there was
possibly a conscious difference in the poetic styles of the
Vaiśvāmitra-s and Bhāradvāja\#-s on one hand and the Vāsiṣṭha-s on the
other, with the former showing a predilection for the use of āmreḍita-s.
This makes one wonder if the reduced use of āmreḍita-s by the
Vasiṣṭha-s, who had some links to the Iranian side, represents a
regional tendency also seen in the Avesta, which also uses a low number
of āmreḍita-s. As noted above the unique structure of the soma-maṇḍala
probably accounts for its low āmreḍitacount.
