+++
title = "Mongolica: Knowledge preservation and generation, Bolad Aqa and thexa0like"

+++
We had earlier written [an
essay](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/05/20/some-notes-on-rashid-ad-din-bin-imad-ud-dawla-abul-khair-and-his-times/)
on the preservation and production of synthetic knowledge by the
Chingizid Mongols. Here we discuss a few additional points in that
regard.

It is clear that throughout the Chingizid clan there was a certain
proto-scientific interest right from the beginning. Astronomy was one
area that appears to have interested many of them. It perhaps relates to
the fact that the full expanse of the sky leaves a profound impression
on the observer on the vast openness of the steppe. Indeed, in Mongol
shamanic oral tradition there are accounts such as Ursa Major being the
banner of the tngri-s. Thus, starting from Chingiz Khan we see
considerable interest in patronizing astronomers. In 1218 CE the Chingiz
Khan recruited the gigantic, long-bearded Yelü Chucai (said to have been
\~2.05 m in height), who came from the earlier Mongolic branch, the
Khitan. While Yelü Chucai was an all-round scholar, the great Khan was
particularly interested in his knowledge of meteorology and astronomy.
The Khan used his knowledge to predict snow late in year on the steppes
during his Khwārizm campaign. He also predicted eclipses for the Mongols
and showed the Khan a comet towards the end of the campaign in
Turkestan, which is likely to have been the 1222 CE apparition of
Halley’s comet. Not surprisingly these scientific observations of Yelü
Chucai were mixed with a form of Sino-Mongolic astrology. After the
conquest of Samarqand, Chingiz Khan set up an observatory there and
appointed a cīna astronomer Li, likely at Yelü Chucai’s behest. In
course of the Turkestan campaign Yelü Chucai obtained astronomical works
of the Hui-ho \[from the Mohammedan world\] and studied them closely. As
a result he detected errors in the Chinese method of calculations and
created a revised method for the Mongol calender and astronomical
tables.

The next great Khan Ögödei, the second son of Chingiz, after completing
the destruction of the Jin was quick to repair the astronomical
observatory near Zhongdu in 1236 CE and establish regular observations.
After the line of Ögödei was displaced, the title of great Khan came to
the line of the fourth son of Chingiz, Tolui, with the latter’s first
son Möngke. He had the geometry of Euclid brought to the Mongols from
west and had it explained to him. Rāshīd ad-dīn mentions how thereafter
Möngke proved several geometric theorems by himself – this might
constitute the earliest geometric study in Euclidean geometry in east
Asia. Khan Möngke’s brother Qubilai, even while crown prince, had
geographers and astronomers from the Hui-hui land \[Mohammedan world\]
and others brought to his court. The work of the Japanese researcher
Kodo Tasaka shows that he had them make a terrestrial globe and an
armillary sphere for the Mongols. Qubilai’s observatory at Dadu had a
wide collection of instruments like these and also sundials and
astrolabes. Their next brother, the Il Khan Hülegü, had an astronomical
observatory built on the top of a hill at Marāghah in Iran. Here he
appointed Nāssir ad-dīn al-Ṭūsī , the Mohammedan mathematician and
scientist, whom he had captured during the destruction of the
Hashishin-s. Nāssir ad-dīn al-Ṭūsī had internalized a lot of the
knowledge of the West Asian “freethinkers”, who in turn had acquired the
foundation of their knowledge from the Greek and Hindu worlds. This work
lead to one of the best pre-Copernican planetary models in the western
world. Nāssir ad-dīn also prepared an “edition” of Euclid that was
influential in transmitting Hellenistic geometric knowledge widely.
Again when Hülegü found that the Mohammedans with Egyptian ties in his
kingdom were plotting an insurrection in league with the Mamluqs, he had
all of them killed except the astronomers.

The governor of Tibet in the mid-1300s, Barandnā (Skt: Prajña), the
descendant of Qubilai Khan, also commissioned extensive astronomical
works deriving from Hindu and Hellenistic traditions that led to
Mongolian commentaries being prepared on them. This Hindu astronomy was
transmitted in part via the last great tantra of the nāstika-s, the
Kālacakra, which had elements modeled after the now lost eponymous
saura tantra. Some of this material survives in the ritual manual
preserved by Sangwar, a Mongol official in the Manchu times from Boro
Balgasun in Ordos. Here we see a legendary Khan receiving Indian
calenderical knowledge from goddess Vimā, the daughter of the great
Indra. There is a table preserving the old Indian nakṣatra system:
“naghšidar-un ner-e odun-u togh-a bui düri ba maqabud ene bu”: The
nakṣatra names, number of stars, figure and element. We also see the
incidental transmission of ritual of ultimately Hindu origin in the
process such as: “basa nigen eketü Mahašuvari tngri”: Another topic
concerning the god Maheśvara; “Maqagala baghuqu edür anu”: As for the
day Mahākāla descends; “Okin tngri baghuqu edür kemebesü”: As for the
day the goddess Śri descends.

Outside of the “Golden family” there were some Mongol intellectuals who
played an important role in this knowledge venture of the Khans. One
extraordinary individual who was involved in this process was Bolad Aqa.
We wished to detail his history in our earlier note centered on Rāshīd
ad-dīn but wanted to read more sources pertaining to him; so we left out
that part of the story then. More over, a good review on his history
role was also provided by TT Allsen. In this part of the note we shall
offer a brief summary of his history. In the Secret History the origin
myth of the Chingizid Mongols states that they were descendants of the
wolf Börte Chino and the doe Qo’a-maral at the holy slopes of the
Burqan-qaldun by the Onon river. From them eleventh in descent were the
two brothers Du’a Soqor and Dobun Mergen. Du’a Soqor was said to have a
single cyclopean eye by which he could see a great distance. He found a
vast slab of nephrite which is said to have been his throne \[Later
Ulugh Beg is said to have obtained the same from Mongolia and
embellished Timur’s grave with it\]. From the top of Burqan-qaldun he is
said to have seen a beautiful woman Alan Qo’a in a camp at a great
distance and asked his brother Dobun Mergen to seek her as his wife.
Alan Qo’a became the legendary ancestress of the Chingizid Mongols. But
her sons are said to have had a rift with the four sons of Du’a Soqor
and they parted ways. While Chingiz descended from the former, the
latter are said to have formed the four clans, the Dörben irgen. They
were ranged against Temujin during his rise. Aligning with the
Tayichi’ud they fought him but were forced flee when he destroyed that
alliance. Then the Dörben joined Jamuqa against Temujin but he
decisively demolished that alliance in 1202 CE. Then they joined the
tayang Khan of the Naiman Turks against Temujin but even that alliance
was smashed by him in 1204 CE. At this point they surrendered to him and
joined his ranks.

One of them, Yürki won Chingiz Khan’s trust and he was appointed as the
ba’urchi (chef) of the Khan’s main wife Börte. In addition he served a
military role as commander of a hundred men in a force of 1000 that was
directly commanded by the Khan himself. His son was Bolad Aqa, who
inherited his position as a royal chef under Qubilai. The prestigious
position as the ba’urchi allowed him to receive education along side
Qubilai’s sons. In course of this, his intelligence became apparent and
he was found to have great skill at translating extemporaneously between
Chinese and Mongolian. Thus, he was given the additional responsibility
of dealing with the Chinese officials who were being absorbed into the
Mongol administration. He also likely knew some Sanskrit for he is said
to have liaised with Kashmirian Bauddha Tāntrika-s and trained some of
them for joining the Qubilai’s personal corps. Bolad was also given the
task of adapting cīna rituals as part of the ceremonies for the
coronation of Qubilai as the Kha’Khan. As the ba’urchi he also performed
the four animal-sacrifices (like the Indo-Aryan śamitṛ in the Vedic
animal sacrifice), which the Mongol Khans conducted to prepare the meat
offerings to the tngri-s and ancestors. He also supervised the
preparation of beverages for the royal family.

Subsequently, Bolad served as minister of agriculture to manage the
farming and grain distribution in the Chinese conquests and the minister
planning the construction of hydraulic works. In course of these he
introduced the practice of letting the Mongol animals feed on the
farmland after the autumn harvest so that they could make use of the
crop remains and recycle manure into the fields. On the military front
Bolad assisted the veteran general Bayan in completing the conquest of
the Song. He also fought in the north near the Irtysh along with
Nomoghan the son of Qubilai and the general Toghan of the Jalayir clan
against counter-Khanate of Qaidu and Du’a. One of his last official
actions in the east was the investigation of the enormous monetary scam
by the Mohammedan official Ahmed who had siphoned considerable amounts
from the treasury while Qubilai completely was unaware and took him to
be honest. When Bolad finally intimated the Khan of the scale of this
scam, he executed several Mohammedans who were part of the operation. A
Chinese official who had made a fake of Bolad’s seal was also executed.
In 1286 CE Bolad went from China as the ambassador and advisor to the
Il-Khan Arghun. While he probably returned once to Beijing he went back
and remained the prime minister of the Il-Khans till his death in 1313
CE while on course of a campaign to defend Azerbaijan. In this period he
not only performed several administrative duties but also fought some
battles for Il-Khans. He was probably 73 years when he died with a life
spanning much of Asia and the reign of several Chingizids all over the
the empire. Among other things, in west, he also appears to have
introduced the use of fingerprints for identity as in the east, what
Rāshīd ad-dīn calls the khaṭṭ-i angusht

In the east itself, at the age of \~33 years, Bolad was called upon by
the Khan to set up the imperial library. He along with the Chinese
assistant Liu Ping-chung put together a body of archivists, historians
and other collectors of information. TT Allsen suggests that this
library collected a body of books, maps and pictures. Such a collection
of information appears to have been the basis of the parallel project
conducted by Bolad in the west along with Rāshīd ad-dīn and others. This
project might be summarized in the words of Rāshīd ad-dīn thus:

“*Today, thanks to God and in consequence of him, the extremities of the
inhabited earth are under the dominion of the house of Chingiz Khan and
philosophers, astronomers, scholars and historians from North and South
China, India, Kashmir, Tibet, \[the lands\] of the Uighurs, other Turkic
tribes, the Arabs and Franks, \[all\] belonging to \[diﬀerent\]
religions and sects, are united in large numbers in the service of
majestic heaven \[translation in to Persian of Mongolian Möngke Tngri\].
And each one has manuscripts on the chronology, history and articles of
faith of his own people and \[each\] has knowledge of some aspect of
this. Wisdom, \[which\] decorates the world, demands that there should
be prepared from the details of these chronicles and narratives an
abridgement, but essentially complete \[work\] which will bear our
august name*.”

\[cited from translation of Rāshīd ad-dīn provided by TT Allsen based on
the Moscow edition\]

This effort of bringing together knowledge form different parts of Asia
on part of the Mongols had different consequences on different people.
In the west, it led to the reintroduction of Hellenistic knowledge via
the Mohammedan sources to the Europeans, thereby greatly contributing to
their scientific revolution. In the Mohammedan world itself this
knowledge showed patches of revival and survival when not smothered by
the hand of Mohammedanism – e.g. the case of Ulugh Beg. The cīna-s,
while participating in this process when under Mongol rule never seemed
to have realized the value of Hellenistic knowledge and internalized it
until closer to our times. Among the Mongols themselves, upon the fall
of their empire such interest appears to have mostly waned with
apparently only limited revival in later times based on Hindu astronomy
filtering via Tibet, among other things via revival of the Kālacakra
tradition.

For comparison, we shall take a detour to consider the case of the old
Indo-Greek interactions. This interaction was not carried out under any
active royal supervision. We have some evidence that Alexander despite
his antipathy towards brāhmaṇa-s, who had galvanized the kṣatriya-s to
wipe out the yavana invaders in Bhārata, had some personal interest in
Indian philosophers and scientists and conveyed some of the know-how of
the later to Greece (e.g. how Ptolemaios was sedated during a surgery by
Sarpagandha). Subsequently, there was clearly an interaction between the
two traditions. On the Hindu side, the Hindu astronomers honestly state
that they closely studied Greek astronomical works that they could lay
their hands on and produced multiple commentaries and Sanskrit
reworkings of them. On the Greek side it is less clear from their own
sources as to what, if anything they received from the Hindus. Hence, a
wide range of opinions have been proffered by modern Euro-Americans in
particular. At one end of the spectrum we have Peter Green who thinks
that while the Hindus and yavana-s met in years following the Macedonian
invasion nothing much really came of it in terms of knowledge
transmission. At best both sides poorly understood or forgot the other.
On the other end we have the archetypal white Indologist Pingree and
followers (“Hindus as idiots”) who believe that everything meaningful in
Hindu science came from the yavana-s, so much so that there was no real
Hindu mathematics of note before being enlightened by the yavana-s.
Others like McEvilley have accepted that Hindu philosophical and perhaps
medical knowledge might have been transmitted to the yavana but mostly
for mathematics it was the other way around.

After considering the evidence ourselves we feel that all kinds of
scientific knowledge was transmitted both ways but it was not entirely
incorporated into respective systems. For instance, in the case of
astronomy and mathematics the Hindus while studying and reworking the
yavana works into Sanskrit never incorporated the material into their
core models. Āryabhaṭa’s heliocentric background for the model is unlike
that of any Greek work despite the fact he was aware of them and he and
his students studied them. Hence, some Euro-American workers try to
claim that it should have come from a lost Greek model without
presenting evidence for any such in the Greek world. That simply
suggests that it represents a purely Hindu development. The real core of
Greek mathematics in the form of Euclidean geometry was never adopted by
Hindus, but the pseudo-scientific material of yavana astrology made a
deep impact on Hindu astrology. On the Greek side they of course adopted
several aspects of Hindu medicine and philosophy but what about
mathematics. We hold (as some early modern Europeans did in more
innocent days) that they acquired a bit of Hindu algebra but on their
part never really understood its spirit and remained limited in its
development in Heron’s and Diophantos’ works. Thus, the two had rather
distinct mathematical frameworks that were apparently not able
incorporate material from the other at any deep level perhaps in part
because the deepest of this work did not travel widely between the
civilizations unlike in the case of astronomy. In the case of the Mongol
empire while the patrons brought together very distinct knowledge
systems it appears that the synthesis did not filter down in a big way
in China and Korea, though it might have made more of an impact, even if
indirect in the west.
