+++
title = "A brief note on some new developments regarding the genomics of Indians"

+++
When we wrote a [previous
article](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/a-note-on-the-early-expansions-of-the-indo-europeans/)
on this matter we had stated that new data will alter the details of our
understanding of picture discussed therein. Indeed, two new manuscripts
which were deposited in the past month by McColl et al and Narasimhan et
al have done so. These are still deposited manuscripts and have not been
formally published. Further other data might also come in the near
future. Hence, we are not launching into any detailed presentation of
the revised scenarios in this note. What we intend here is to simply
provide a few illustrations of the authors’ results without much
critical investigation.

![EastAsians](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/eastasians.jpg?w=640)

A screen shot of McColl et al Figure 4

First, the study of McColl et al focuses on the far east bringing in new
ancient DNA data. The main point of interest to the Indian scenario is
that the Andaman Onge are part of a major push of hunter-gatherers into
the far east and Pacific, which spawned several branches that in turn
mixed among themselves in various combinations giving rise among others
to the Austronesian groups and East Asians. Further, in deep Pacific
there were admixtures of the basal branches of this radiation with the
Denisovans, the signal of which is very clearly seen in Papuans and
Australian aborigines. The basal-most branch of this group analyzed by
McColl et al is the 40000 YBP Tianyuan man, suggesting that these
populations were in the east by then. A basal branch of this radiation
group also seems to have contributed to the ancestry of only a subset of
native Americans (independently of the East Asian branch that also
originated from this group). This suggests that they might have reached
the New World independently in an earlier wave or mixed with one strand
of the main East Asian line of Native American ancestry as they entered
the New World. A deep sister group of the Onge and probably a basal
member of this Eastern radiation was an ancient hunter-gatherer group
that settled India, where they might have undergone admixtures with one
or more preexisting non-sapiens species of Homo. This population is now
defined as Ancient Ancestral South Indian (AASI) by Narasimhan et al,
refining the earlier definition of “Ancestral South Indian” by Reich et
al. We may term them the Indian hunter-gatherers.

The key point which Narasimhan et al make is that Neolithicization of
the North-Western Indian Subcontinent proceeded via the entry of Iranian
farmers from the west. Thus, this clarifies a previously uncertain
situation based on archaeology alone. The entry of these Iranian farmers
could have happened as early as the Mehrgarh Neolithic or in more than
one wave of closely related western populations. In any case the authors
posit that it had happened by 6700-5000 YBP. This Iranian farmer group
mixed with the AASI in the NW of the Indian subcontinent and this
admixture was likely the form of the population of the Harappan
civilization that arose in this region. They term this population Indus
periphery. Narasimhan et al also show that the Bactria-Margiana complex
(BMAC) received some admixture from this population, likely of Harappan
provenance, but did not contribute notably to the ancestry of the Indian
subcontinent. Starting around 4100 YPB they start seeing Sintashta
Steppe contributions appear for the first time in BMAC. This ancestry
appears to have filtered south and reached the core Indian subcontinent
thereafter. By 3700-3500 YBP they start seeing East Asian admixture on
the Central Asian steppes, which continues down to the Scythian Iron
Age. However, this East Asian ancestry is not visible in Indian
populations. Hence, it appears that we are left with a window of
4100-3500 YBP when the Aryan invasion of the subcontinent happened. This
is at the upper end of the mainstream invasion scenarios. Further, it is
not inconsistent with the possibility that the invasion triggered the
collapse of the Harappan urbanization around 3900 YBP. But it is also
possible that the Aryans entered and occupied a landscape where the
Harappan urban civilization had already collapsed or was in its last
throes. It also provides support for the young age of the Veda,
especially if one chose to place the Ṛgveda in the Panjab. Further, it
lends some support to the scenario that the Soma cult was acquired by
the Indo-Iranians and integrated with the older fire-cult as they
reached the BMAC sites. It is notable in this context that one of the
main proponents of the Soma cult in the Vaidika system, the Kaśyapa
clan, was the default gotra for a brāhmaṇa who did not know his. There
are issues with each of these points and interesting complications but
we desist from discussing any of these now.

Interestingly, there was another recent publication by Vishnupriya et al
applying the Bayesian phylogenetic methods to Dravidian languages. The
results suggested a possible expansion of Dravidian happening around
4500 YBP. Narasimhan et al seem to mildly favor a Harappan origin of
Dravidian. However, both the linguistic date estimate and several other
linguistic arguments are against the Harappan civilization being that of
Dravidian speakers. Rather, we suspect the Dravidians arose in the South
as part of the Southern Neolithicization – this might have had genetic
and memetic contributions from the Indus periphery but the Dravidian
languages themselves were likely of Southern provenance, probably in the
upper Godavari valley. In the aftermath of the Indo-Aryan
reconfiguration of the north, it is likely that the Dravidians had their
own expansions both South and North adopting various Indo-Aryan
technologies and ideologies. This led to the Dravidianization of many
AASI hunter-gathers, who might have earlier spoken other languages.

Narasimhan et al model extant Indian populations as a three-way mixture
of the Indus-periphery, the Indian Hunter-gather (AASI) and the Steppe
population related to the Sintashta complex. Below are some figures
based on their model to illustrate the situation.

![Indians\_St\_I\_O](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indians_st_i_o.png?w=640)Figure
1. A box plot showing the three modeled components of Indian Ancestry
for the 140 populations studied by the authors. The gray line indicates
the position of the genuine brāhmaṇa population with the lowest steppe
ancestry (i.e. leaving out some groups which are not conventional
brāhmaṇa, e.g. viśvakarman). It is clear that the brāhmaṇa-s show
above average steppe ancestry and below average Indian hunter-gatherer
ancestry.

![Indians\_st\_I\_O\_hist](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indians_st_i_o_hist.png?w=640)Figure
2. The same data is represented as a histogram. It is clear that whereas
the Indus-periphery and Indian Hunter-gatherer ancestry is unimodal, the
steppe ancestry is not with groups showing low and high steppe ancestry.
This explains the authors’ earlier model of ASI and ANI.

We then sorted the populations into five categories: 1) braḥmaṇa-s (here
we retained the viśvakarman); 2) Warrior caste (traditional kṣatriya-s)
and their equivalents; 3) Middle castes: vaiśya-s, cattle-breeders and
agriculturalists; 4) service castes: traditional service jati-s often
included as other backward, backward and scheduled castes; 5) tribes.
For this we had drop generic groups like Gujarati, Punjabi, Muslim and
the like. This left us with 124 populations. These are plotted as a
ternary diagram.

![Indian\_Ternary](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indian_ternary.png?w=640)Figure
3. Ternary diagram of the 3 strands of Indian ancestry. The 5
caste-tribal groups defined above are colored: 1-red, 2-orange,
3-aquamarine; 4-blue; 5-violet. One can see the effect of the two
admixtures with the steppe ancestry’s effect being predominant in the
varṇa populations.

A closer examination of this is seen the next three figures:

![Indian\_steppe](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indian_steppe.png?w=640)Figure
4. A box plot of the inferred steppe ancestry in the above-defined five
groups. The steppe ancestry is arrayed in accordance with the caste
ladder and tribals have the least of it on an average.

![Indian\_Indus\_periphery](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indian_indus_periphery.png?w=640)Figure
5. A box plot of the inferred Indus-periphery ancestry in the
above-defined five groups. It is interesting to note that unlike the
steppe ancestry’s the Indus-periphery ancestry is greater in the warrior
and middle caste groups than in braḥmaṇa-s, who have a lower median
value of this component. However, this difference is only mildly
significant in the current data (p=.033) and sampling bias cannot be
ruled out.

![Indians\_HG](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/indians_hg.png?w=640)Figure
6. A box plot of the inferred Indian hunter-gatherer ancestry in the
above-defined five groups. Here for the four groups from the warrior
castes to the tribes we see a reverse of the scenario seen for the
steppe ancestry. However, the braḥmaṇa-s show a slightly higher median
value of this component. While again we should be clear that this could
be due to sampling bias, taken together with the above plot, it might
reflect some sociological reality. The braḥmaṇa-s probably to start with
did not mix much with the preexisting populations of the subcontinent
but as they expanded, especially while moving south, they mixed with
directly with populations with lower Indus-periphery and higher
hunter-gatherer components.

Together, these plots suggest a picture, which was long suspected from
the physical appearance of Indians. The Indo-Aryans established
themselves in the subcontinent entering via the NW, where they mixed
with the older Indus-periphery populations that were likely part of or
survivors of the old Harappan civilization. The groups with a wide-range
of older Indian hunter-gatherer-Iranian farmer mixture were incorporated
across the upper caste ladder but especially in warrior and middle
castes where we see considerable dispersion (e.g. southern
agnikula-kṣatriya with low steppe ancestry). The movement of
braḥmaṇa-s into the south possibly also involved admixture with
these groups.

Finally, a brief political note. The pro-Hindu pakṣa had acquired an
aberration mainly in the past 3 decades known as OIT or the out of India
theory for the origin of the Indo-Europeans. This never had a leg to
stand on but is now dead and cremated. Unfortunately, the pro-Hindu side
and mainstream H nationalism has invested so much in making Indo-Aryan
autochthonism a centerpiece of their thought that it mostly ceded the
writing of data-based Hindu prehistory to parties who are never going to
be favorable to them. Even more tragically they do not even seem to
recognize how wrong they were – there is a finite probability that most
of the OIT proponents are going to continue that way. Further, there is
an unsubstantiated rumor making rounds that the Indian side might have
prevented the use of Indian aDNA in the current analysis fearing the
inevitable end to OIT. If this were true then it would add to the
scandal and only provide more fuel for the usual enemies of the Hindus.
This intellectual failure of mainstream Hindu nationalism in framing its
foundations is quite worrisome as it might reflect a deeper systematic
failure in thought.

References:  
The Genomic Formation of South and Central Asia, Narasimhan et al.
<https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/03/31/292581>

Ancient Genomics Reveals Four Prehistoric Migration Waves into Southeast
Asia, McColl et al.
<https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/03/08/278374>

A Bayesian phylogenetic study of the Dravidian language family
<http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/5/3/171504>
