+++
title = "Civilizational collapse, complexity, innovation andxa0neomania"

+++
On these pages we had provided some commentary on the work of the German
thinker Oswald Spengler and his ideas of civilizational development. We
had also provided other perspectives on this matter derived from
analogies stemming from simple mathematical systems. We originally
wished to detail other thoughts in this direction, particularly relating
to civilizational collapse, within the [conversational
framework](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/11/07/of-lives-of-men-of-times-of-men-i/)
we have often used on this pages. However, not everything the frail
mortal proposes is achieved, as the mighty gods, who show reveal
glimpses of deeper nature of existence to him, also shower afflictions
that dispose of his plans. Hence, we simply decided to place a few words
relating to this topic here rather than work it into a piece in the
series. In part this was triggered by the “neomania” I heard from people
reaching a crescendo, all enthusiastic about the solution to deep human
problems by new technologies that were just around the corner. Here, I
am using neomania in a sense I have seen the Lebanese author NN Taleb
use it – an unbridled sense of desire and hope for new technology as a
panacea. It was ironic that two of the biological technologies that were
talked about involved me as a discoverer – all I got from them was a
sense of pleasure of uncovering a hidden insight at the time I stumbled
upon those discoveries – beyond that they have not solved any of my own
human problems. Hence, perhaps one could call me biased in this regard.
However, I should clarify that even I would welcome some of the
neo-technologies and hope they improve my life but I remain a skeptic
regarding them ultimately solving any fundamental problems or being
better \*on an average\* from less-glamorous solutions. All of this led
to some thinking about the book by the American historian Tainter, which
is one of the more detailed accounts of the endgame or civilizational
collapse (*Collapse of Complex Societies*).

He cites Casson regarding the aftermath of the termination of Pax Romana
in Britain: “*From A.D. 100 to 400 all Britain except in the north was
as pleasant and peaceful a countryside as it is to-day … But by 500 A.D.
it had all vanished and the country had reverted to a condition which it
had, perhaps, never seen before. There was no longer a trace of public
safety, no houses of size, dwindling townships and all the villas and
most of the Roman cities burnt, abandoned, looted and left the
habitation of ghosts* ”

This kind of end is not unique. Tainter collects several examples: 1)
the western Chou empire in China; 2) Harappan civilization in India; 3)
The Mesopotamian kingdoms; 4) Egyptian Old and Middle kingdoms; 5) The
Hittite empire; 6) Minoan Civilization; 7) Mycenaean Greek civilization;
8) The Roman Empire; 9) The Olmec in Mexico; 10) The Teotihuacan
civilization in Mesoamerica; 11) Casas Grandes near the Mexico/USA
border, the Chacoans of New Mexico and the Hohokam of Arizona (these
three adjacent native American cultures probably had some interactions
but it is not clear as what the exact relationship between them was);
12) the native American culture of the Cahokia mound complex in the
middle Mississippian zone; 13) Huari and Tiahuanaco kingdoms of Andean
South America.

One can debate some of the cases of collapses collected by Tainter. One
may also say his list is heavy on the old Americans – not surprising
given that he is an American historian. For example, right in Asia there
are other notable examples, like the Khmer civilization, which showed
the classic pattern of efflorescence followed by collapse. It is also
pretty weak on sub-Egyptian Africa. Immediately south of Egypt, the
Meroëtic civilization can be mentioned as an independent case. The
sub-Saharan Great Zimbabwe can also be considered another valid African
example. We could also consider the Benin empire, although one could
place the primary blame for it is collapse on European Christian
contact. Nevertheless, we do feel Tainter’s is generally a good list.
Further, the Americo-centricity is not entirely a bad thing thing
because the Americas developed for long without significant contacts
with Eurasia after the initial peoplings, Thus, they were a good
independent laboratory to study the development of human organizational
complexity. In these examples Tainter makes the case for development
from a relatively simple organizational state to a complex state that
was characterized by increasing organizational complexity followed by a
“golden age” and then a collapse, where most features of
organizational and technological complexity are lost and the population
returns to a basic subsistence mode.

One may ask how does one measure complexity of a civilization? We would
say a relatively simple device, inspired by devices we have effectively
used in our work in biology, can capture social complexity: Let us
denote each distinct occupation performed as primary source of
livelihood by an individual in a society as a character. Then per
household we can create a string of such characters concatenating the
character representing each individual in the household. Then by
aggregating those across all households in the human habitation or
civilization under consideration we get an occupation string for the
entire habitation/civilization. We then calculate the Shannon entropy
for this string. This will be a reasonable measure of complexity. Such a
measure does suggest that as a civilization or culture develops it rises
in complexity reaching a peak value. While this peak value might have
considerably differed between the Eurasian+Egyptian-zone civilizations
and those of deep Africa and the Americas the trend in its value is the
same in course the development of a culture or civilization followed by
a collapse.

As another dimension we may also consider the recent work by TA Kohler
and colleagues (*Greater post-Neolithic wealth disparities in Eurasia
than in North America and Mesoamerica* by Kohler TA et al). They used
archaeologically determinable house-size distribution to compute Gini
coefficients. The Gini coefficient is a measure of the inequality in the
values comprising a frequency distribution (g=0, total equality; g=1,
one owns all and rest nothing) and is typically used to measure the
inequality in income distribution in a society or habitation. They
showed that the Gini coefficients increased with the domestication of
plants and animals in the Neolithic and subsequently with the emergence
of the Indo-European model of wide-ranging conquests over Eurasia. In
their limited analysis they found that the disparity indicated by the
Gini coefficient was more in parts of Europe and Asia they sampled than
in the parts of the Americas they studied. The average Gini coefficient
was markedly higher in cultures with classic states than those that
remained restricted to the local habitations.

An implication of all this is that complex societies are intrinsically
associated with a non-egalitarian structure. A corollary to this is the
need for a degree of centralization or hubs to maintain any degree of
complexity beyond the ordinary. We see the same constraint imposed on
several biological networks, such as transcriptional networks. Here,
there are small number of transcription factors, “hubs”, that control a
very large number of genes and a large number of transcription factors
that control a small number of genes. In such a network structure, where
the degree-distribution of the nodes follows a power-law distribution,
an attack that randomly targets nodes has a low probability of breaking
up the network. However, an attack that specifically targets the hubs
will surely bring it down. However, such networks do fine with regime
change, i.e., nodes which are hubs may be freely lost as long as new
hubs with statistically similar properties as the lost hubs
concomitantly emerge in the network. Hence, we may say that any defect
that can propagate up to the hubs so as to irreplaceably destroy them
cause a collapse of the system.

In our youth the Rus, who had implemented the Marxian delusion, plied us
with cheap books with subtle delivery of their cherished doctrines: 1)
Egalitarianism; 2) Communism; 3) triumph of technology over religion and
nature. Our meditations on such issues in the social domain were
initially sparked by our trying to apprehend the first of these – the
superficially alluring egalitarianism of the Marxian doctrine. At that
time many around us had bought it into it. At the face of it seemed like
channel for rebellion against authority – being a svacchanda we were not
fond of authority ourselves. Yet our closest informers had warned us
about the dangers of the Marxian doctrine. While playing all these
issues in our mind, we soon realized that it was a figment of the
Abrahamistically deluded imagination. Thereafter we soon arrived at the
interlocking of complexity, structure, functionality and inequality.
That interlocking acted like a conservation principle you could not
increase one side of this without reducing the other – essentially you
cannot have your cake and eat it too. Thus, social complexity,
intra-social structure and effective multifunctionality went hand in
hand with increased inequality. Egalitarianism simply meant that such
things had to devolve towards simplification or entirely collapse, since
the climb-down is never a mirror image of the climb-up. If the climb-up
were to happen by the mode of preferential attachment of new nodes to
certain nodes of the network, the climb-down it often proceeds through
an attack on hubs of a network with properties approximation a power-law
distribution resulting in collapse. In course of our life we have
witnessed several examples of such collapse under Marxian or
semi-Marxian implementations.

A more subtle understanding of the social role of technology and the
production of community goods came from our studies on biological
conflict and cooperation, which are but the proverbial two sides of the
same coin. There two broad roads to biological cooperation: 1) when you
form a multi-individual assemblage with your kin then you can contribute
to the “commons” even at some expense to your own fitness if that
contribution bumps up the net included fitness which you gain from your
associated kin who benefit from it. 2) If you are forming an assemblage
with non-kin – like say a bacterial mixed biofilm or a mixed flock of
birds – then you develop cooperation via mutualism and potentially
functional differentiation. Both these scenarios sustain a certain type
of technological innovation. First, the mutualism, “frees” you from
performing certain tasks. Hence, you can devote that surplus to
otherwise unaffordable innovations that might contribute to your
fitness. At the very basic level, these innovations might relate to
biological conflict, i.e. weaponry to prevent predatory/parasitic
entities from taking your gains. Second, in any cooperation, both
between kin and between non-kin, there is a strong incentive for “black
sheep”, i.e. cheaters, who gain a fitness advantage by not contributing
to the commons but only using the communal goods. Indeed, we see their
emergence routinely in biological assemblages, often even via single
point mutations. For any cooperation to survive we hence need policing.
This takes the form of weaponry similar to that used in inter-group
biological conflicts. These scenarios spark off arms-race like situation
which are the strongest drivers of “technological” innovation in
biology. These might then lead to “peace-time” use of these innovations
in other biological contexts. For example, we have shown that much of
the eukaryotic epigenetic-information-encoding apparatus has emerged
from components that originally evolved as part of the
offensive/defensive weaponry in biological conflicts in the prokaryotic
world. We came to realize that this parallel of technological innovation
broadly applies even to human technologies. In the “big-picture”,
technologies that are not ultimately contributing to fitness in some
fundamental way are unlikely to lead to technological utopia as some of
its proponents hold; rather they might simply lead in the direction of
civilizational collapse.

This brings us to the concluding part of this discussion: Among those
doctrinaire Soviet books we leafed through in our youth, there was at
least one which was inclined towards futurology. If my memory serves me
right in 2018 CE we were predicted as not too far away from what was
already a technological utopia. If this was the Soviets, one of the very
few science-fiction works I read (by some American) also had rather
grandiose predictions for this date. None of that has come to pass. Yet,
in parts of my admittedly small circle there is a sense of anticipation
– a feeling that we might be close to an unprecedented time where a
great revolution manifests from new technology. For some it does have
shades of a utopia. For others it raises the specter or the joyous
possibility of the times of the right to a salary without the need to do
any work. Yet others talk of the freedom from human limitations. Yet, we
may go back to Tainter’s list and ask if we might join that too. One
point which might be noted is that, whether it was in the metal-limited
Americas, or Eurasia, or Africa, the rise of civilizational complexity
also went hand in hand with technological innovation. Sometimes this
innovation was rather complex as in the Greco-Roman world or India. Yet
those civilizations collapsed with all or much of that technology
entirely vanishing in the successor populations. The votaries of the
coming technological golden age say that this time around it is
different, whereas Spengler did not see it as being different. If the
technology is not enhancing its fitness then we may ask if it can in any
way stave off a collapse in the future.

Tainter lists four points which he sees as being major factors pertain
to collapse:  
“*l. human societies are problem-solving organizations;*  
*2. sociopolitical systems require energy for their maintenance;*  
*3. increased complexity carries with it increased costs per capita;
and*  
*4. investment in sociopolitical complexity as a problem-solving
response often reaches a point of declining marginal returns.*”

We would add that unless the costs of increased complexity in someway
translated into a benefit for fitness (and here measuring fitness is
complicated) it is likely to hit a road block. The neomaniacs think that
for point 4 new technology might provide a way out. Here again we remain
skeptical that it would escape his “declining marginal returns” clause
especially when weighed in terms of its contribution to fitness. Hence,
we say: 1) There is likely a good reason dolphins have retained high
“IQ” for a long time but only developed limited technology; 2) The
so-called Fermi’s paradox is a real thing for most intelligent organisms
are either leading the lives of dolphins and ravens or are repeatedly
undergoing collapse rather than taking hold of the galaxy in the
technological utopia of science-fiction.
