+++
title = "Mongolica: Qubilai Khan’s campaign to destroy the Southernxa0Song"

+++
The final act in Mongol conquest of China shows the military capability
of Qubilai and why his grandfather, the great Khan had singled him out
as the one who someday would adorn his throne. We shall place here a
very brief account of this war. In late summer of 1259 CE the Mongols
faced a major crisis when the supreme leader Möngke Khan died of
dysentery while conducting the siege of the fort of Diaoyu of the
southern Song. The next in line for the throne of Chingiz was his
brother Qubilai who was supported by his younger brother the Il-Khan
Hülegü. Hülegü decided to send about half his men from Iran to aid
Qubilai continue the campaign against the chīna-s. However, he was
thwarted in this plan due to a squabble with his cousins of the Jochid
line, who were in state of ferment after the death of their great leader
Batu, the grandson of Chingiz via Jochi. Nevertheless, Hülegü manage to
send the young Bayan of the Baarin tribe (one of the early tribes that
elected Temüjin as Khan), a rising general in his army, to help his
brother Qubilai. He was given a command at a young age after his father
fell in battle while taking the Hashishin forts under Hülegü. Qubilai
pressed on and established a bridgehead south of the Yangtze river near
Ezhou. But soon thereafter he had to move back north due to his brother
Ariq Böke claiming to be the great Khan. In the mean time the Song under
their leader Jia Sidao regained the ground lost to the Mongols south of
the Yangtze.

In 1260 CE after Qubilai Khan had settled the rebellion of his brother
Ariq Böke, set his eyes on destroying the last Chinese kingdom, the
Southern Song, once and for all. The Song were short on horses and thus
lacked a swift-moving cavalry. However, Qubilai from his prior
experience knew that the terrain meant that Song could still nullify the
traditional cavalry tactics of the Mongols. Hence, he decided not to
hurry and made elaborate preparations. The Mongols amassed extensive
pyrotechnics as well as a powerful array of rockets and explosive bombs
for sieges. But then Song had the largest army in the world of over a
one million men and also had an impressive array of torsional artillery
to deliver fireworks against a besieging force: large trebuchets with
good accuracy and less accurate mangonels and also giant crossbows.
Moreover, they were the first Chinese kingdom to have a permanent and
strong navy fully capable of diverse maneuvers on rivers and the seas.
It had an array of some of best ships of the time equipped with naval
pyrotechnics for attacking coasts and other ships. They also had
strategic depth in the form of the alliance with the kingdom of
Campāvati to the south.

In 1265 CE Qubilai tested the Song land forces at Sichuan and
comprehensively defeated them. This gave impetus to the Mongol morale to
enter into a decisive war with the cīna-s. However, Qubilai knew fully
well that this was not enough as Song, from then on, were going play a
defensive strategy banking on their vast army. They were going block the
key invasion routes that the Mongols would be able to take with a string
of well-stocked forts. Thus, the Mongols would be forced to take routes
through difficult terrain in central and south China or risk a
completely new form of warfare, naval, against a force of over 100,000
Song marines who were stationed along the coast and instructed to
preemptively to thwart any Mongol attempt at building a navy. Qubilai
decided that he would first focus on the land campaign and then build up
his navy over a period so that they could match up with the Song. He
also raised a massive stock of pyrotechnics and bombs specifically
designed to attack ships with the Song navy in eye.

Thus, in 1267 CE Qubilai directed his army to systematically proceed
along the Han river, the left tributary of the Yangtze in central China
with the Song capital of Hangzhou as the focus , even if the progress
was slow. Putting this plan into action, the 30 year old general Bayan
led the Mongols to a series of victories using heavy bombardment with
the pyrotechnics and cutting off supplies with the mobile cavalry units,
thus taking all the smaller forts which could be taken with just the
land army. Then they besieged the second strongest Song fort of Fancheng
and after a prolonged siege captured it. Provisioning the army with this
captured fort, they advanced against the strongest and best defended
Song fort Xiangyang in 1273. In the meantime Qubilai had readied the
phase-I of the Mongol navy, put it on the river and carried out a
continuous naval blockade of Xiangyang. Finally, with the land army
converging, this mighty fort was captured by 1274. With that the Mongols
broke into the core Yangtze region and closed in on Hangzhou. Qubilai
promoted general Bayan for his successes as the commander-in-chief of
the Mongol army. The Song lord Jia Sidao charged at the Mongols
stationed at the Yangtze with a force of 130,000 but Bayan smashed his
advance and forced him to retreat. He tried to negotiate a peace treaty
but Bayan rebuffed it and continued the attack forcing Jia to flee. Then
the Mongol generals Bayan and Aju punched their way forward aiming at
Nanking, Changzhou and Wuxi. In the first city the Song army fled at the
approach of the Mongols without offering much of a fight. In the
subsequent encounters the Song lost heavily against the quick moving
Mongol forces and had to surrender the cities. Several top Song generals
were targeted and killed by Bayan and Aju in these battles thus denuding
their command capacity.

Qubilai then sent three Chinese emissaries to discuss surrender terms
with the Song but the Song killed those emissaries. Qubilai immediately
ordered strikes on the city of Yangzhou on the Yangtze and Jiading and
destroyed the Song units which were positioned there. He then used these
as a base to launch a surprise attack with fast-moving boats equipped to
hurl bombs and pyrotechnics on the first Song river fleet. The Song
admiral taken by surprise was killed and his fleet was rapidly brunt and
sunk. The veteran Song lord Jia Sidao was killed shortly thereafter by a
fellow Chinese perhaps employed by the Mongols. Then the Mongols swept
up the Jiangsu province where the Song population resisted strongly but
was massacred upon being defeated. Hunan and Jingxi were taken next by
Bayan. Then Qubilai launched a three pronged amphibious assault on the
Song. A western wing under general Ajirghan marched to take the fort of
Jiankang and secure the key Dusong pass. In the east Qubilai unfolded
the second phase of his navy under admirals Dong and Zhang Hongfan to
sail along the Yangtze to reach the sea and then secure the coast for a
naval showdown with the main Song sea fleet. Bayan led the central wing
to march straight to the capital.

Seeing the rapidly unfolding of the Mongol plans, and being reduced to a
patch around Hangzhou, the Song sent a emissary stating that they were
willing to be a protectorate under the Mongols. Bayan sent him back
saying that the Mongols were now aiming for complete conquest of the
Song. Finally, in March 1275 the Mongols closed in on the Song capital
and launched a simultaneously attack with two land armies and one naval
force. The Song thought they would stave off the Mongols with their
fire-arrow giant crossbows as they had done to the elephant corps of the
Han several centuries before. However, they came up against an
overwhelming bombardment by the Mongols with thousands upon thousands of
iron-cased and earthen bombs hurled from trebuchets. The Song crossbows
and seige engines caught fire and parts of the capital province were
were hit from the bay by the naval attack of Mongols. The superior
pyrotechnics of the Mongol destroyed the Song naval defenses and allowed
their ships to close in on the capital. Then the Mongols launched their
main land assault with the cavalry division under Bayan. The Song while
having a larger force numerically could not match up to the
tulughama-like sorties of the Mongols and eventually folded up. With
that the main Song land resistance was over and the Song queen
surrendered the capital to the Mongols without any resistance in
February of 1276 CE.

There was still a mighty Song fleet and the loyalists taking the two
young surviving princes with them sailed down the sea and used Macau and
nearby islands as a base. When Qubilai had to move north to face
[Qaidu](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/)
who was challenging him as rival Khan the Song tried to reestablish
themselves by fomenting rebellion in Fujian, Guangdong and Guangxi in
1277 and 1278 CE. Qubilai having settled the issue of Qaidu for the time
being returned to finish the Song rebellion. The Mongols first flushed
them out of Fujian and Guangxi by repeated land attacks and then
corralled them in Guangdong where one of the Song princes died leaving
the last one as the emperor. Seeing the Mongols close in, he and his
supporters realized that there was no hope of fighting a land battle.
But their navy of nearly 1000 excellent ships and several hundred
supporting boats was intact and they decided to retreat to the island of
Yaishan off Macau. It was here that the final battle was fought in 1279.
The Song arrayed their ships in a rectangular formation and placed
several palisades tied to boats to form a perimeter. Thus, the whole
array was like a floating fortress from behind which the Song troops
could fight. They also kept close to land so that they could supply
their men with weapons, food and material for repair. This effectively
cost their mobility against a Mongol fleet with smaller but much faster
vessels. At first the Mongols took some high positions facing the
Yaishan coast and launched a bombardment in February of 1279 with
incendiary shells and stones. This damaged several ships of the Song and
demoralized them to a degree.

However, when the Mongol fleet finally assembled for battle in March
1279, it was still only half the size of the Song fleet. On March 19th
the Mongols calculated that the tide would provide two opportunities
that day. The tide receded towards the south early in the morning
creating a rush between the two islands where the Song fleet was
stationed. Since they had built highly maneuverable ships, the Mongols
used the momentum of the tides to launch rapid attack on the Song from
the north. For this assault the Mongols chose the admiral Li Heng, said
to be a descendant of the old emperor Tai-zong of the Tang. This attack
brought the Mongols close to the Song ships and they began hand to hand
fighting, at which they excelled, with the corps on the support boats.
Taking advantage of this encounter the Mongols moved a second formation
of about 100 ships to the south and launched an attack by mid-morning
from the south. The Song turned the full force of their naval artillery
against this formation. But by noon the Mongols made an amphibious
landing on the island of Yaishan and made a pyrotechnic attack against
the Song ships closest to land. By then the fourth Mongol fleet of
around 100 completed the encirclement of the large but immobile Song
fleet. Shortly after noon the Mongols breached the Song palisade and
were now able to attack ships inside it. They then used the momentum of
the afternoon tides to launch another rapid attack to close in on the
Song before they could deploy their next round of naval artillery. In
this attack they broke up the defensive rectangle of the Song completely
and got to the main ships. Having boarded them they engaged in fierce
closen combat. By evening the Mongols had killed 100,000 Song marines
and the Song prince’s corpse was seen floating in the sea. By then
Mongols had captured 800 Song ships. Seeing this, the Song navy lost
heart and surrendered. With that the Song empire of China came to a
close and the survivors fled to Campāvati. This closing battle also
showed how far the Mongols had come from a horse-borne steppe power to
one which could defeat one of the best navies of the time at sea.

In my childhood, one nice afternoon, I leaned against the cot in my room
and lapsed into a reverie. This war flashed in before my eyes in great
detail like a movie. Inspired by that we staged an enactment of the same
which gave us much pleasure.
