+++
title = "A poll on peoples’ beliefs onxa0reincarnation"

+++
Using the Twitter’s poll tool we conducted a poll which gave the below
results:  
Reincarnation happens:  
Believe so but there is no evidence for it: 52%  
Sure, have the evidence for it: 20%  
No, just mumbo-jumbo: 11%  
Do not know: 17%  
388 respondents  
Most of the people who are in my sphere on Twitter are Hindus from India
and North America, with smaller numbers from East Asia and Europe.

Hence, the above result is quite in line with reincarnation being a
widespread belief among Hindus. With all the caveats of sample size and
this poll not being “scientific” and the like, it is still notable to us
that the majority believe in it. 72% in one way or another. Some
complained that the negative alternative was too strong. Others said
that it was self-evident to them hence the alternatives did not capture
that special experience of their self-evident knowledge of
reincarnation. All those are valid but we think these alternatives
mostly capture the “big picture”.

In Hindu tradition, reincarnation makes its appearance in the late Vedic
tradition in the āraṇyaka-s and upaniṣat-s while being conspicuously
absent in the early layers of their tradition. Yet parallel beliefs are
encountered among their cousins the yavana-s and in a muted form
(perhaps due to Zarathushtra) among the Iranians (at least as far as the
Zoroastrians are concerned). Thus, it could have been an older belief
that came back to the mainstream in the later Vedic layers. It is
central to the philosophies of the nagna and the tathāgata suggesting
that the belief in reincarnation had taken deep root by around 2500 YBP.
Thus, Hindus holding such a belief today is unsurprising. Medieval
Abrahamistic thinkers were terrified by this idea taking root in their
peoples under [Hindu and tāthāgata
influences](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/) as
they thought it to be damaging to their cults. However, this belief
exists widely outside the Hindu world, even among peoples smothered by
the hand of Abrahamistic delusions. The Turks in Turkey for example
widely hold such beliefs; so also do Lithuanians and First Americans to
name a few, who have not been in the Hindu sphere of influence.

Our poll and anecdotal conversations we have had over the years suggests
that even though the majority of Hindus might not have seen evidence
directly, i.e. either through their own experience or seeing cases first
hand, they seem to believe in it. Hence, it is one of the few aspects of
the Hindu religion that seems to rest in large part on belief. Yet,
Hindus were always somewhat uncomfortable with this facet of their
religion resting purely on belief. Thus, even before the days of the
tathāgata, we hear of an ikṣvāku monarch performing experiments with
criminals condemned to death in order the determine the “substance” that
left the dead body to reincarnate in another. These experiments, however
poorly conducted, were seen as providing evidence for a reincarnating
substance and thus providing an empirical basis for the claim.
Remarkably, even in our age, one of my own śruti teachers believed that
such an experiment had been more recently repeated and the results of
yore had been reproduced. Others in the past were less sanguine about
such experiments and declared that they found evidence from more
indirect sources. The most commonly stated evidence is that of people
recalling texts or special knowledge at a very young age, apparently
without any exposure. Also included in this class of evidence, is the
recollection of events of past births that can then be verified
independently. At least 77-78 people in our poll responded that they had
evidence – so we assume that quite a number of people feel that they
have seen such signs even today.

Finally, in all our inquiries it has been apparent that to most people
it is not clear as to what really reincarnates. This was apparent in the
responses to the poll. One respondent said that he took reincarnation as
an axiom of his worldview. However, it is not clear if a completely
consistent worldview has emerged for him by taking reincarnation as an
axiom. Inquiries with Hindu teachers who believe in reincarnation
usually results in the following answer: There is something called a
sūkṣma-śarīra. This is said to “envelop” the ātman and keeps a record
of the karman balance of an individual. As long as it is non-zero it
results in the ātman experiencing reincarnation. However, when that
balance is zero the ātman no longer has the experience of identification
with a śarīra attains the state of mokṣa. Of course, there are subtle
variations on this theme depending on the teacher and also some more
drastic differences with the bauddha-s and jaina-s. Yet they all seem to
agree that there is something like the sūkṣma-śarīra that reincarnates.
Some of the believers might even give a more precise account of that
sūkṣma-śarīra and associate it with the manas or buddhi. Several
modern believers (including some Hindu teachers) and investigators of
reincarnation state that it is more physical. They say that birthmarks
and developmental malformations correspond to lesions from the past
birth.

Today it is thought that only cārvāka-s hold that reincarnation does not
happen. Many Hindus fear that if this belief was proven wrong then the
Hindu religion might crumble. Whether this belief has a leg to stand or
whether the Hindu religion will really crumble if it is shown to be
false are different questions. There is also an even more fundamental
question of whether the notion can be tested at all. Those will be
discussed separately in a very different format if the gods are
favorable to us. This is just a brief record of the beliefs on the
matter of reincarnation that might provide a preamble to that
discussion, whenever it happens.
