+++
title = "Some words on mathematical truth, scientific conviction and the sociology of science"

+++
Sometime in the bronze age more than one group of humans, including our
own Aryan ancestors, discovered that the squares of the two legs of a
right triangle sum up to the square of the hypotenuse. This is the famed
bhujā-koṭi-karṇa-nyāya, which remains true to this date in Euclidean
space. In contrast, only a few of the scientific theories of the bronze
age have survived in any form close to how they were originally
proposed. Coeval with this momentous mathematical discovery, in the
bronze age, most civilizations thought that the sun and the planets go
round the Earth. Then a few millennia later the counter-hypothesis that
the earth and the planets go around the sun took birth. But it took a
long time for the older hypothesis to be falsified and the new one to
take root. The new one stood the test of all subsequent falsifications
but its actual form underwent many further modifications. This flow of
the scientific process has been presented in its idealized formed by the
Jewish intellectuals Popper and Kuhn. [However, it should be kept in
mind that the actual process of science rarely follows the post-facto
idealized
presentation.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/08/03/big-science-and-grant-driven-science-and-how-discoveries-are-made/)
In any case, the primary lesson from this abstraction of the scientific
process is that science is rather different from the mathematics in one
matter.

A mathematical truth once discovered remains pretty much the same. This
truth is established by what is termed as a proof in mathematics, which
itself is based on an underlying set of axioms (for now we shall set
aside the big issue of Gödel’s theorems). The form of the statement of
such a mathematical truth, a theorem, might change over time due to the
concept of “mathematical rigor” affecting the nature of the proof which
is supplied for it; nevertheless, its essence remains pretty much the
same. However, unless a scientific matter can be trivially reduced to an
underlying mathematical theorem, there is no such truth in science as
there is in mathematics. Instead, there are only falsifications and
attempted falsifications. A scientific statement which survives all
subsequent falsification attempts may be considered a scientific
“truth”. More correctly, it may be considered a scientific
conviction because, for the most part, it is established in a way quite
different from the mathematical truth arrived at by the device of a
proof.

[![Donkey](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/donkey.png?w=640)](http://)  
Figure 1

Yet, there is a basic similarity of a key process used in both
mathematical and scientific discovery. The investigation begins with a
body of observations. For example, one observes that whatever triangle
one draws or conceives the sum of two of its sides is always greater
than the third. This can be easily proved under the axioms of Euclidean
geometry as in Figure 1 thereby becoming the mathematical truth, the
Donkey’s theorem. In science too we begin in the same way by gathering a
mass of observations. Then one makes a proposal to explain that mass of
observations, which may be termed the scientific hypothesis. Here is
where things get different between mathematics and science. The proposal
is considered truly scientific only if it offers a specific
“prediction”, which can then be tested usually by another set of
observations. If these new observations falsify the original proposal,
then the hypothesis is no longer considered as a valid one and a new
proposal has to be sought to explain the observations. Now, scientific
conviction regarding a hypothesis gets established by a large body of
supporting empirical observations. This is quite contrary to
mathematical proof. A large body of empirical observations supported
Fermat’s last theorem, which was then finally proved. All observations
within our current reach support the hunch that the logarithmic integral
![\\textrm{Li}(x)\>
\\pi(x)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctextrm%7BLi%7D%28x%29%3E+%5Cpi%28x%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\textrm{Li}(x)\> \\pi(x)") but [Littlewood proved it to be
false](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2018/02/12/counting-primes-arithmetic-functions-ramanujan-and-the-like/).
Similarly, the [Mertens
conjecture](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2018/02/03/our-auto-discovery-of-the-mobius-and-mertens-sequences/)
regarding the value assumed by the Mertens function has been proven to
be false but no current empirical observation has reached the point
where it is really false. Thus, mathematical truth is very different
from scientific conviction – a corresponding body of observations as
those ‘testing’ the ![\\textrm{Li}(x)\>
\\pi(x)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctextrm%7BLi%7D%28x%29%3E+%5Cpi%28x%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\textrm{Li}(x)\> \\pi(x)") or Mertens conjectures would have made for
a strong scientific hypothesis yet that body contributed nothing to the
truth of the respective mathematical statements. In this regard it might
be pointed out that the mathematicians tend to term their hunches or
even well-tested but unproven convictions as conjectures. Some of these
which are supported by a large body of downstream evidence but still
remain unproven are dignified by the term ‘hypothesis’, e.g. the Riemann
hypothesis regarding the connection between the Zeta function and the
prime numbers. Finally, it should be stated that even when scientific
conviction is established upon successful hypothesis-testing, underlying
it is a probabilistic statement. This usually takes the form that given
the body of testing observations, the chance of an alternative
hypothesis as opposed to the chosen one explaining the observations is
some low value.

Often, getting a valid body of observations is itself a limiting factor
in science because one may or may not have had the technology in the
first place to generate such observations. Further, even with the
technology in place, the observation collection might have other
practical roadblocks like the capacity of the human or machine
observers. Thus, a big part of science is the collection of a clean body
of observations – this is often overlooked in narratives privileging the
hypothesis-creation step. The availability of technology again plays a
central role in the testing of the hypothesis. The observation of
gravitational waves or the Higgs boson are classic examples of this. The
specific predictions were made a long time ago by the respective
hypotheses in these examples. However, we needed all this time for
technology to catch up to make the test of the hypothesis.

The role of the idea of proof in establishing mathematical truth,
pioneered by the yavana thinkers, played a huge role in their thought
process and also that of the traditions which borrowed from them like
the Mohammedans and the later Europeans. Among the Hindus, a parallel
concept of proof from a set of axioms developed from the linguistic
tradition culminating in the work of the sages Pāṇini, Kātyāyana, and
Patañjali. The great Pāṇini, after an expansive data-collection foray,
[created the clean data set of the
gaṇapāṭha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/09/02/pa%e1%b9%87ini-xuanzang-and-tolkappiya%e1%b9%89-some-legends-and-history/).
This formed the basis of developing a system of proof for a linguistic
observation based on certain axioms. As an example, let us take the word
mahoraskaḥ meaning ‘he who has a broad chest’, which is a bahuvrīhi
compound. How do you “prove” the formation of this compound word from
the constitutive root words mahat and uras. Following Pāṇini you get the
below proof.

mahat\~su+uras\~su-\> mahat\~su+uras\~su+ka\~p-\>
mahat+uras+ka-(ānmahataḥ…)-\> mahā+uras+ka-\> mahoraskaḥ |

Here,’\~su’ is a Pāṇinian meta-element, much like the construction of
the circle in the above proof of the Donkey’s theorem. It is indicated
by Pāṇini’s sūtra: anekam-anya-padārthe | (2.2.24). Likewise, the ending
is specified by a samāsānta-sūtra. In this case the uras\~su triggers
the samāsānta-sūtra: uraḥ prabhṛtibhyaḥ kap | (5.4.151), which brings in
the ending and the meta-element ‘+ka\~p’ for the ending. Once that has
been docked to the terminal one applies the sūtra concerning the
meta-elements: supo dhātu-prātipadikayoḥ | (2.4.71), which directs the
deletion of the meta-elements. This then triggers a transformation of
one or both of the combined elements by a samāsāśrayavidhiḥ. In this
case, it is: ān-mahataḥ samānādhikaraṇa-jātīyayoḥ | (6.3.46) which
causes a transformation of the mahat to mahā. Then it triggers the
sandhi-sūtra-s, which in this case are akaḥ savarṇe dīrghaḥ | (6.1.101)
and ādguṇaḥ | (6.1.87) which finally result in mahoraskaḥ (Footnote 1)

Thus, this system provides a means of “proving” the formation of a
compound as per the Pāṇinian axioms.

While, as we saw above,  there is a distinction between scientific
conviction and mathematical proof, the “hidden hand” of geometry
underlies the establishment of a scientific conviction. In physics this
is actually not so hidden – it might be directly operating via the
reduction of the physics to an underlying mathematical expression.
Alternatively, the types of hypotheses that can be created are seriously
constrained by underlying geometric truths. This latter expression is
also seen in chemistry to a great extent. In biology too we find that
the geometric constraints of hypotheses to be a serious player, often
but not always relating to the underlying chemistry. In fact, we go as
far as to say that the geometric constraints layout even part of [the
basic axioms from which biology should be
built](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/09/11/the-basis-for-philosophy-in-science-especially-biology-and-religion/).
However, we posit that in biology a second underlying element is
critical in constraining the hypothesis that can be formed. This takes
the form of the grammatical structures similar to those analyzed by the
school of Pāṇini in the analysis of the Sanskrit language. One may see
this [earlier note for some details (section: An ideal realm with a
syllabary?)](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/10/23/syllable-number-and-rules-in-the-ideal-realm/).
In conclusion, having an eye for these underlying geometric constraints
and the parallel “linguistic” constraints allows one to formulate
hypotheses that can produce genuine scientific convictions, especially
in biology.

In practice, such an understanding regarding hypothesis-formation, while
widespread among physicists and in large part among chemists, is not
common among biologists. They have neither a clear idea of the
foundational axioms nor the foundational theories of their science. They
can still be effective at gathering data, but the pressure from the
funding agencies for “hypothesis-driven science” has resulted in a
fetish for poorly framed hypotheses or pseudo-hypotheses that are not
really capable of producing genuine scientific convictions. However,
biology, particularly its study at a molecular level, has drawn a lot of
money due to its direct relationship to the human condition via the
promise of medical advances. This money, like most other monetary
incentives, is available in a competitive manner to biologists. With the
competition for money comes the opportunity for winners to lead a life
of mores, or even a larger than life existence with wide-ranging world
travel at public expense. There are other non-monetary benefits – fame,
and adulation via vanity articles in the popular press (e.g. note the
vanity article on Voinnet, a French fake researcher in RNA biology in
the Science magazine prior to his suspension for faking. He was also
conferred some big award and one of his commenders even felt he should
have been given the Nobel prize). The display of success in order to win
the next round of funding is typically achieved through publications in
certain prestige venues, like what the Chinese and the Koreans call CNS
(the Cell journal and the magazine Nature and Science). Sometimes just
raking up a large number of publications in other respected venues might
also do the trick. The availability of big money also allows
investigators in this field to run labs like sweatshops and lowers the
bar for the employment, thereby letting in a body of less-discerning
and/or less-intelligent people into the field. In fact, the widespread
lack of foundational knowledge has allowed such individuals to even
prosper widely – almost the equivalent of having physicists or engineers
with a poor understanding of Newtonian mechanics. Moreover, the
widespread lack of foundational knowledge leads to a tendency of it
being better to be “vague rather than wrong” – an inverse of the correct
scientific attitude (voiced by mathematical thinker Freeman Dyson): “it
is better to be wrong than vague.” This manifests in molecular biology
and allied fields like immunology in the form of an emphasis on
phenomenology and vague models rather crisp biochemical predictions (of
course on the other side there is also physics-envy manifesting in the
form of worthless mathematicization that yields little biological
insight). With such a system in place, we are left with an explosive
situation – an unsurprising call to the only too human urge to cheat.

This cheating has taken two major forms: 1) rampant plagiarism; 2)
production of fake results. The first is primarily a sociological
problem arising from the urge to sequester all the spoils for oneself.
However, it also feeds the extensive misrepresentation of scientific
results and inflation of particular findings in order to gain an edge
against competitors. Not surprisingly, it creates a rather unhealthy
social system within science. The second is fundamentally damaging to
the science itself for it fills the field with noise. This is compounded
by both the drive to publish a large number of worthless papers and the
fetish of peer review orchestrated by cartels which work as
echo-chambers. As a result, it becomes difficult for the inbuilt
corrective mechanisms of science to clean up the mess in piling mass of
literature. While I have taken molecular biology as the centerpiece
here, it appears that this is a more general problem. It might actually
be even more rampant in fields like psychology and also the area of
applied medical and nutritional research. This should not be just a
cause of concern for the scientists in the field because 1) a lot of
research is done on public money; 2) a lot of this research informs
medical practice which directly impinges on the health of people; 3)
unscrupulous practice in publicly funded science will seep through (via
cartel formation) to commercial medical research and practice leading to
more suffering for the patients – a striking example in recent times is
that of the Italian ‘celebrity’ doctor who claimed to perform tracheal
transplants only to end up consigning several of his patients to
gruesome deaths; he was prone to faking his scientific results and
credentials.

Is there a way out of this? At this moment that does not look easy to
me. Very powerful people in Euro-American science are part and parcel of
the problem. [Those who have read this story of ours before will get a
hint.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/07/20/this-time-its-the-big-mans-story-2/)
The whole attitude within Euro-American science need to change and some
of that has deep connections to the Abrahamistic undergirding of their
culture. Sadly, the negatives are worsened by either the ‘gaming’ of or
the imitation of the Euro-American system to different degrees by all
the eastern nations (China, Korea, Japan, and India being the chief
among them). In all this, we see the wisdom of father Manu that the
brāhmaṇa’s ethic is needed for such pursuits and that the brāhmaṇa
should keep a low-profile staying away from this business of feasting on
adulation.

-----

Footnote 1: This example was taken from a learned paṇḍitā Sowmya
Krishnapur’s lecture on the bahuvṛīhi compound.
