+++
title = "A Political roundup August 15xa02018"

+++
As I remarked to a friend, much of the stuff in (geo)politics which is
relevant to us is what we have predicted before based on the relatively
straightforward model of mleccha-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi i.e. the
anti-heathen coalition of those infected by Abrahamistic meme-plexes and
their secular mutations. What remains is just too uncertain to predict
with our limited knowledge and ability. This might be the more
interesting and perhaps the more dangerous part of our existence, but
for most part we simply have to watch it unfold. That is part of the
reason why we are not too motivated to write a lot about this on these
pages. Nevertheless, we felt it might be appropriate to provide review
of for another Independence Day has dawned and given that the elections
are scheduled for next year.

So let us take a panoramic view by traveling back in time. The great
demolition at Ayodhya on 6 December 1992 was a landmark even that hinted
that the Hindus were no longer going to take things lying down. hence,
we call upon fellow Hindus to observe a moment of remembrance for the
men who gave up their lives to bring down that symbol of marūnmatta
tyranny. This event and its aftermath created the first notable
post-Independence ferment among the Hindus to gain political power and
come out of the eclipse of the Gandhi-Nehru dynasty. Overseeing the
demolition through benign inaction was the Prime Minister PV Narasimha
Rao, an unassuming man of intelligence and a deep and enormous
linguistic capacity from the Andhra country (notable was his facility in
picking new human and computer languages). But PVNR’s main contribution
was his reform of the Indian economy, which for the first time allowed
Indians to experience the real middle class life. This boosted the
growing confidence of Hindus and after a period of uncertainty
culminated in the first NDA government under AB Vajapayee.

While as an adherent of the śruti I found his keeping of the hallowed
title of Vajapayee without truly living up to it grating, he was a man
of importance for the survival of the Hindu polity. His most important
achievement was the conducting of the nuclear weapons tests totally
surprising the mleccha and cīna enemies – this was a kind of boldness
which had not been exhibited before. Next, he was able shepherd the
nation through the economic blockade imposed by the evil mleccha-s and
show that the economic platform, which PVNR had laid the foundations
for, was indeed robust. In this period he had to handle the jihad of the
marūnmatta-s in the Kargil war. The secularized Hindu army carried the
day and showed that despite the mleccha attempts to curb them with
sanctions they Hindus were not to be taken as walkovers. The
mleccha-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi was at this point flummoxed by both the
military victories and economic resilience of the Hindu nation and
resorted to their usual trick of deploying the internal marūnmatta bomb
– the legacy bequeathed on the Hindus by the faux Mahātman and Nehru.
The most prominent among these attacks was the arson in Lāṭānarta, where
emboldened marūnmatta-s burned down a train carrying Hindus killing
many. The man who came to the fore in this dire situation was not ABV
but his future successor the Lāṭeśvara from the tailakāra-jāti. It was
due to him that the Hindus were able to show to the rākṣasa-like
marūnmatta-s that they could not get away with their usual crimes. This
was instrumental in bringing peace to the state and teaching a lesson to
the marūnmatta in the only language he understands.

But then Hindus are renowned for dropping the axe on their own foot.
Thus, lulled by the relatively good times the benign rule of ABV had
brought, deciding not to take a long term vision, they instead
facilitated the return of the Gandhi-Nehru dynasty via UPA-I. This
government was led in proxy by the Helena of India who was a windfall
for the mleccha-s, and she ably served as their agent in undermining the
Hindu nation. To keep the Hindus in check, the marūnmatta-s were
unleashed on a routine basis and this reached a culmination in the
invasion of Mumbai on Nov 26 2008 by a mere band of 10 ghazi-s bringing
back memories of Ikhtiyar al-Din Bakhtiyar Khalji, the hero of
Bangladesh. As the UPA kept facilitating anti-heathen action, the NDA
was unable to even put up a proper fight – ABV faded away into a
vegetative state and his lieutenant, the aging saindhava LKA lost the
plot in many ways (Note his egregious appointment of Kulkarni as an
adviser). This only consolidated the grip of the Abrahamistic
convergence against the Hindus. To worsen matters, it looked as though
the cīna-s might launch a decisive strike on the enfeebled secularized
Hindu army – things almost looked lost for the Hindu nation.

It was in such dire circumstances that the Lāṭeśvara became Dillīśvara
in 2014. The mleccha-s having known his capacity from his restoring of
the Lāṭānarta country greatly feared him. For 12 years they had kept him
out their countries because they hated him as the symbol of what they
hated most – the unconquered heathens of Hindustan who were the last
great bulwark of that old and brilliant Indo-European heathenism, which
they had either ground to dust or placed in museum closets. This
heathenism was a rival worldview to all that the counter-religions of
Abrahamism represented in their essence. Its very presence was a
negation of the narratives of Abrahamism and it had to be exterminated.
If there was one leader among the Indian masses who could give it a
lifeline it was the Lāṭeśvara. Hence, they summoned all they could could
in the form of their first responders to prevent his acquisition of
power. They raised fake leaders like the broom-wielding koṭvāl of Delhi
and the hazardous perpetuator of Gandhian blunders. But none of this
worked in the long-run and the Lāṭeśvara took power.

Among the failures of the ABV-LKA duo was their inability to protect the
homeland security of Bhārata from marūnmatta-s, śavasādhaka-s and other
kaṇṭhaka-s. We had: the hijacking followed by the humiliating release of
demonic ghazi-s; the train attack; the ghazwat on the Parliament.
Further ABV was hobbled by the machinations of the possibly crypto-preta
president KR Narayanan. This is where the Lāṭeśvara NM focused. Despite
his inadequacies on the ideological front, his lieutenant Dobhal was
able to be quite effective in curbing the violence of the marūnmatta-s.
He also dented their ability to finance such operations by the secretive
demonetization maneuver. His other lieutenant Rajnath Singh, again,
despite his inadequacies, has done a reasonable job in prosecuting a
vigorous assault against the secularized mutation of Abrahamism, namely
the socialist terrorists of internal India. On the external front the he
handled the confrontation with the belligerent Han by tackling the
Doklam conflict really well. He also sent a message to the ghazi-s by
directing the secularized Hindu army to launch “surgical strikes”
against them. This had a psychological effect more than anything else –
perhaps the Hindus were doing it for the first time since the Maratha
punches delivered in their heydays.

On the economic front things are less clear, in part because I am not
qualified to assess the matters too precisely. The general trends point
to some success in this regard, especially in terms of curbing and to a
degree reversing the damage caused by the UPA misrule. However, the
demonetization and the goods and services tax, while done with good
intentions and with long-term benefits in mind, might have affected many
adversely; however, this is perhaps a matter of perception. On the
external front, while NM’s foreign policy has been clearly more robust
than that managed by the flaky Jaswant Singh under ABV, its success is
not entirely clear. The handling of the Nuclear Suppliers Group matter
does look like a failure to us. Finally, like a good Hindu king ought to
do, NM has paid much attention to the issue of jana-kṣema and made major
strides in this direction. He himself has led the
svaccha-Bhārata-abhiyāna from front in attempt the impart the
much-need civic sense to the undisciplined Hindus. The ground
connectivity progress managed by Gadkari and railways by Prabhu/Goyal
seem to be bright spots too. However, specific Hindu issues relating to
temple administration, temple rights, animal husbandry and ground level
prevention of the infection spread by dayi-s and evangelists have not
been satisfactorily addressed.

That last point in the above discussion brings us to proverbial
“elephant in the room”. During the UPA rule the
mleccha-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi had systematically infiltrated the
judiciary and the civil service with pro-Abrahamistic elements. As India
is ruled by a democratic form of government, NM and his lieutenants are
having a difficult time undoing the evil of this infiltration. This in
part is the basis of their inability to do much for certain specific
Hindu issues. Going forward, this could result in enormous damage to the
Hindus. One only hopes that NM is doing his best to uproot these plants
of the enemies completely revamp the affiliation of the administrative
machinery. Beyond this, our enemies are certainly rattled by this
Julian-like come back of the H under NM. But will he prove to be just
that – a Julian?

The mleccha-s and the marūnmatta-s would definitely want it to end that
way and NM is going to have to fight hard to keep the saffron flag
fluttering. Among other things they would continue their strategy of
raising false leaders, like the man of the broom, in various local
settings to create a general ferment. The idea here is not to create a
rival for NM but to damage the impact of his janakṣema. The śava-s would
be used to harry the polity – e.g. the Sterlite Copper agitation in the
Tamil country. They would also be tempted to deploy the sword arm of the
marūnmatta to attempt something big and bloody. Their new agent in TSP
Imran Khan might also be deployed for exerting pressure from western
Mohammedan fragment of India. The agent of the Eastern Mohammedan
fragment, the white-shrouded evil daughter of Bakhtiyar would be used to
expand violence against the Hindus in the east. A political alliance
would created around the Kangress and the dredges of the old UPA to
attack the NDA like the various enemies of Sudāsa ganging against him.
The cīna-s might try to fish in these troubled waters too but we suspect
that Trump’s trade-war might come to the aid of the Hindus here. The
mleccha deep-state itself is having problems due to the unexpected
triumph of Trump. This might keep them busy and Hindus should exploit
that. However, the techniques developed against Trump are and will be
deployed against NM and the Hindus in India. Finally, the mleccha-s know
that if they incite something big and bloody too early or too late it
could end up consolidating the Hindus. Hence, we tend to think that the
path they would prefer is that of a “million mutinies”. The malcontents
from the depressed classes and other groups will be cultivated and
deployed. The purchased “news traders”, much like the Piṇḍāri purchase
by the English, would be used to amplify these disturbances.
Reinforcements would be sent to the socialist terrorists. The idea would
be to simultaneously take the sheen of the vikās and break up the unity
among the Hindus. If NM returns to power then the stage would be set for
bigger and more gory confrontations whose exact unfolding would depend
on other geopolitical events of the future.

As a tailpiece we should mention that within hours of completing the
body of this text the news reached us that one of the protagonists of
the above story, ABV, has passed away after a long life — the last of
those were hardly worth living. We have been critical of him on these
pages on more than one occasion but now that he belongs the realm of the
manes we have to acknowledge his historic role with gratitude. He
certainly built the platform that Hindus can use to move forward and the
one that the Lāṭeśvara is using. His end brings down the curtain on this
turn in the meandering of the Hindu nation. Many Hindus have been
spending the last four years doing nothing but bitching about NM. They
are nothing but armchair activists who have not participated in
electoral contests or organized protective services on the ground. One
thing we can tell such folks is do your own little bit for the dharma at
the grassroots level. Do not expect the prime minister or mahānta yogī
Ādityanātha to be a quantum entity who is at multiple places at the
same time performing bābāistic miracles. Also remember that certain
parts of the country are seriously compromised with the infections and
batting for them would not save them unless they are willing to chip in
too. Finally, this period has also seen the death of the Dravidianist
leader, the hater of brahma, and the corpulent woman who attempted to
destroy the Kumbhaghoṇa maṭha. The Hindu leadership needs to act quickly
in this window of opportunity to eradicate the evil of Dravidianism.
