+++
title = "Cows, horses, sheep andxa0goats"

+++
It goes without saying that humans are what they are today because of
cows, horses, sheep and goats. Hindu civilization in particular is in
the very least the product for the first two, while remaining two
contributed to it from “behind the scenes”. The major civilizational
transitions in human history were built atop the bones of these four
animals: the Neolithic developments in West Asia, the urban Nilotic
civilization in Egypt, the rise of the Indo-Europeans on the Eurasian
steppes, the rise of the Turco-Mongolic peoples on the same steppes but
at their eastern end, and the expansions of the African pastoralists. We
were curious if the present distribution of these animals has any
notable features or relationship to their history. Accordingly, we used
the UN Food and Agriculture Organization data on these animals to
visualize their distribution across different countries and continents.
Table 1 shows their total population (here the term “cows” stands for
what is provided in the FAOSTAT database as cattle).

Table 1. The latest UN FAOSTAT population data  
![\\begin{tabular}{lr} \\hline Animal & Population \\\\ \\hline Cows &
1491687240 \\\\ Sheep & 1202430935 \\\\ Goats & 1034406504 \\\\ Horses &
60566601 \\\\ \\hline
\\end{tabular}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbegin%7Btabular%7D%7Blr%7D+%5Chline+Animal+%26+Population+%5C%5C+%5Chline+Cows+%26+1491687240+%5C%5C+Sheep+%26+1202430935+%5C%5C+Goats+%26+1034406504+%5C%5C+Horses+%26+60566601+%5C%5C+%5Chline+%5Cend%7Btabular%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\begin{tabular}{lr} \\hline Animal & Population \\\\ \\hline Cows & 1491687240 \\\\ Sheep & 1202430935 \\\\ Goats & 1034406504 \\\\ Horses & 60566601 \\\\ \\hline \\end{tabular}")

We first plot the populations of each pair of these four animals for all
countries that possess both of them using the
![\\log\_{10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}") scale (Figure 1) and tabulate the correlations between
them in Table 2.

[![Livestock\_correlations](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_correlations.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_correlations.png)Figure
1

Table 2. The Pearson correlations between life stock on the
![\\log\_{10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}") scale  
![\\begin{tabular}{rrrrr} \\hline & Cows & Horses & Goats & Sheep \\\\
\\hline Cows & 1.00 & & & \\\\ Horses & 0.85 & 1.00 & & \\\\ Goats &
0.81 & 0.66 & 1.00 & \\\\ Sheep & 0.80 & 0.72 & 0.83 & 1.00 \\\\ \\hline
\\end{tabular}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbegin%7Btabular%7D%7Brrrrr%7D+%5Chline+%26+Cows+%26+Horses+%26+Goats+%26+Sheep+%5C%5C+%5Chline+Cows+%26+1.00+%26+%26+%26+%5C%5C+Horses+%26+0.85+%26+1.00+%26+%26+%5C%5C+Goats+%26+0.81+%26+0.66+%26+1.00+%26+%5C%5C+Sheep+%26+0.80+%26+0.72+%26+0.83+%26+1.00+%5C%5C+%5Chline+%5Cend%7Btabular%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\begin{tabular}{rrrrr} \\hline & Cows & Horses & Goats & Sheep \\\\ \\hline Cows & 1.00 & & & \\\\ Horses & 0.85 & 1.00 & & \\\\ Goats & 0.81 & 0.66 & 1.00 & \\\\ Sheep & 0.80 & 0.72 & 0.83 & 1.00 \\\\ \\hline \\end{tabular}")

The populations of the horses and cows are the most correlated pairs.
The sheep and goats are the next most correlated. Thus, animals of
comparable size tend to be more correlated in their populations. The
horse-cow pair is also the primary pair of the old Indo-European
pastoralism. It is possible there is a historical echo of the
Indo-European conquests that made this pair a widely adopted unit.

[![Livestock\_ratios](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_ratios.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_ratios.png)Figure
2

We then looked at the distributions of the ratios for these six pairs
(Figure 2). In each plot we mark the following: the mean(red), India
(blue), Mongolia (green), Kazakhstan (gray), Kyrgyzstan (cyan). We can
see that the plot for the cow:horse plot is the least skewed and is
approximately normal. India presents a large country that is heavily
skewed in the favor of the cow over the horse. The horse evidently did
not do very well over larger swaths of India unlike the cow. On one hand
this had its consequences for the Indians in course of their conflict
with horse-borne invaders. On the other it made India the land of cows.
In contrast, Mongolia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan show the reverse trend,
being horse-heavy pastoralist nations. Kazakhstan was one of the first
sites of horse-domestication in horse-centric pastoralist Botai culture.
This form of pastoralism persisted on the eastern steppes among the
Altaic type of peoples long after the Botai people became extinct after
colliding with our Indo-Iranian ancestors . Mongolia still retains this
state in its most drastic form.

Mongolia is also unusual in favoring both goats and sheep over cows.
Notably it also has a comparable number of sheep and goats. The
sheep:goat ratio shows multimodality with some countries investing
heavily in favor of sheep over goats. This is where the two steppe
nations Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan differ from Mongolia. India in contrast
weighted in favor of goats over sheep, again reflecting the
environmental conditions favoring goats. Further, goat pastoralism might
have come early to India along with the Iranian farmers who played a
major role in the foundation of the Harappan civilization. Nevertheless,
sheep pastoralism eventually spread deep into peninsular India with the
use of sheep milk and a memory of it is preserved in the [origin myths
of the Reḍḍi-s of
Andhra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2003/09/01/masi-reddi/).
The goat:horse ratio is also notably multimodal suggesting that
originally goats and horses defined very different pastoralist niches.
The effects of this ancient niche distinct appears to persist to this
date.

[![Livestock\_Pop\_change](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_pop_change.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_pop_change.png)Figure
3. India (blue), Mongolia (green), world (black)

The above are based on the latest population statistics but one can also
ask about their dynamics. In this regard the FAOSTAT database has data
for many countries and the world for about 57 years. One simple way to
look at population change in this period is fraction of population
change with respect to the start and end of this period. This can be
assessed using the formula:

![f\_{pc}=\\dfrac{2(p\_f-p\_i)}{p\_f+p\_i}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=f_%7Bpc%7D%3D%5Cdfrac%7B2%28p_f-p_i%29%7D%7Bp_f%2Bp_i%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"f_{pc}=\\dfrac{2(p_f-p_i)}{p_f+p_i}")

Here
![f\_{pc}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=f_%7Bpc%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"f_{pc}") is the fraction of population change,
![p\_i](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=p_i&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"p_i") the initial population and
![p\_f](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=p_f&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"p_f") the final population. The distribution of
![f\_{pc}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=f_%7Bpc%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"f_{pc}") for the four animals is plotted in Figure 3. Except for horses
which have shown a slight decline, the populations of the other animals
have shown growth world-wide. One sees that, except for sheep, the
![f\_{pc}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=f_%7Bpc%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"f_{pc}") for India is lower than for the world for the remaining
animals. In contrast, for Mongolia it is higher than for the world
define a truly pastoralist nation. The Indian horse populations have
shown a notable decline in this period.

[![Livestock\_dynamics](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_dynamics.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/livestock_dynamics.png)Figure
4. ![y](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"y")-axis in
![\\log\_{10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}") scale.

This measure only gives a coarse view of the population change. Hence,
we looked at the absolute population change for 3 nations (Mongolia,
India, USA) in Figure 4 over a 57 year period for which data exists. The
dynamics of the precipitous decline of the horse in India is apparent.
As noted above, much of India is not suited for the horse and in the
absence of the old military and royal-display derived pressure to keep
the horse numbers high it has mostly had a free fall. USA shows almost
the reverse trend with respect horses and cows. We are not sure if this
trend for cows relates to the decline in beef consumption among the
Americans. The India cattle situation two booms followed by busts. The
turning points for these busts seem to correspond to El Niño-related
droughts and it needs to be see if they were indeed the triggering
factors for the declines in Indian cattle. In Mongolia there seem to be
generally similar trends for both cattle and horses. The marked rise in
productivity after the fall of the Soviet Empire suggests the release
from Soviet collectivism allowed the Mongols to recover their
traditional pastoralist lifestyle. The Mongolian situation also shows
the strongest evidence for climate effects, given that after the Soviet
collapse the Mongolian cattle and horse populations have shown similar
busts and booms. These seem to correspond to the aftermath of the severe
Mongolian winters known as the jud-s that take a heavy toll on the
animals and the pastoralists. However, the warming in northern latitudes
might be allowing a rapid bounce back from the juds.
