+++
title = "Fraudulent science by Indians: some really badxa0news"

+++
Around 2011 we were approached by a researcher of Indian origin for a
collaboration in biochemistry regarding a family of proteins whose
biochemical functions we had uncovered. After more than an year of
dealing with him, it became clear that his research practices were
questionable. Based on information from a whistle-blower we then reached
the conclusion that he was involved in outright scientific fraud. This
prompted us to investigate his work a little more and we found at least
15 published papers of his with fraudulent data. This brought to our
mind one of the earliest cases of fraud in molecular biology by an
Indian postdoc from Mumbai working with Jim Watson. A broader
investigation revealed that the person whom we were dealing with was
merely one of at least five researchers of Indian background all with
professorial positions in the United States of America and India who
were involved in a very similar pattern of fraud. This concerned us for
it brings a bad name to researchers of Indian origin. However,
simultaneously we also observed several examples of similar fraud by
people of European, Jewish, Chinese and Japanese ethnicity. Indeed, very
recently we had another case to deal with involving comparable, painful
fraud by Chinese collaborators. Hence, we thought this is a universal
problem with no special predilection for such fraud among Indians.

However, as the days went by since our original encounter with fraud, we
seemed to accumulate more and more cases of Indians engaging in such
fraud. Recently, we uncovered yet another case of fraud involving a
family of proteins whose evolution and biochemistry we had helped
characterize in the first decade of the 2000s. This again involved an
Indian lead author giving us the gnawing doubt that things were not
right among our people. This prompted a colleague and me to look at
federal registry of scientific misconduct issued by The Office of
Research Integrity (ORI) of the Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS), USA to see if some of the cases we had detected were in it. This
register records cases in which fraudulent research performed using
public money in form of grants given by the DHHS were reported to the
ORI for examination. While the federal register released by ORI does not
cover all cases of fraud performed using public funds, it has at least
60 confirmed cases along with the details of the case and the punishment
recommended by ORI. These 60 cases were in period from 2011 to 2019 CE.
The majority of them were biochemistry/molecular biology fraud of the
kind we had encountered in our starting investigation: 1) manipulation
of gel image; 2) creation of fake images of biological material; 3) Some
cases of simple plagirism; 4) Out right creation of fake numerical data.

We realized that these 60 cases could provide a means of examining if
Indians were particularly prone to fraud or not. Notably, the cases
released in the register allowed the names to be classified quite
unambiguously into 6 ethnic groups (Table 1). Among West Asians there
are representatives from each of the 3 Abrahamistic religions of the
region.

Table 1  
![\\begin{tabular}{lrrrr} \\hline Origin & Count & Percentage &
Cheaters/million & Cheaters/1000 \\\\ \\hline European & 27 & 45.00 &
0.14 & 0.67 \\\\ Indian & 20 & 33.30 & 6.29 & 4.72 \\\\ Chinese & 7 &
11.70 & 1.85 & 0.57 \\\\ West Asian & 4 & 6.70 & 0.38 & 2.32 \\\\ Korean
& 1 & 1.70 & 0.59 & 0.25 \\\\ Japanese & 1 & 1.70 & 0.77 & 0.33 \\\\
\\hline
\\end{tabular}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbegin%7Btabular%7D%7Blrrrr%7D++%5Chline++Origin+%26+Count+%26+Percentage+%26+Cheaters%2Fmillion+%26+Cheaters%2F1000+%5C%5C++%5Chline++European+%26+27+%26+45.00+%26+0.14+%26+0.67+%5C%5C++Indian+%26+20+%26+33.30+%26+6.29+%26+4.72+%5C%5C++Chinese+%26+7+%26+11.70+%26+1.85+%26+0.57+%5C%5C++West+Asian+%26+4+%26+6.70+%26+0.38+%26+2.32+%5C%5C++Korean+%26+1+%26+1.70+%26+0.59+%26+0.25+%5C%5C++Japanese+%26+1+%26+1.70+%26+0.77+%26+0.33+%5C%5C++%5Chline++%5Cend%7Btabular%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\begin{tabular}{lrrrr}  \\hline  Origin & Count & Percentage & Cheaters/million & Cheaters/1000 \\\\  \\hline  European & 27 & 45.00 & 0.14 & 0.67 \\\\  Indian & 20 & 33.30 & 6.29 & 4.72 \\\\  Chinese & 7 & 11.70 & 1.85 & 0.57 \\\\  West Asian & 4 & 6.70 & 0.38 & 2.32 \\\\  Korean & 1 & 1.70 & 0.59 & 0.25 \\\\  Japanese & 1 & 1.70 & 0.77 & 0.33 \\\\  \\hline  \\end{tabular}")

Indians constitute
![33\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=33%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"33\\%") of the fraud cases in the federal register. This itself is
quite striking because it is rather clear that they do not make up that
high a fraction of the biomedical research workforce, which is being
probed here. Now, the simplest normalization for the counts is by the
representation of these ethnic groups in the USA. This population data
can be assembled quite easily by an internet search for the period under
consideration. Normalization by this population share is shown in column
4 of table 1 as the number of cheaters per million of the population. By
this reckoning and Indian would be nearly 46 times as likely to be
involved in fraud as a person of European descent.

One could object that the US population share of the ethnic groups is
not a valid normalization for it does not accurately reflect their
representation in the biomedical work force. While the latter part of
the statement might be true it is amply clear to anyone in the business
that Indians do not constitute a fraction greater than Chinese in this
workforce, making this objection quite facile. Yet, one would want to
perform a more objective normalization based on the proportions of these
groups in the workforce. This data is much harder to get in a clean
form. However, an article published in the *Nature* magazine *“The new
face of US science”* by Misty L. Heggeness, Kearney T. W. Gunsalus, José
Pacas and Gary McDowell (03 January 2017) allows us to get approximate
figures needed for such a normalization. This article informs us that in
2014 (which is in the time range of the data under consideration and
also given that a typical graduate student/postdoctoral career in about
4-5 years) that there were about 69000 biomedical researchers in the US.
Of these about 40020 were of European descent (excluding Hispanics) and
23500 with ancestry in various Asian countries. That primarily includes
Indians, Chinese, Koreans and Japanese. To obtain the breakdown we can
use two methods: 1) Sample a random set of 100 biomedical research
publications and see what proportion of these Asians are found in them;
2) Use the proportions of graduate students from these nations in
American biomedical research programs to get a sense of the breakdown.
Based on this we can estimate the approximate maximum number of
biomedical researchers of these ethnicities to be: 4236 Indians, 12236
Chinese, 3928 Koreans and 3059 Japanese. For West Asians it is harder to
get an estimate but based on the biggest contributing group of these the
Israelis from a publication in the Jewish newspaper Haaretz we an infer
this number to be ![\\approx
1725](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+1725&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx 1725"). This allows a more specific normalization, which is
shown in column 5 of Table 1 as the number of fraudsters per 1000
researchers.

The Indians continue to remain the most prone to fraud even after this
more realistic normalization. If the 60 fraudsters were evenly
distributed among the 69000 biomedical researchers then the probability
of finding a fraudster at random would be 0.00087. Given this and their
numbers in the biomedical workforce, the probability that at least 20
Indians are frauds in the federal register by chance alone is ![4.44
\\times
10^{-10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=4.44+%5Ctimes+10%5E%7B-10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"4.44 \\times 10^{-10}") or they are ![\\sim
8](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csim+8&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sim 8") times more likely than other populations to commit biomedical
research fraud. From the names of the Indian fraudsters in the federal
registry we can infer that in all likelihood all of them come from the
“forward castes”. Up to
![1/3](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=1%2F3&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"1/3") of them are likely of brāhmaṇa descent. This means they are drawn
from the Indian elite. As can be seen in Table 2 they are drawn from all
over India with a particular over-representation of individuals from
South Indian states.

Table 2  
![\\begin{tabular}{lr} \\hline Region & Count \\\\ \\hline Tamil
Nad/Kerala & 7 \\\\ Telugu states & 4 \\\\ Bengal & 2\\\\ Sindh/Panjab &
2 \\\\ \`\`Hindi belt'' & 3 \\\\ Maharashtra & 1 \\\\ Karnataka & 1 \\\\
\\hline
\\end{tabular}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbegin%7Btabular%7D%7Blr%7D++%5Chline++Region+%26+Count+%5C%5C++%5Chline++Tamil+Nad%2FKerala+%26+7+%5C%5C++Telugu+states+%26+4+%5C%5C++Bengal+%26+2%5C%5C++Sindh%2FPanjab+%26+2+%5C%5C++%60%60Hindi+belt%27%27+%26+3+%5C%5C++Maharashtra+%26+1+%5C%5C++Karnataka+%26+1+%5C%5C++%5Chline++%5Cend%7Btabular%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\begin{tabular}{lr}  \\hline  Region & Count \\\\  \\hline  Tamil Nad/Kerala & 7 \\\\  Telugu states & 4 \\\\  Bengal & 2\\\\  Sindh/Panjab & 2 \\\\  \`\`Hindi belt'' & 3 \\\\  Maharashtra & 1 \\\\  Karnataka & 1 \\\\  \\hline  \\end{tabular}")

Further, since entry into the US biomedical work force typically
involves an IQ test (administered either for admission to an American
graduate school or to an Indian institute), we are dealing with people
most likely with IQ ![\\ge
123](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cge+123&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\ge 123"). Thus, what we are seeing is not per say a problem of
cognitive capacity but a problem of “ethics” or “corruption” in the
Indian cognitive elite.

One could point out that there is some bias against Hindus in the US
academia; hence, they might be specially picking on the Indians as
opposed to the European origin majority or other foreigners, though all
commit fraud to a similar degree. Undoubtedly there is bias — powerful
fraudsters of European or Jewish descent are more often “rehabilitated”
or overlooked than those of Indian descent. Nevertheless, that is
unlikely to have been the primary cause for at least the cases in the
federal register. Several of the Indian cases in the register were
considered “golden boys” by the American institutions or had vanity
articles about their fraudulent research in American outlets. Thus, it
does not appear that at least in these cases they were being specially
targeted. Thus, we posit that there is a real problem.

A part of this problem is a general one. The Euro-American biomedical
research (which sets the trend in most of the world except to a degree
in Japan) is beset with several serious problems:  
\* There is very little attention paid in biology education to the
theoretical foundations of the science. We would go as far as to say
that less than 50
![\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\%") of the practitioners in biomedical research have good grasp of
the foundations of biology. To give an analogy of how bad this is,
imagine more than half the physicists and *real* engineers plying their
trade without knowing classical mechanics in any serious sense (e.g.
having not much of a clue of how to set up a Hamiltonian or a Lagrangian
of a system). As a result poor hypotheses abound, which in turn spawn a
glut of bad ideas.

\* The Euro-American scientific system has an unhealthy model of
competition and the fetish of peer-review, which favor both an urge to
cheat to get an article published as well as rich dividends for nuanced
plagiarism -i.e. plagiarism of ideas without citation rather than
outright copying of text. To put it bluntly we have seen some form a
plagiarism of our work with total impunity almost every other month in
the past few years. Plagiarism also contributes to confirmation bias and
fake reproduction of bad ideas. A part of this competition is fostered
by big labs in several Euro-American institutions, where powerful
principal investigators run the show like industrial sweat shops. These
environments also do not allow for proper oversight — I am aware of
cases where the graduate student or postdoc did not see the PI for more
than a month at a stretch. Further, most interaction was limited to
sanitized presentations in lab meeting rather than direct oversight by
the PI at the bench.

\* The magazine culture: Euro-American biomedical research assessement
and funding agencies place enormous emphasis on publication in the two
famous British and American science tabloids or the journal *Cell*,
their many offspring and upstarts like *eLife*, *PLOS Biology* etc. In
some of these venues, especially the tabloids and *Cell* articles are
subject to insane review processes with time lags of 6-12 months from
submission to acceptance for publication. These venues are thus high
stakes venues that increase the urge for plagiarism and chicanery.

These are general causes that affect both Indians and others. However,
as the scientific system in India increasingly emulates these practices
in some form, it increases the incentive for Indians in India to commit
fraud rather than do good science. Now let us consider some factors that
might predispose Indian origin researchers to commit fraud more often
than others:  
\* Some of the fraudsters who are in the federal register come from labs
run but Indian origin PIs in American institutions. Their labs are
reported as having an unhealthy environment — high pressure to produce
results at short notice without adequate mentoring or oversight. We have
evidence that this was the case even in the fraud cases which are not in
the register. As noted above this is a major recipe for malpractice.
Thus, it appears that there is some tendency for Indian origin PIs to be
less than professional in managing their labs.

\* Indians face major immigration constraints in the US. This can be
used as an anvil both by American and Indian origin PIs to pressurize
their students, who typically have no other avenues for escape or
alternative employment due to sword of deportation hanging above their
necks. Hence, science takes a back seat to survival and the incentives
are slanted towards getting ahead by means of malpractice.

\* Training in Indian schools and colleges does not emphasize aspects of
honest scientific practice. Students often manipulate laboratory
experiments to get results that their instructor expects. Little
training is given in the statistics of variation and experimental error
in school and college. For example, in my first semester in college I
vividly remember the instructor conducting physics lab demanding that we
exactly get
![g=9.8\\tfrac{m}{s^2}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=g%3D9.8%5Ctfrac%7Bm%7D%7Bs%5E2%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"g=9.8\\tfrac{m}{s^2}") in single trial experiment\!

\* Importantly, most students in the science stream in India have no
real interest in science per say but merely see it as a means for
obtaining a seat in engineering or medical school. Those who do not make
it typically enter the sciences and gradually drift their way through a
B.Sc. and then a M.Sc. to finally reach a graduate program. Most of them
are not from the cream of the educational system and are often not
suited for cutting-edge science. Thus, when they make it to graduate
school in the US they come ill-equipped for science and when subject to
pressure might have some incentive to “game the system” just as they
gamed the exams in India to get ahead.

\* After the near-death encounters with Islam and Christianity, Hindu
civilization is a shadow of its former self. There is serious decline of
the internal system known as dharma. The decline of dharma shows up in
the form of loss of discernment regarding the pursuit of knowledge and
the pursuit of gain. In the past when a person committed himself to the
pursuit of knowledge, there was a strong demand on him to observe
certain ethics. These were enforced by the gate-keepers of the system
and quacks would be punished. Indeed, father Manu the law-giver has a
long list of criminals engaging in fraud like palmistry or
future-prognostication, quacks, scams, and fellows claiming
qualifications which they do not possess. He recommends that such be
caught by the Rājan using investigators sent to keep an eye on such and
if their crimes are proven to fine them. However, multiple repeat
offenders could be put to death. Similar the legal tradition of
Yājñavalkya has various provisions for the punishment of the quack
physician.

In conclusion, we do not find any pleasure in presenting this. It
personally only affects us in a negative way given that it has brought a
bad name for Indian researchers, which is not going to go away in the
near future. That is why I tell people that it is better to be a small
man doing some low key but real science rather than professor Big who
appears in the newspapers but does fake science. The approach of fake it
till you make needs to be adopted with greatest care and does not apply
to every aspect of human activity. These observations might have much
deeper, unpleasant implications. It is relatively clear that the Hindus
have not performed too well for being an old nation with clearly visible
past achievements after they saw off the English tyrants more than 70
years ago. There are many reasons offered like the effects of the
medieval Mohammedan incubus, the English tyranny, and Gandhi and Nehru.
The former factors certainly have had their effect. But the past 70 odd
years since independence have seen no major revival of scientific
pursuit. There have been no major successors to many of the exemplary
solitary Hindu researchers from the pre-Independence or early
post-Independence era. We suspect that one cause for this is a terrible
culture of knowledge generation among Indians in recent times. An
offshoot of this is this tendency of dishonesty that we are seeing among
Indian biomedical researchers. It shows in terms of tangible technology
too: despite having an big need for the aeronautical engine or a proper
assault rifle, Indians have had considerable difficulty in successfully
mastering these technologies. Facets of this are also seen in other
areas of Indian creative expression, e.g. journalism and cinema. I do
not watch cinema but I am reliably informed by someone who does that
there is some tendency for plagiarism from the occident. As with
science, this tendency in journalism along with unthinking adoption of
occidental memes are damaging for the nation. In journalism the idea is
merely to produce uncritical stuff that the pay-master (e.g. the
mleccha) likes. Hence, we feel that this data should be presented so
that our people make take deep look at their problems and consider their
science policy implementations accordingly.

See also:  
[Big man’s
story](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/07/20/this-time-its-the-big-mans-story-2/)  
[The fake
scientist](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/13/the-fake-scientist/)
