+++
title = "Big fruits and dead giants"

+++
**The fruits of the elephants**  
nāgo bilvam ivākramya pothayiṣyāmy ahaṃ śiraḥ |  
alabhyām icchatas tasya kīcakasya durātmanaḥ ||  
Like an elephant seizing a bilva \[fruit\] I will crush the head of that
evil Kīcaka who desires that which ought not to be attained.

This striking simile occurs in our national epic the Mahābhārata in the
words of the 2nd Pāṇḍava Bhīmasena to his wife. Herein, he promises to
strike her tormentor Kīcaka even as an elephant strikes a bilva fruit.
The bilva (*Aegle marmelos*) and similar-looking fruits greatly
fascinated us in our childhood (Figure 1). Among the other fruits that
appear to have convergently evolved a comparable structure are *Limonia
acidissima* which produces a fruit (commonly called the wood-apple) that
resembles the bilva in terms of its woody shell. Then in our youth we
ran into the elephant apple, *Dillenia indica*, in a great botanical
garden, which also produces a monstrous, hard fruit with parallels to
the above two. Such fruits with hard rinds which might need to be broken
by a hammer to access the pulp puzzled us — which animals other humans
(who are only recent feature of the Indian landmass) could deal with
such a formidable fruit. We then read as a youth of an account of humans
and elephants in conflict for this fruit in Northeastern India, which
has since then only intensified apparently resulting the killing of some
elephants.

[![elephant\_fruits\_small](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/elephant_fruits_small.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/elephant_fruits_small.png)Figure
1

It was shortly thereafter that we came across this remarkable simile
from the Mahābhārata. The kavi as a naturalist was likely recording a
real ecological observation via this simile. Suddenly everything became
clear in our minds: These cannonball-like fruits did not evolve for
human consumption at all in the first place but for a symbioses with
large herbivores, the foremost among which were the proboscideans.
Proboscideans enjoyed a widespread distribution in recent Cenozoic past
across India and probably played a major role in the dispersal of the
seeds of these plants. Their hard shells were an adaptation for
specifically being consumed by these animals thereby allowing their
seeds to be deposited far from the parent plant in their fertilizing
dung. So strong was the selection for such a mode of dispersal that we
have at least three independent cases of convergent evolution of
comparable fruit morphology among these Indian trees. One may also add
that the mango might have also benefited in the past from a similar
proboscidean dispersal.

The above woody fruits also made us curious about the mysterious
cannonball tree (*Couroupita guianensis*), which we encountered with
much excitement in our youth in a temple of Rudra in the Karṇāṭa
country. Indeed, its flowers are offered to Rudra, with its reproductive
whorls resembling a liṅga sheltered by a hooded serpent. The woody fruit
itself is quite reminiscent of the morphology of bilva or the
wood-apple. So it appeared to us that it was yet another case of
convergent evolution of such a fruit type. The only issue is that we
soon learned that it is not native to India but to Central and South
America. This got us wondering as to how and when it reached India.
Given that is called the nāgaliṅga or the śivaliṅga tree across both
Indo-Aryan and Dravidian languages, and its wide usage in folk Indian
medicine, it appears that it might have even reached India in
pre-Columbian times. Thus, it might join a select band of mysterious
plants like the custard apple, the sunflower, datura and the maize that
made their way to India from the Americas in pre-Columbian times. How
exactly these made their way from the pre-Columbian Americas to India
remains a matter of debate to date.

India still has the elephant and has a deep and reasonable fossil record
of megafauna, some of which were truly gigantic even relative to the
modern Indian elephant: the extinct elephant *Palaeoloxodon
namadicus* was probably one of largest land mammals ever, which might
have grown up to 5.2 meters in height, and mysteriously became extinct
sometime after 24000 years before present when *Homo sapiens* was
already in the subcontinent. Therefore, the presence of several such
fruits primarily accessible to megafauna, like the elephants
(hereinafter colloquially used for proboscideans), is no surprise given
their long history in the region. However, we see no elephants in the
Americas; hence, the presence of fruits like those of the cannonball
tree puzzled us. This puzzle deepened when we first reached the shores
of Krauñcadvīpa and observed other such fruits such as the osage orange,
which would have been most suitable for giants like elephants. Moreover,
even other fruits like the avocado, which are today consumed by *Homo*,
seemed more apt for a megafaunal consumer. But this was a stark
contradiction for, unlike Africa or India, there are no megafaunae in
the Americas. This raised the question to as to what were these fruits
doing in the Americas?

**The American elephants**  
The answer to this is tied to remarkable history of the mammalian
megafauna of the Americas. We shall talk briefly about two distinct
lineages of those here. The elephants as afrotherians had their
provenance in the African landmass with some of the earliest members of
the clade, like *Moeritherium* being found in North Africa. There they
eventually radiated into at least 5 great lineages: the Deinotheriids,
Mammutids (mastodonts), Gomphotheriids, Stegodontids and Elephantids.
Between 18-22 million years ago multiple members of each lineage left
Africa and invaded Eurasia to colonize it in a big way. By around 16.5
Mya the Mammutid *Zygolophodon* invaded the North American continent via
the Bering strait. It was followed shortly thereafter by
*Gomphotherium* which was in North America by 15 Mya. They were
followed by likely multiple invasions of Stegodonts, with
*Platybelodon* reaching the New World around 13 Mya and *Amebelodon* by
around 10 Mya. The Elephantids were the last lineage to invade the New
World with the mammoth — an initial species *Mammuthus columbi* emerged
in NA after 2.6 Mya and then within the last million years *Mammuthus
primigenius *followed. In the late Pleistocene, between 120000-13000 ya,
there were representatives of three major elephant lineages in NA
including, multiple mammoths of the Elephantid lineage, Mammut of the
Mammutid lineage and several gomphotheriids.

![elephants\_png](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/elephants_png.png?w=640)Figure
2: The phylogeny of elephants according to Jeheskel Shoshani

Around 3 Mya the isthmus of Panama was complete connecting the North
American continent to the isolated South. This sparked the great
American biotic interchange, the main phase of which was between 2.7-1.8
Mya. During this period in the region corresponding to today’s Florida
to Honduras there were members of all three lineages, namely the
Mammutid *Mammut*, the Gomphotheriids *Cuvieronius* and *Stegomastodon*,
and the Elephantid *Mammuthus*. A little after 2 million years a
Gomphotheriid derived from the North American representative
*Rhynchotherium* entered South America. It subsequently spread
throughout South America and spawned 3 species, namely *Cuvieronius
hyodon*, *Notiomastodon platensis*, and *Haplomastodon waringi*. Thus,
until not very long ago there was an extensive elephant fauna across
both the Americas, which provided the opportunity for an extensive
co-evolution of certain fruit morphologies with them.

The evidence from the Arabian footprints suggests that the common
ancestor of the Gomphotheriid and Elephantid lineage already had
behaviors similar to those seen in extant elephants — matriarchal herds
and roving males with a more solitary behavior. It is conceivable that
such behaviors had already emerged even earlier prior to the divergence
of the Mammutids or the Deinotheriids. The elephants have large brains
and particularly well-developed temporal lobes. These features are
consistent with their complex behavior and learning capacity which go
hand-in-hand with their sociality. This, combined with their large size,
made them relatively safe from conventional predation pressures and
likely fueled their great march out of Africa that in the end spanned 5
continents and the entire range of ecosystems from wet-land forests, to
dry-lands, to the frozen Arctic. But this march that spanned over 20
million years suddenly came to a halt some time after about 1 Mya. A
wave of extinction of the elephants was seen first in the Old World and
sometime between 20000-7500 years before present in the New World. What
was the cause of this? While some ecologists like to blame climate
change, we hold that there is little doubt that things point to the hand
of *Homo*.

![elephants\_vanderGeer](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/elephants_vandergeer.jpg?w=640)Figure
3. The global spread of some extinct elephant skeletons from Van der
Geer et al 2016; DOI: 10.1111/jbi.127431. 1.European *Palaeoloxodon
antiquus*; 2. North American *Mammuthus columbi*; 3. Asian *Stegodon
zdanskyi*; 4. Southern European *Elephas mnaidriensis*; 5. Mediterranean
pygmy *Palaeoloxodon falconeri*; 6. Channel Islands *Mammuthus exilis*;
7. Japanese *Stegodon aurorae*

The roll-back of the elephants corresponds to the major expansion of
*Homo* beyond Africa. Indeed, elephants are seen at human feeding and
kill sites throughout this period. Notably, the last elephants of the
lineages that became extinct are seen in refugia where humans did not
initially reach: The remote Wrangel Island in the Arctic ocean had
Mammuthus until around 4000 YBP and these finally vanished around the
time *Homo* first settled on the island. Similarly, in SA the
gomphotheres persisted in refugia until around 8000-7500 YBP before
their complete extirpation by the paleo-South Americans. It is
conceivable that there was a faint memory of recently extinct elephants
in human tradition. For example, the Mahābhārata records [a giant
elephant-like
animal](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/04/29/upakatha-of-previous-sulapuru%e1%b9%a3a-catvarakam-2/)
in the legend of the brāhmaṇa in the pit. As a large species with a long
maturation time and a slow rate of reproduction, what was once a key to
their success became their Achilles heel when faced with a
super-predator like *Homo* who wiped out the reproductive adults before
they could be replaced. Thus, the empire of the giants came crashing to
the floor.

One may ask but what about the elephants of Africa and India? How did
they survive the assault of *Homo*. Some have offered the suggestion
that the long presence of *Homo* in these regions allowed
co-evolutionary responses that allowed them to cope with him. It is
possible that some behavioral adaptation of such a type exists – e.g.
aggressiveness towards *Homo*. However, as others have pointed out (e.g.
Surovell et al) that the more likely reason was that only the elephants
from forest environments, where sizable populations of *Homo* could not
be supported, made it past the slaughter. Indeed, while *Homo* branched
off from his closest cousins in a dense forest biome where they still
grimly hang on today, the rise of the predecessors of *Homo*
corresponded to his march into more open environments. Ironically, this
opening of African environments into mixed wood- and grass-land habitats
might have been triggered by the massive megafaunal expansion in the
Pliocene, which also marked the emergence of the lineage leading to
*Homo.* The work of O’Brien’s team using molecular data has shown that
the savanna elephants of Africa, i.e. *Loxodonta,* experienced a greater
population bottleneck than their forest counterparts, suggesting that
being in more open habitats they experienced the heavy hand of *Homo.*
Further, the extinction actually depended on the developments in the
intelligence and technology of *Homo.* For instance, when archaic *Homo*
first reached India he was probably not capable of completely wiping off
all elephants. But probably sometime around 50 Kya the sapiens species
of *Homo* was able develop hunting methods that allowed targeting of
accessible elephant species. This was evidently the cause for the end of
*Palaeoloxodon namadicus *by 24 Kya in India. Likewise, in the Americas
the spread of the Clovis hunters and their successors probably was the
key point in delivering the final blow to the elephants of the New
World. This has gone on to our times as newer weaponry comes into being
and newer races of *H.sapiens *reach places where they were previously
absent. This is what marked the demise of the cheetah and the near end
of the lion in Asia and the various faunae of Australia and New Zealand.
Now that *Homo’s* gun-hand can penetrate the forest with ease, the
remaining two species of elephants would also be wiped out in the
relatively near future in the absence of a directed conservation effort.

**The sloths and their demise**  
The elephants were a relatively late addition to the South American
landscape, coming in only after the completion of the Panaman isthmus.
South America had its own iconic megafaunae even when landmass was
isolated from the north. The fate of one of those indigenous components
of the fauna also paralleled that of the elephant-new-comers. These were
the xenarthrans, remarkable components of the uniquely South American
faunae, one of the great placental lineages, which included the sloths,
the anteaters, armadillos and glyptodonts. These were enormously
successful animals, which, during the great American biotic interchange,
were one of few lineages of Southern mammals that successfully made it
to and colonized the North. In fact, they were early movers, and reached
Central and North America even before the isthmus of Panama was
complete. On the other side they colonized the West Indies, with an
extensive presence in the Greater Antilles and Cuba. Once in the North,
they advanced further, with the Thomas Jefferson’s sloth (*Megalonyx
jeffersonii*) reaching Alaska. Indeed, they might have even made it all
the way to the Old World across Beringia had their world not come to an
abrupt end as we shall see below.

Today we have only two genera of sloths, the two-fingered sloths
(*Choloepus*) and the three-fingered sloths (*Bradypus*), small arboreal
forest mammals living in regions not easily accessible to humans. They
are a pale reminder of the once glorious radiation of the sloth clade of
xenarthrans that spanned a great diversity of behaviors and sizes. We
had the giant ground sloths like *Megatherium* that grew up to 6 meters
in length. We had marine Megatheriid sloths like *Thalassocnus*, which
progressively acquired aquatic adaptations and grew up to 3.3 meters in
length. Then there were ground sloths which modified the very landscape
of parts of Brazil and Argentina, where they dug up numerous burrows in
hard substrates ranging in diameter from 1.5 to 4 meters. While the
species which created them are not known, based on their size they could
have been the work of sloths like *Glossotherium*, *Scelidotherium*,
*Ocnotherium* or *Lestodon*. Further, they successfully survived the
arrival of competing Northern herbivores, like the elephants, and new
predators, like the cats and the bears, during the faunal interchange.
Notably, some giant sloths like *Eremotherium* often co-occur with
elephants after their arrival in South America suggesting that they had
partitioned into different niches in the same habitat, thereby
recreating a setting like the African bush.

![sloths\_small](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/sloths_small.jpg?w=635&h=724)Figure
4. Sloths by Jorge Blanco

The relationships of these sloths were enigmatic until recently, but as
their demise was not so long ago it has been possible to use ancient DNA
and paleo-proteomic approaches to address the problem. Recently
published studies suggest an interesting evolutionary scenario for the
sloths, wherein the Caribbean sloths *Acratocnus ye* and *Parocnus
serus* form the basal-most lineage. The next to branch off was the clade
uniting the Mylodontids and the 2-fingered sloths. The third clade
includes all the Megatherioids and the 3-fingered sloths. Within it the
South American Megatheriids are the basal-most lineage. The North
American Megalonychids and Nothrotheriids form the immediate
sister-group of the 3-fingered sloths. This suggests that either the
arboreal adaptation evolved twice in the 2- and 3- fingered sloths or
that there was an ancestral arboreal tendency from which the ground
sloths repeatedly emerged. The latter is supported by the arboreal
tendencies observed in the West Indian sloths (Figure 4). Further, this
phylogeny also suggests that the sloths reached the West Indies via an
early land bridge long before the connection of the North and South
American continents.

**The survivors of the *Homo* Blitzkrieg**  
Strikingly, the end of the sloths closely paralleled that of the
elephants, which were only recent arrivals to the South. After an
enormously successful run that spanned tens of millions of years,
sometime around 10000 YBP, they all but completely vanished in the
continental Americas. Subsequently, around 4400 YBP they vanished
entirely in the West Indies. This pattern is telling as it parallels the
fate of the last of the extinct Elephantids on isolated islands, where
they vanished much after the mainland and typically only after humans
arrived. Like elephants, sloths such as *Megatherium americanum* too
have been found in butchery sites of *Homo* in the Americas from around
12600 YBP. There have been major climatic changes and concomitant
shrinkage of ranges, loss of habitats and background extinctions going
on all while before the origin of *Homo.* However, new species fill
those that are lost through convergent evolution or the old lineages
recover after a while. The pattern we observe here is nothing like that,
especially given that many of the lineages that vanished so dramatically
across continents had been successful in weathering the climatic changes
and background extinctions over tens of millions of years. Thus, despite
the fashionable statements among some ecologists and paleontologists
pinning everything on climate, we have to conclude that *Homo* squarely
stands accused.

All this happened with almost the suddenness of a mass extinction due to
astronomical causes, but, unlike in those cases, many of the plants once
adapted to the megafauna remain intact. Indeed, the ecologists Dan
Janzen and Paul Martin, who first noted these anomalies in their
brilliant paper “Neotropical Anachronisms: The Fruits the Gomphotheres
Ate” noted several examples from the New World of what might be remnants
of now lost adaptations of plants to megafauna. For example they propose
that large clusters of thorns of the legume known as the honey locust
tree might have been an adaptation against browsing by the now extinct
elephants. Some of them, like the avocado, which was once on the menu of
the great sloths, might have found a new partner in their extirpators,
i.e. *Homo.* Others have proposed that the osage orange might have
survived because some early Americans used the tree to make bows and
subsequently due to the horses brought by Europeans taking up the role
of their dispersers (see Barlow’s excellent popular account of the
same). Hence, one would predict that new megafaunae might arise again
once *Homo* himself goes the way of extinction.
