+++
title = "Leaves from thexa0scrapbook-4"

+++
As described
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/09/18/leaves-from-the-scrapbook/)
these entries are from the scrapbook of the second of the caturbhaginī,
Vrishchika.

**Entry 1; kāmāturā, year Siddhārthin of the first cycle:** Indrasena
departed for grad school last week and I am feeling a bit of loneliness
of a kind I did not even feel when Lootika left. In the midst of all
this I did not even register the fact that I have completed my basic
medical degree in good time. But dear my agrajā’s words come to mind
that the true prowess of a person becomes apparent only when they prove
themselves all on their own against hostile forces. I was also reminded
of her admonishing me that I was way too swayed by sentiments of
attachment and eros. But sometimes I feel concerned that she might have
taken that too far — she has totally lost all contact with Somakhya for
an year now. At least now Somakhya has Indrasena beside him but my
pretty agrajā is all by herself battling hostile mleccha-s in the quest
for glory.

Thankfully, due to the favors of the gods I am likely to get any
internship I would like, but that is just practice. It goes without
saying that I would be pursuing experimental medicine for that was how I
always supposed to be doing. In any case, I have got a waiver to already
start accompanying and assisting my senior Vidrum on the rounds till my
program formally opens. I guess he harbors some edginess towards me
right from school days but still tolerates me because of all the
curricular help I have rendered him over the years and his friendship
with Lootika and Somakhya. One of my reasons for writing this entry was
an interesting case that confronted us last week — it brought a closure
to me in an unexpected way. A young mleccha man arrived with acute
cardiac symptoms. He had a generally culprit-free angiogram but rapidly
deteriorated and died a couple of hours after admission. Since it was an
unusual case we pursued it further for it might teach us something we
did not know. One thing which became apparent was that he did not show
any elevation of cardiac-specific troponins in the blood. However, his
cardiac muscles showed a dramatic fall of calcium ions in the
sarcoplasmic lumen a sign that his SERCA calcium pump was compromised.
Yet, it was totally normal in sequence.

An interview with his parents who was accompanied by an official of the
embassy of the said mleccha country revealed something interesting. They
were working for a NGO for the “inculcation of scientific temper among
Dalits and tribals”. I wondered what that could mean. They were full of
pride on their son and declared that he was a great genius from
childhood and a “Do it yourself” scientist. However, they said he had a
strong suicidal tendency; hence, due to certain episodes they had
brought him over from their country to stay with them for sometime and
cool off. They showed me some of his notebooks, which indicated that he
was indeed some kind of a polymath with ranging interests and insights.
Moreover, he was a DIY molecular biologist. That stirred something in me
for it reminded me of none other than myself and my sisters. The scan of
his notebook revealed that he had engineered a variant of the SERCA
inhibitory peptide phospholamban, which was effective in shutting down
SERCA in the heart. A closely analysis of his tissues revealed that it
was by means of that peptide he had sent himself to king Vaivasvata — he
thought no one would ever figure out that it was a suicide. Via Vidrum I
provided a report to his parents and the official and closed the case.

I was struck by the strangeness of all this. His death reminded me that
often a great tree grows in a jungle and then one fine day is struck
down by the indra-senā or the wrath of the pitiless Vāyu as our Iranian
cousins would have said. Thus, indeed this young man had seen many
realms of knowledge but no one knew that he had reached so deep for he
had fallen like that tree in a lonely boreal forest with no one to hear
the crash of its fall and thereby judge its great mass. But the case
brought to something more sinister to my mind: once when we were young
and had expressed our svābhāvika-siddhi-s for the first time Lootika and
I had made the ghost of a brāhmaṇa speak. He prophesied my vīra but at
the same time mentioned that a prativīra would also emerge. But the
ghost added that we would not be affected by the prativīra for he would
attain Vivasvān’s mace-wielding son even before he could engage in a
contest with us. I realized that the individual was the prativīra and
that he had passed away just in front of my eyes. That also gave me a
signal because Indrasena had told me via the kauberī-vidyā that after
the prativīra has departed we will face the true contests of our life
even as I proceed towards the bus stop at Mlecchadigdvāravṛti.

**Entry 2; rakta, year Siddhārthin of the first cycle:** Things seemed
to precipitate by the day as though drawn by fate inexorably towards a
certain preferred unfolding of events things. Or at least that is how
the human mind tends to rightly or falsely pick patterns from the noise
in the background. I was part of the team attending to a trauma case
involving activists of the mandira vahīm̐ banega group who were holding
a meeting for mobilization for the reconstruction of the temple for the
Ikṣvāku heroes at Ayodhyāpuri. As they were proceeding to their office
beside the Vināyaka shrine on the Somamārga for a meeting they were
attacked by assailants who had vanished almost without a trace. The
eyewitness declared that the shots came from the snaking queue, which
was awaiting a darśana at the shrine and that the assailants created
some chaos in the line by shooting in the air and took advantage of that
to merge into the crowd and escape. Some even insisted that the
assailants wore saffron robes and were actually worshipers at the
shrine. In any case the mayhem left one of the activists with a bullet
lodged in his left clavicle. We were able to quickly stabilize his wound
and save his life. However, the secretary of the mandira vahīm̐ banega
committee had succumbed to his injuries by the time he was brought to us
and the only task we were left with was the autopsy. He had two bullets
which had entered his skull through the occipital region — one had
exited through the right frontal while the other was lodged in the
brain.

There was some discussion after the autopsy which involved one of our
seniors the resident Samikaran and Vidrum’s new friend, another resident
Marxenga Sen. They both remarked that his death was probably fully
deserved because he was there to cause trouble. They added: “After all
had the Chief Justice Shashiyabh not declared that such people do not
want the country to ever be in peace.” Duly, I did not pass the
opportunity to rile them by stating that it was not the mandira vahīm̐
banega group but their mustache-less bearded friends who were the
biggest cause of not just the country not but the world not being at
peace. They went on like a person on bhaṅga or a song playing in a loop
on how the assailants were certainly Hindu terrorists as they were
saffron-clad and visiting the temple and that it was an internal
gang-fight among the Hindu terrorists. I quickly made my exit wondering
when these might join the beards or the well-known socialist terror
movement.

Just then my mother had called me and asked me to catch sleep in the
residents’ lounge. She did not want me coming back home that night
because apparently there was an operation to apprehend Saif ad-din
as-Sullami on way between the hospital and home. She said that she would
pick me up in the morning. That name sounded vaguely familiar; so, I
looked him up and found that he was known to be a peddler of a flavor of
music called sufi-pop, which accompanied gyrating dances that were
popular with a section of the educated youth with a proclivity towards
debauchery. There was a rumor in certain circles that he was also
involved more serious stuff like using his musical outlet for love-jihad
and running a hitman service for a national and international clientele
of criminals. It was seemed that he was behind the shooting that took
place earlier in the day and had also played a big role in the UCC
riots. I wondered his men were among those who had tried to kidnap me
last year during the UCC riots.

As that scary incident flashed in my mind I took out my knife and
garala-śaṅkula and placed them on my desk. Jhilleeka had improved the
design of the garala-śaṅkula such that it was less-likely to jam as it
had done during my encounter with the marūnmatta-s. I even have a third
weapon, the śilī which Indrasena had gifted me along with the
instructions of its use. It is a small peg which can be used to impinge
on particular points that were termed marman-s in the old Hindu medical
tradition. Our ancestors held that: “mārayantīti marmāṇyucate ।”; hence,
pressing at those points with the śilī could in the least incapacitate
the attacker. These points of the old tradition are mostly a secret and
mentioned in the old medical literature. In Cerapada there is also a
legend that the twin Aśvin-s appeared on earth to teach the secrets to
their kṣatriya-s to counter their drāviḍa cousins to the east, while the
latter were favored by Bhava. I realized that one could fairly precisely
strike these marman-s by locating certain superficial blood vessels,
fascia, tendons and aponeuroses, which tradition called sīrā- māṃsa-
snāyu- and saṃdhi-marmāṇi. I had a good sense of their location from
actual anatomical examination. I also felt I was much better than my
dear agrajā in wielding these implements and could actually cause some
serious damage even if I were to be completely overwhelmed by a male
assailant. But perhaps this is only feeling arising from the human
tendency to overestimate oneself.

**Entry 3; rasa, year Siddhārthin of the first cycle:** On my way to
college I pass by a little park, which originally had a small shrine in
the middle of it. Several years ago out of curiosity Varoli and I went
to see what was there and found it to house the statue of a man called
Rasgol-bābājī. There, a woman told me that miracles could be witnessed
by praying to the said bābājī. She explained that Rasgol-bābājī had the
power of a 1000 Sai-fakīr-bābājī-s, a 100 śrī-śrī-108-bābājī-s and 10
das-ser-jigar-bābājī-s. Even as I was taking in the magnitude of the
hepatomegaly of the last of them, she exuberantly mentioned how bābājī
used to appear in her dreams to warn her of all manner of impending
disasters. She then went on to say that his student Khambhā-vālā-bābājī
was now in charge and that he would occasionally visit the park to
dispense miraculous medications that could “cure any disease”. Sometime
later I noticed that a new shrine had emerged next to that of
Rasgol-bābājī. Apparently, his successor Khambhā-vālā-bābājī had
joined his master in the abode of the buffalo-rider and was now
consigned to a samādhi beside him.

Vidrum had been informing me of the multiple cases of lead and mercury
poisoning he has been encountering in the past couple of years. We
checked the data an realized that there was indeed a significant spike.
We wondered what might be the cause for those cases as our state’s
environmental agency had given a clean-chit for our water and food
sources. The answer dawned on us with a crash yesterday. We had a
“god-man” rushed to our care by his throng of devotees. They claimed
he was under an abhicāra from his rival śūl-vālī-mātājī. They added that
he could cure himself but his symptoms were so severe that they need us
to give him some medication so that he could become stable enough to
counter the abhicāra or prepare medications for himself. He was not
cooperating constantly stating he could cure himself but was clearly in
deep agony. His cheeks were red and he was complaining that scorpions
were constantly running under his skin. Reading my name on my badge he
became delirious and started yelling that the scorpions running under
his skin had suddenly manifested a dangerous woman. Before I could even
process what happened next, one of his votaries rushed at me and started
pulling my hair while another grabbed my hand. Thankfully, Vidrum who
was beside me acted quickly and knocked out the guy who was grabbing my
hand. That gave me a breather by which time I had drawn my śilī and bore
it down on the exposed sīrāmarman on the attacker’s hand. His hand went
limp and I freed my hair and struck him again on his skull with śilī
thus making him fall. Vidrum and others signaled me to retreat as they
handled the case. The scary memory of the murder of a physician near my
school by the irate relatives of a patient flashed in my mind but in the
adrenaline rush I was feeling elated as I had never felt recently — I
had knocked out an attacker successfully with the śilī\! In my
excitement, I sent off mails to Indrasena and my sisters describing the
incident and asked them not to tell my parents.

Later that day, I heard that Vidrum had referred the god-man to the
poison-control department. There the god-man’s anuyāyin-s had caused
quite a bit of trouble and took their man away after the department told
them that they had to stop him from using mercury and lead and that he
had to remain in the hospital for an attempt at chelation therapy.
Vidrum said that he was considering reporting the man to the
poison-control authorities because he believed he might be behind the
metal-poisoning cases we had seen. Out of the blue, Marxenga came to me
and started haranguing me that “right wing” types like me were the cause
of emergence of likes of that god-man. Vidrum for a change shooed her
away. He told me that the supposed holy man was a certain Gajpuṭ-bābājī,
the student and successor of the late Khambhā-vālā-bābājī. I looked him
up and realized that he ran a popular channel that was frequented by
many believing in his miraculous “medicines” for whitening the skin,
curing malignancies, diabetes and the like. Vidrum asked me regarding
his peculiar name. I explained to him that evidently he had taken it up
from a traditional kiln known as the gajapuṭa, which among other things
was used in baking mercurials. This led me to investigating his channel
and I saw that he had a show in which he described the preparation of
leaden, golden and silver rasagola-s for people to wear. There he took
elemental mercury heated it successively with the juices of garlic,
aloe, wood-sorrel, betel leaf and the triphala-s, each for the duration
of a week in his famed gajapuṭa that had lent him his name. At the end
of it he claimed that he had pacified the mercury and started handling
it with his bare hands mixing it with powdered silver. Then he squeezed
out the mercury remaining from the amalgamation and continued repeatedly
heating it with the pastes of various herbs prepared with gomūtra,
ajamūtra, nārīmūtra of a menstruating woman and milk. At the end he
arrived at an amalgam globe that he advised his devotees to wear or keep
in their mouth as a panacea for all kinds of diseases. With that it was
clear how our failed rasa-siddha had landed up in our hospital and had
probably also sent many of his votaries over too with his mercurials,
irrespective of the powers of his rival śūl-vālī-mātājī. I wait to learn
more of his fate and that of his enterprise.

**Entry 4; vi, year Siddhārthin of the first cycle:** A lecturer in the
geology department at the university called on me. He was known to
Somakhya and had been friendly with him. It was through him he had a
passing acquaintance of Lootika and me. He had with him a visitor from
Argentina. He had come to ask me if I could somehow arrange to use the
CT scanner in the hospital for scanning a rock with a fossil that he had
found at Utnoor in Telangana. I asked him for more details. He told me
that the Argentinean was an expert on such extinct reptiles and believed
that the skull he had found was notable. The Argentinean told me that he
believed it was fossil of utmost importance and a relative of the
dinosaurs. I took a closer look and could make out the partial contours
of a skull. It looked too primitive to be a dinosauromorph or a
pterosaur. I realized it might be the skull of an aphanosaur and
remarked so. The Argentinean was surprised and he said that nobody he
had encountered in India till now had known about aphanosaurs. I told
him that I immediately realized its significance because it promises to
be the first complete skull of an aphanosaur and we could test the
hypothesis of their being close to the ancestry of the greater
dinosaurian lineage. I agreed to help them with arranging the scans on
condition that they would give me a chance to study the skull too. They
agreed to include me as an author on the study. I am sure Somakhya would
be as jealous as he can ever be of me when he hears of my luck in this
regard.
