+++
title = "A dinnertime conversation"

+++
A complete version of this apolog will currently not be visible to the
public.

-----

Things had cooled off a bit on the political front after the
assassination of the Prime Minister Pratap Simha by a massed drone
attack. On the personal front Vidrum had sort of come to terms with the
mysterious disappearance of his lover Meghana. He was now ever more
convinced that she had been killed by a marūnmatta. He had the vague
sense of possible trouble in the future but for now his duties as a
young physician kept him busy. He had set aside the anger and
indignation that resulted from the disappearance of Meghana and was
following the advise of his precocious junior and professor at the
medical school, Vrishchika, to chart out an appropriate niche for
himself. Thus, he was watching less cricket and spending his free time
looking more closely at the relevant clinical data along the lines
Vrishchika had suggested to him. While he initially found it boring, he
soon felt he was seeing patterns he had never before seen in his life.
This perked him up and he started putting in effort to try to understand
them. In the process he was for the first time trying to read a wider
array of literature with a more critical mind. Suddenly, it was dawning
on him that several of the practices and larger framework of the modern
medical practice itself was mostly not grounded in alleviating the
problems of the patients.

That afternoon Vidrum felt his mind crowded with less-comforting issues.
Perhaps, deep within he had some foreboding that there was only a
temporary lull in the troubles and that a great clash of men was waiting
to happen in the future. Due to the company of his old friends Vidrum
was moving away from the alluring but fallacious ideas of his other
friends like Samikaran, Gardabh and Mahish. In fact it seemed as though
they could no longer be counted as his friends, especially if the
terminal life and death struggle between the dharma and rākṣasavāda was
to play out as Lootika had witnessed in her dream. To add to this
general background of thoughts, the experience with a patient he had to
handle the previous day was playing on his mind – he was hardened to
such sentiments but for some reason this case kept returning to his
mind. It specifically raised a question which had always bothered him in
the background – the thought of whether he had really been a success in
life. He had faithfully followed what his parents had charted for him.
After all the trials and tribulations he had been successful at that but
it was not entirely clear to him if had truly met ‘success’. His parents
were extremely proud of where he had reached in life but he was not
entirely sure if that meant anything at all. On the other side his mind
wandered with some happy expectation to the impending appointment he had
early that evening. He had been invited to Indrasena and Vrishchika’s
house for hanging out for the evening and dinner. Indrasena’s younger
brother Pinakasena and his wife Shallaki were also on vacation with them
for a few days. But then his mind wandered back to the issue of
achievement when he thought of the people whom he was slated to visit
that evening. Nevertheless, knowing that time was short he quickly made
some lemonade and ṣaṭṭaka -s that he wished to take to his hosts to
accompany the dinner they were spreading.

On arriving at Indrasena and Vrishchika’s house he was introduced to
Pinakasena and Shallaki. He had met Pinakasena once before when he and
his brother had come from their city, the sprawling Kshayadrajanagara,
to stay with his classmate Somakhya for a fortnight. They refreshed
their acquaintance. Vidrum: “I recall the the great game of cricket we
had at Somakhya’s house.” IS: “Ah you have a good memory. It seems to
have faded away from my ken but perhaps one us might have have a record
of it in our scrapbooks.” Vrishchika: “Indrasena, it has to be your
scrapbook for certainly me and my sisters did not join you all to play
cricket of all things. I guess the only thing Indrasena remembers from
that trip was meeting me, the walk we all took to that gigantic palm
tree – a rare one for our city, which even towered over the specimens we
might encounter in Visphotaka or Samudragandha, and that memorable
dinner we had at the Hotel Yadava.” Vidrum chuckled: “I can imagine.”
Pinakasena: “Ah, I do recall the good cricket we played. Indra batted
badly and bowled badly throughout. Vrishchika, while you were not
physically there, I think you can take the blame for that. I think bro
was only thinking of you even while playing.”

Vrishchika: “You guys are always blaming me even when I was not
there\!”  
Vidrum: “But, Vrishchika, you were always a big trouble-maker, right?”  
Vrishchika: “I thought that title squarely belonged to my elder sister:
after all on the last day of school our principal said that I was such a
well-behaved girl, unlike Lootika who was always into mischief. OK
Vidrum, why don’t you now inaugurate the goṣtḥī with some of the
nimbūka-rasa that you have so kindly brought us. Lootika and Varoli
always considered me and Jhilleeka as inferior cooks. Even if that were
true, you would not have to suffer that, for much of the bhakṣa for
today has been handled by honorary sister Shallaki, whom even Somakhya’s
mother has certified as good. So let me get you some of her modaka-s to
get going.” Vidrum: “It is very brahminical indeed: bhojya and bhakṣya
with no trace of onions or garlic. I get that feel of purity.”

Vidrum: “So Shallaki do you also originally hail from
Kshayadrajanagara?” Shallaki: “No, I come from Shodasharajya
(Ṣoḍaśarājya).” Vidrum: “Hmm, an out of the way, quite place. I am
sure the air was cleaner than our mahānagara and the life much quieter.
How did you find the education there?” Shallaki: “You are right with
regard to the air and the charming life of a small town but regarding
education there was nothing much to speak of. I must say that situation
was quite nice too for in the village of the blind the one eyed woman is
queen.” Vidrum: “What do you mean?” Shallaki: “In our town there was not
much competition as you had in your city, both in school and in college.
So by just putting in a little effort I could stand out in academics and
boost my ego. That might have done me some bad but thankfully I got see
reality upon running into the caturbhaginī.”

Vidrum: “Interesting that you say so. I have been thinking a lot on
related issues. Imagine being in school with likes of Vrishchika and all
her sisters\! It certainly was a stiffer situation for us, especially
given all the pressure my parents put on me to catch up with the rest. I
understand from Indrasena that Kshayadrajanagara was only a little less
stressful than our city.”

Pinakasena: “Indrasena and I made the following estimates using data
from Vrishchika and Shallaki. The average IQ of your college class,
Vidrum, was approximately 120-123; in Kshayadrajanagara in mine and
Indra’s class it was 116-119. In Shallaki’s college in Shodasharajya it
was just 103. But remember in the general populace across all our
regions the average is at best around 90. Now you can also look at it
this way. In a mahānagara like yours there were roughly around 250000
students who would have written the university entrance exam with you.
If we take all the medical colleges in the district there are
approximately 200 government rate seats available to the open category.
Now not all students with that high IQ threshold needed to make it to
the medical school will want to study medicine. About the same number
will want to go to engineering school. About ¼ that number will go to
law school. Another ¼ will want to become accountants and go on the
track peculiar to them. It will only be a rare minority like Indra or
me, say one each year, who would drop out of those professional courses
to take a pure science degree. That will give us approximately 500
students and a fraction of 0.002 who pass the IQ threshold to
potentially enter medical school. Now with that mean of 90 for our
general populace and a typical standard deviation of about 15 we can
calculate that threshold to be an IQ of 133.17. Now, if we take your
class of about 120 students with a mean IQ of 121.5 and a similar s.d
then you have about 26 students in your class alone who could go for
those seats. Whereas in my class there would have been roughly 18 such
students and in Shallaki’s only 3. So indeed it must have been quieter
for her than for you.”

Vidrum: “Yes. I would believe your estimates are anecdotally in the
right range given that there were little over 10 people in my class with
IQs in the 140 and above range. In that range the difference really
tells with respect to even the mean for our class. It can be
demoralizing to those lower down the ladder as the case of a patient I
had to deal with yesterday illustrates.”  
Vrishchika: “Talking of patients, I was itching to ask about patient
\#29?”  
Vidrum: “Yes, I was thinking of that very case. First, I must thank you
for your spot on and immediate diagnosis: as I had expected it was
something up your alley.”

Vrishchika: “So you confirmed mycetism ?”  
Vidrum: “Yes indeed: it was an attempt of suicide.”  
IS: “Mycetism from a suicide attempt?”  
Vidrum: “The young patient was brought it with an emergency situation.
He presented profuse perspiration, miosis in an eye, accompanied by
ptosis in the other, convulsions and difficulty breathing among other
things. After we struggled a bit since the patient was not orally
communicative, I went over to check with your wife, as such are the
things she might see through instantly. She was quick to take a shot
that it was likely muscarinic intoxication. I acted on it and found that
he had attempted suicide by shroom and stabilized him with atropine.”  
Vrishchika: “Tragic, but that’s an unexpected twist. Why would someone
attempt suicide via something so inefficient and painful as a muscarinic
mushroom? He could have tried something else that might have brought his
end more efficiently. Remember the guy in our school who committed
suicide with Mercuric Chloride?”  
Vidrum: “It is indeed an odd choice of an agent. But regarding the pain,
remember that when people are in such a state they do not care much
about the pain: leave alone that
![HgCl\_2](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=HgCl_2&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"HgCl_2") case, we have had people make an attempt at suicide by
drinking phenol, right?”  
Indrasena: “Remember, access to agents is not always easy.
![HgCl\_2](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=HgCl_2&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"HgCl_2") is not exactly something easily available unless he has access
to the chemistry lab in school or college. Moreover, Vrishchika, you
might be underestimating the potential of muscarinic intoxication.
During my peregrinations in the ghats with a naturalist, I came across a
large bolete mushroom, likely of the *Rubinoboletus* group. My
naturalist companion informed me that it was particularly toxic and used
by the hill pastoralist-subsistence farmers to impose a death-punishment
on life-stock thieves whom they caught. They were said to prepare a
mushroom-bun using this fungus and administer it to the thieves who
would then die in their custody within 24-36 hours. I collected a sample
and it is in my storage. However, after realizing its active principle
is mostly just muscarine, I did not investigate it further.”

Vidrum: “That’s most interesting. This young patient’s surname suggests
that he might have his origins in the shepherd community. I wonder if
after all he was doing what he did with some prior knowledge but simply
did not dose correctly. That’s why we were able to salvage him with
atropine and adrenaline.”  
Vrishchika: “Vidrum, here you have a notable case at hand, which you
should carefully work up into a manuscript and publish it – it will make
an interesting case report. Hope you have all the material
well-documented.”  
Vidrum: “Yes I do. I hope we can get Indra’s sample to do some tests for
muscarine.”

Shallaki: “Very outre indeed but perhaps it is my low IQ that I am
unable to see what was it in this case that made Vidrum think of ones
place on the IQ ladder.”  
Vidrum: “This is the time of the results for the university entrance
exams. The patient very badly wanted to make it to medical school but he
came up against mathematics and pulled the plug in it. The failure led
him to attempt self-destruction. It reminded me of my own situation
years ago. My parents had, from an early age, nailed it into me that the
way forward in life was to have the initials MD engraved next to my
name. They placed tremendous pressure on me to reach that goal. It was
tough struggle at the university entrance exam: just as Pinakin laid out
I was competing with the IQ heavyweights in our class for that small
slice of seats. My parents naively thought that just putting in hours of
work would take me there. Looking at your clans-folk, Somakhya and
Lootika, or the nasty Hemaling, I got my first doubts about whether this
was true. I asked Somakhya one day about this and he said: ‘don’t slack
on your studies but it will mostly boil down to what your parents gave
you at conception. Knowing you well, I think you will survive but then
the gods or luck can always have other plans.’ Thankfully, that turned
out to be true and the gods favored me, But then time and again I was
reminded that there is something more than just the work you put in or
the education your receive. In fact it was this which lead to me
breaking up with Manjukeshi and falling out with Samikaran.”

Vrishchika: “That’s where realism might help. It might be a good idea
not to force people who do not have it in them to become doctor but do
something else which could still make their lives cheerful. An animal
can lead a happy life without having fathomed the depths of calculus or
the arcana of enzymology or peering down infected orifices: it is good
to know that early rather than commit yourself to misery with no pay
off.”  
Vidrum: “Vrishchika, I have always felt you speak from a lucky vantage
point, as you were undoubtedly the most intelligent student, male or
female, in your class all the way from school to the end of your
education. How else could we explain that just in your first year you
aced several of the exams of the last year? Should you not be having
some consideration for the aspirations of the less-fortunate rather than
seeking to write them off at birth?”  
Shallaki: “I think we all are speaking from a lucky vantage point.
Otherwise we would not all be here together chatting in this manner. I
think neither you nor anyone else in this room can really experience the
world in first person as it is for someone at the mean IQ of a 90 or for
that matter even someone at 100, at or below which 3/4th of our people
are situated. Hence, I would not at all say that Vrishchika has no
consideration for the less-endowed in this dimension due her advantage.
She is only advocating a realistic approach where we do not whip a horse
without the wherewithal in hope that it might win a difficult race. That
said, I do acknowledge that slotting someone as a low intellectual
achiever, perhaps at birth itself, might discourage them from achieving
even what their potential might hold for them. This is a difficult
dilemma when you want implement something humane for society at large.”

PS: “In fact the likelihood of a more humane approach stems from first
recognizing the ground situation. We need not follow fashions of the
Abrahamistic Occident to shape our thoughts, which is one of a fear of
reality and multiplicity – be it in religion or in society at large. In
our tradition we have always had a more realistic picture of human
nature and the existence of substructure within it. Hence, we need to
work from what is actually there rather than what we think should be
there. In fact, rather than write off people, such a realization might
help provide the right kind of assistance and prior information for
them, rather than make them play to lose.”

IS: “Then we were in school, the wife and I were part of a study to use
a gigantic compendium of single nucleotide polymorphisms to study the
correlations of each with a bunch of quantitative traits like muscle
mass, tendency for psychotic conditions, brain size and general
intelligence. By adding these correlations we were able to develop
polygenic scores that were rather predictive of these quantitative
traits. In fact, due to the enormity of the data sets that were accrued
we were able to do better than any prior attempt. Vrishchika is now
extending the results to include observations such as the orientation of
the dendritic arborizations in smart people with big brains with respect
to the duller folks with smaller brains. The regular arrangement of the
dendritic arborizations is a reasonable predictor of intelligence. As
you know, to be a commissioned officer in the army requires you to pass
a pretty rigorous test that probes general intelligence. However, the
non-commissioned servicemen are not selected via such stringent
procedure. But the army as part of its modernization plan was very
interested in probing this aspect for it has serious bearing on
performance and training. In fact general intelligence is a good
indicator of whether a javān will be trainable for something important
in modern warfare than just being a grunt. Thus, the army supported this
study and has made good use of our polygenic scores as a predictive
tool. Of course they do not substitute it for an intelligence test;
however, it informs them of the kind training they should invest in for
a javān and the specialization they should deploy them in. The
predictions of psychoses also informs them regarding the types of
posting and training that might be appropriate for an individual. The
way it works is they all have equal opportunity but if they fail the
given opportunity then this information guides the future steps that are
taken.”

Vidrum: “That is interesting. I can see something like this being of use
in the army. Due to your wife, I am also beginning to utilize risk
scores in civilian medicine for a variety of conditions and it does help
me sharpen the advise I can give my patients. But can we really do any
good using the brain size and polygenic scores for general intelligence
among civilians?”  
Vrishchika: “The army project is the one which actually convinced me of
the utility of the polygenic scores for intelligence in civilian
medicine. I actually advised the army in this matter and saw it to have
utility in routine military medicine. I am sure you would agree Vidrum
that the medical counsel for a patient is not a simple matter. Many
actions a patient needs to follow in order to successfully take modern
medication is not exactly simple for someone closer or below the mean in
the IQ distribution. For instance, take management of diabetes or
something even simpler like taking the medications appropriately as
instructed. In such a situation the polygenic score gives us a
non-invasive prediction of whether the patient’s intelligence would be
sufficient to handle the task of auto-administration of the prescribed
medication. If we get an indication that it might not then we might
recommend some extra training, take some extra-steps and provide some
additional aids to ensure that they correctly auto-administer.”

Vidrum: “Alright that sounds like something interesting and certainly I
need to take a closer look at it. But I am still worried about the
misuse of tests of general intelligence or still worse a polygenic
prediction, especially in education. What about the psychological trauma
derived from knowing that you have bad polygenic score? We could have
more cases like our patient \#29 then.”  
Shallaki: “While I completely see your point of the potential
educational misuse, as Indrasena pointed out regarding the army, I think
there is also potential for the converse. One thing that has emerged
from intelligence studies is that a person with a certain low IQ score
can be trained by repeated specific instruction by example to do certain
tasks as well as a higher IQ person. However, such people are
less-likely to benefit much from abstract higher general education
unlike a higher IQ person. Hence, I would say that we should start by
giving an equal opportunity and encouragement for all. However, if a
person is showing a tendency of failure we can make an assessment of the
prospects and the potential training course for the individual based on
the polygenic score. Learning Newton’s laws of motion or principles of
linguistic evolution are not for everyone. If we have a good evidence
that their intelligence is not up to it then it is actually a good thing
not to make them waste their time with such things but train them more
practically for matters likely to give them a respectable life.”

PS: “This brings to mind a conversation we had with Indra’s classmate
and Somakhya’s cousin Saumanasa who used to think everyone has the same
intelligence, sort of like your evil Samikaran. The results of Indra and
Vrishchika really shook her up. She was wanting to go the route of ‘the
universal right to income for these people until robotics and artificial
intelligence would aid them catch up with the rest.’ We were trying to
tell her that a typical man values a dignified life coming from being
employed more than an income without work and those who do go that route
are likely to end up with serious issues like substance abuse and
violent crime.”  
Vidrum: “It is interesting she puts a positive spin on robotics. The way
automation and robotics are entering our lives I think life is getting
harder for these people with lower IQ. I sort of started sympathizing
with a famous advaitācārya, who is sort of a Luddite, who felt that we
should turn our backs to mechanization and automation.”  
PS: “I think the jury is still out on that one. I see that smarter ones
projecting even greater power with the artificial computer minds. Yet I
admit that those with lower intelligence are to an extent doing certain
otherwise difficult tasks by themselves nowadays because of the
computer’s mind aiding them with information in a more ready to use
form. For example, in our parents days people had to look up a table for
the very normal distribution we have been talking about but we can
simply do it at the tap of a finger due to the extended mind in the form
of our computers. Looking up some of those tables was a more complex
task making such information less accessible to many.”

Vidrum: “Well, Samikaran is still laboring under the belief that all are
equal in the upper story and is probably still serious about his ‘Trash
the Brahmin’ project since he believes that all inequality has arisen in
our people due to ‘brahmins’ denying them education. But what about
engineering the genetics to change the potential? Did Saumanasa not
suggest that one?”  
Indrasena: “I am sure Saumanasa would love to see samatvam too. But she
is a human geneticist herself and actually knows a thing or two of the
matter. The main issue is that we are dealing with a quantitative trait
with a polygenic foundation. So it is not something for easy
intervention. There are some loci that we ourselves uncovered from a
study of a big-brained family of V1s, which by themselves can give a
good effect but even those are tricky. In fact the Qin Shi Huang’s merry
successors acted almost immediately after we published our analysis of
PAX6 and delta-catenin to engineer a Crispr Ding and a Crispr Dong based
on those variants. They were big-headed no doubt but apparently the
intended super-Hans are not doing too well according to the latest
intelligence we have gotten. There is something about the genetic
background, which we figured out only much later, that they missed. All
this, I guess, is keeping Saumanasa from venturing in the direction of a
genetic intervention and preferring an artificially engineered one. ”

Vidrum: “If this were the scenario on the ground I wonder what this
might mean for the differences that have been claimed for the mean IQ of
nations. Evidently the data is already there to explore its causes and
consequences, right?”
