+++
title = "Human journeys, ascents andxa0descents"

+++
As we headed towards the bus-stand to take our homeward conveyance, we
saw an unusual stir in its vicinity. We passed a clump of young,
well-to-do, white American women ambling along holding over-sized coffee
or cola cups and exclaiming: “Wow\!” as they eagerly looked at
something. The still air was pierced by the blaring horns and the
strobing lights of the vehicles of emergency responders. Some distance
from the bus-stand was a construction site with a gigantic crane, which
we passed on our weekly trip to a store. A Mexican man, by his
appearance evidently of mostly pure First American ancestry, had fallen
from his lofty perch where he was either trimming a branch or fixing a
wire, since a bundle of power-lines hung low from a pole near which he
had been suspended. But now, like emperor Yayāti having exhausted his
puṇya, he had fallen either electrocuted or due to having lost his
hold. As we reached bus-stand, the first responders were trying to
resuscitate him and soon loaded him into their vehicle.

As we watched his fate, we thought ourselves that this man is likely
going to have his appointment with Citragupta and if he evades the
crossing of the ladder for now, the going is likely to be tough for him.
Medical care in the Big-mleccha-land is generally poor and more so for a
likely undocumented immigrant with no insurance coverage. Hence, we were
greatly surprised when a man standing beside us in the bus-stand, who
ostensibly had witnessed the whole incident from that vantage point,
said something similar with a tinge of an Eastern European accent:
“There is no American dream for that poor guy even if he survives that
one. I’m pretty sure he is a daily wage-earner and I’m don’t know how he
could support his recovery.” We nodded in assent and muttered something
about how expensive treatment could be.

That man who was standing beside us was the type who liked to talk to
strangers. Without any solicitation he took off on his autobiography.
We, not being the type who easily makes conversation with strangers,
heard him out for most part with only occasional interjections to
acknowledge our listening or to keep his flow on track. What follows is
a paraphrase of his yarn from the bus-stop to the time we got off near
our house. We record it, in part, reminded of a former student of ours
who made conversations with strangers in course of her train-commute and
wrote them down as tales.

The man was of Jewish ancestry (though he clarified that he himself was
an \`atheist’) who hailed from what is now Ukraine but earlier part of
the sprawling Soviet Empire. He had apparently obtained a degree in
\`industrial chemistry’ and then went to the land of his peoples,
Israel, probably during the demise of the Soviet Empire. While Israel
was the land of his ancestors, he did not like it there for he said it
was too “militant” for his tastes. So after making some money there he
went to India. He gave an account of his extensive peregrinations
through India, which suggested to me that his yarn was not entirely
fictitious for what he said of the places he visited in the desh seemed
rather authentic. He even said he wanted to return to the desh to spend
a while there. From there he went back to this natal town of Odessa in
the independent Ukraine but somehow managed to convince the Americans
that he was a deserving refugee due to persecution. The Americans let
him come to the US and gave him a work permit and he soon was also able
to get a Green Card. In his first year as a refugee he did pole work —
i.e., fixing electric cables and utility poles — this was actually how
he got started with his biographical narrative. He was apparently the
only person of Jewish ancestry in this work and all his colleagues were
non-English-speaking Mexicans. While his was not as good as his
colleagues in the hard physical labor and suffered from painful but
self-treatable and auto-healing injuries, his cerebral capacity and
education allowed him to get a slightly better job in cleaning up
hazardous material.

In course of that job he was again with a body of Mexicans and
Central/South Americans, some of whom apparently did not even speak
Spanish too fluently (likely being from one of the more isolated
groups). Some of his colleagues suffered injuries from hazardous
substances in course of their work and he claimed to have used the skill
he learned in the Soviet Army training to administer them first aid
\[Footnote 1\]. The Jewish gentleman quit the job after having saved
some money as knew he was exposing himself to truly nasty stuff. He then
started working for an Iranian carpet-dealer fixing carpets but before
long he finally got a job he wanted in the fossil energy industry, which
was more in line with his education. In course of this job he apparently
traveled to all kinds of places world-over. Now, having made a lot of
money he leads a more sedate life. Perhaps with a sense of remorse, he
is very particular to use foot-powered and public transit. By that time
our stop had come and we left behind the ancient-mariner-like narrator
in the bus. As we got back home we said to ourselves that people with
notable life histories perhaps want to tell it to others.

The Jewish gentleman interspersed his winding reminiscence made some
other remarks. He said more than once that he has always been bothered
about the inequality in the world. He said that his experience in
pre-independent Ukraine had made him lose faith in socialism as a
solution to it. His experience in Israel and post-Soviet Ukraine made
him doubtful of “organized religion” and nationalism. On learning we
were not a Christian, he added that he found the Americans to be to
following a “Dark-age version form of Christianity not far from Islam”,
which probably inspires some of the harsh laws and law-enforcement in
the land. But he added that he did not say this to the Christian
Americans because they might think him to be an atheist Jewish
intellectual undermining the religion of Christ. America had made him
realize that capitalism is after not too great either, especially if you
are in the shoes of one of the fellow Mexican workers from his early
days in the US. He felt scientific education might be the way out
because that is how he “made it”, whereas his Mexican and Central/South
American friends are probably still struggling in their lives unable to
afford, a good house, medicines and treatment. But again he quickly
added that he did not want to interfere in other peoples personal lives
— implying that religion was basically a personal thing.

There are some aspects of gentleman’s experience and conclusions we can
commiserate with. That apart, one key aspect that seemed to mystify him
was human inequality to which he felt there must exist some solution —
just that we had not reached it yet. A lot of people around the world
are unable to come to terms with inequality as an inherent feature of
humans. Those who are better endowed in one dimension or the other than
their fellow men see this sooner or later. But the effect of the
pratyakṣa is different on different people:

  - Some realize that voicing it aloud will only prove too dangerous for
    their own safety for those who lack their special gift might get
    jealous of them and try to destroy them. Hence, they knowingly deny
    the existence of the difference and attribute it to something else
    (e.g. the Lebanese thinker Taleb). The more pernicious among the
    deniers would say that it is because of the lack of human effort on
    part of the less-endowed.
  - Since special ability comes from something very innate it looks very
    natural, just as other innate processes such as feeding or
    urinating. Hence, some are unable to understand that others might
    not be able to do such natural things. Hence, they insist that their
    special deeds should be easy for all — they just need to keep
    trying.
  - Yet others sense the differences to be inherently dangerous and want
    to eliminate them either by destroying those above them or those
    under them. This is their idea of literally leveling the playing
    field. Such tendencies have taken root in an ironic and euphemistic
    garb in the US and other Anglophone parts of the leukosphere. It is
    passed off using various terms falling under the rubric of social
    justice. Given the deep intellectual resonance, affinity and perhaps
    even unilateral love of part of the Indian elite with this part of
    the leukosphere, they too are imbibing these ideas to their
    detriment.

In the end one has to admit that a part of the experience of the Jewish
gentleman or anyone else who has reached the shores of the
big-mleccha-land to live there for a substantial period of time relates
to it still being a frontier society (to borrow the naturalist-thinker
E.O. Wilson’s term) with vast natural resources. Once such a frontier
mindset takes over the population, we see its effects in various aspects
of life, even if the land looks superficially urbanized. For example,
few Americans find it strange that their land for most part has no good
public transport to talk off. Few find it strange that one has to get
into an over-sized car and guzzle gas to get to a place on the horizon
to just get ones groceries or to go to where one needs to do to earn
daily bread. A few find it strange that one needs to drive more than a
mile to a place where one exercises in something called a “gym”. No one
seems to raise an eyebrow about living in a large isolated house, where
one might barely know or interact with others outside the nuclear family
in a non-structured way. \[Of course there are places which are
exceptions but those are very few\] Indeed, with such a land in the
temperate zone where infectious disease is relatively low, and with
restrictive laws, a fraudulent triangle of physicians, pharmaceutical
industries and insurance companies can make a quick buck. Thus, like a
true frontier-land it is truly a place where the going is good as long
as one is physically strong.

In such a frontier-land there are dangerous jobs to be done. But if you
lead a large existence yourself you need those jobs to be done for cheap
to sustain your own lifestyle. In the past this was achieved by
importing slaves from Africa to do all the dangerous stuff free of cost.
Today the Mexican and Central/South Americans play this role. When
confronted with these issues a well-heeled white American gentleman, a
type that cheers at “amazing” TED talks, said that artificial
intelligence combined with a universal income policy will be the
solution. But he misses that point that AI that will merely cut out the
jobs now done mostly by these people of First American ancestry. In fact
it is not just them. There are a large number of Indians too want to
join their ranks and sneak into US from the southern border. The reality
is in the event of AI and automation actually delivering the promise,
the life of such seekers will probably be worse off (and I’m no
luddite). And a universal income policy is little more than a foggy
figment.

In the end, a lot of those who are bothered by the issue of human
inequality are often attracted towards “cool” solutions rather than
realizing that the main reason these people are flocking to the US to do
even the most dangerous jobs is probably just the lure of the frontier
where they hope they might get a better life than in their own lands.
Often this better is not something fancy but about water and energy —
these are two things that cannot be easily solved by just imparting
“scientific temper” to the populace. Thus, locally addressing water
and energy issues can go a long way in people fulfilling their innate
potentials (which is actually a good state) but the inequality is not
going just vanish. Further, nature of pyramid schemes are often missed
by people, both with low or high IQs: those who reach the frontier lands
first are going to get much more out of it than those who come later.
Thus, no place has endless space for everyone to try the same strategy.
Of course those with a higher IQ are likely to quickly display a new
strategy that might earn them better returns as things get competitive
but the basic nature of a pyramid scheme does not go away.

There is no samatvam but a certain sambhāva, saṃyama, and suvṛtti might
help. But in the end people need to come to terms that there are some
divides which might simple to wide to span with bridges. This of course
will be difficult for the typical Occidental “intellectual” of the day
and his fellow travelers to grasp in the current atmosphere.

-----

Footnote 1: Here we could add that we are aware of an Indian
hazardous-waste-cleanup-contractor who employed Mexican and South
American workers. He mentioned how he had to once prevent his workers
from playing with elemental Mercury using bare hands
