+++
title = "The tale of thexa0dolmen-dweller"

+++
![bhagya3](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya3.jpg?w=486&h=443)

The exams were over and the last semester of toil was all that stood
between Vidrum and the dim glimmer he saw at the end of his metaphorical
tunnel. He finally had some free time that he wished to savor in full.
He had been so busy with his studies that he was still unclear as to how
to spend that pleasant autumn morning. Just then he got a message from
his friends Sharad and Murund that they would like to drop by. Seeing
the opening for some activity he asked them to come over quickly and get
some breakfast along for him. As they filled themselves with the viands
at Vidrum’s place Sharad and Murund took off on politics. Ere long
Sharad had launched into an interminable exposition of the electoral
politics of the day: “The Tiger Party has won the elections for the
municipal corporation in the South Visphotaka constituency. Vidbandhan
Singh of the Kangress-Secular Party has won the elections for the Zilla
Parishad at Shengaon. Lakkiraju of the Cycle Party has beaten the 5
times incumbent Potturaju for Sarpanch at Sarvepalli.” Thus, he went on
and on. Murund: “The education policy of the Hindu-dal sucks. I don’t
know why you still support it Vidrum. I am sure it is under the
influence of Somakhya and Sharvamanyu.” Sharad: “Indeed, I believe it
will be a major factor in the Mahanagarapalika elections in
Turushkarajanagara where the Moslems might form an alliance with 4 other
backward caste jāti-s because of the introduction of the 50-50 marks
policy for the local language and national language.”

Vidrum was trying hard to be polite but the blow-by-blow analysis being
presented by Sharad with interjections from Murund was getting too much
for him to bear. Just then Sharad was about to launch into his
speculations regarding the upcoming speech of Ram Mandir Mishra on
“Hinduism as Secularism”. As though to show the sign of participation,
Vidrum knowledgeably asked: “Is that election for the Mahanagara Nigama
at Surat going to be indicative of the success of the Hindu-dal? in the
national elections?” Sharad’s jaw dropped at his host’s ignorance and he
went quiet for a few seconds trying to recover. Taking advantage of the
silence Vidrum remarked: “Friends, I need to go to college to retrieve
something I left behind.” Perhaps, it hit Sharad that his grand lecture
was a waste or perhaps he felt a bit let down by Vidrum’s disinterest;
whichever was the case, he and Murund decided to leave along with Vidrum
and go their own way. In reality, Vidrum had nothing to retrieve — it
was just a ruse to end the incessant patter of Sharad’s monologues. In
any case, Vidrum was a bit of a changed man these days and he thought he
could just do some calming reading in the library, catch some lunch and
plan the rest of the day and beyond. There, he came across an article on
dolmens and cists to the South West that was located among some
reasonable rock-climbing spots. He thought that it might be a great idea
to rope in some of his friends to explore that site.

At the library he sighted Vrishchika and went up to her: “Vrishchika,
thanks for all those cheat-sheets you generated for pharmacology and
biochemistry — it really clinched the day for me”. Vri: “Well, is good
to hear that. Unlike you, I still have a couple of stupid exams to
finish before I’m a free bird.” Vid: “Why would you need to study?”.
Vri: “Well I could certainly pass them without studying but if you are
in this business of beating others it takes more effort, just as the
guys say you need to keep up the practice if you have to be in fighting
shape.” Vid: \`How is your sister Lootika? is she done with her exams?”
Vri: “Yes, if you wait for half an hour, you will see her swing by —
today we are riding back with our father.” Vid: “What happened to her
aśva?”. Vri: “You wouldn’t believe it. We were attacked two days ago by
those loutish gangster boys Samikaran et al. They broke the spokes of
her aśva; so, it is under repair now.” Vid: “That is awful of them. What
happened?” Vri: “When we were returning home they whistled at us and
displayed some lewd gestures. Lootika asked me to ignore them but I lost
my cool and lunged at them with my bike and hit one. Another drew a
knife then and Lootika tried to hit him with her bike when Samikaran
drew a stick and skewered her spokes. She fell off but both of us
recovered our bikes, sprayed the camphor-mangrove juice mixture we have
developed on their faces, and were able to make away swiftly.” Vid: “Wow
— well done — that is quite an improvement on your part!” Vri: “It was a
bit of a risk but I think quite a few of the public saw what happened
and they might be a bit wary now on. We will be banking on your help if
we need it.” Vid: “Not exactly in a mood for gangster fighting but if
required my billhook will be there to help you.”

A little while later Lootika came by to take her sister along. Vidrum
inquired regarding her bike and mentioned to her his plan to explore the
place with dolmens and cists to the southwest: “Do try to come along
tomorrow. I’m now heading to tell Somakhya and some others who are
likely to be interested.” L: “Sounds exciting, see you tomorrow at the
railway station.”

The next day Vidrum with a band of 7 of his friends were exploring the
strange landscape near Siddhakoṭa, which they had reached after a 1.5 hr
train ride and an hour’s walk thereafter. Many interesting structures
caught the eye of Somakhya and Lootika though it did not interest the
rest too much. However, as was usual Vidrum and Sharvamanyu hung around
with them listening to the comments they might make. They soon found a
series of menhirs that seemed to trace out a winding path along a slope
leading to a shelf in the basaltic rock. Somakhya: “This is a sign of
megalithic settlement in the area. From the irregular shapes of the
menhirs, it seems to be from an earlier megalithic phase predating the
Aryan contact and the Dravidian expansion.” Lootika sighted a strange
painting on the wall with circles and lemniscate-like figures: “Hey,
this might be a sign of an even earlier settlement”. Somakhya then
shouted out to the rest as he found a chalcedony microlithic core:
“Indeed, the art on the rock might have been as early as the
Mesolithic”. Then Sharvamanyu went to join the rest as someone called
him and Vidrum took a little detour with Somakhya and Lootika to climb
some cliff faces. Vidrum made an improbable climb and reached a ledge
with an overhang. He shouted out to his companions that he had found an
inscription with more rock art. Neither Somakhya nor Lootika could go up
the way Vidrum had done but after a while, they found another easier
path up and joined Vidrum on the ledge. They remarked that they could
not read the script but it seemed to be of early Cālukyan provenance by
its form. They then saw the rock art Vidrum had found — it depicted an
elaborate battle scene with elephants, horses and headhunters — clearly
of an age far removed from the Mesolithic art they had seen earlier.
Somakhya wondered if given the inscription and the location it marked a
record of a historic battle fought between the Cālukya-s and the
Pallava-s.

![bhagya2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya2.jpg?w=592&h=107)

The other clump of the remaining five friends headed up a tumulus
adjacent to the rock faces the three were exploring. There, Sharvamanyu
found a strange rock with cupules. He remembered Somakhya and Lootika
showing him such a rock in the past that made musical notes when struck.
He tried the same with this rock and it gave out a sonorous jangle. Soon
the rest of them were striking a rock trying to make music with the
rock. Bhagyada, one of the five, suddenly said that she heard Lootika
call her and ran towards a dolmen that lay just beyond the singing rock.
The music they were making reached the ears of Vidrum and his two
companions; Vidrum: “I presume they have found a singing rock like the
one you had shown us near Vināyakakoṭa.” Suddenly, the air was pierced
by a shrill cry of horror and pain and everything went silent. Lootika:
“Friends let us get back to the rest. That is the yell of my friend
Bhagya. I fear something terrible has happened to her.” It took them
some time to join the rest because Lootika in her disquiet for her
friend almost slipped and fell while getting down from the ledge. When
they reached the rest of their companions, they saw them clustered
around Bhagyada and fanning her. Vidrum stepped forward and checked her
pulse and sprinkled water on her from a water bottle. As he was
attending to her, Sharvamanyu remarked: “Lootika, this is strange. She
said she had heard you call her and went under that dolmen. We then
heard her utter a cry and found her collapsed. When we tried to get her
out of the dolmen, I swear to you, even though the roof is high enough
for us to get beneath it we felt as though someone had given us a hard
knock on the head. It is still aching a lot.” Lootika: “That is strange
indeed! We were a bit of a distance away and I did not call anyone — we
heard your music and her cry but, as you saw, it took us some time to
reach you all.”

In the meantime, Bhagyada had woken up but was uttering something that
sounded like gibberish to most. Somakhya: “That is very strange. It is
pretty linguistic though not understandable — it sounds like some type
of an unknown Dravidian language.” Seeing Lootika clutching her friend
and trying to calm her down Somakhya took out a powder of theanine, a
cactus and Brāhmī handed it to Lootika: “Gautamī, make her a tea from
this.” Some time after taking that tea she gradually stopped uttering
the copious gibberish and seemed to slip into a dazed trance. Vidrum
came up to Lootika who was still holding Bhagyada: “Lootika this seems
to be something in your realm — I don’t know of her ever having any such
problem in all these years.” Suddenly, something clicked in Lootika’s
mind and she sprang up and ran under dolmen. She instantly recoiled
holding her chest, stumbled out of it and ran back to Somakhya’s side:
“Somakhya, its occupant seems pretty aggressive and I’d say malevolent —
see how he tricked Bhagya into his lair by mimicking me. We need to
subdue this guy forcefully!” Vidrum: “Will Bhagya continue to be in this
trance-like state? What do we do now, we need to get back too!”
Somakhya: “Give us half an hour; hopefully we can restore her to
normalcy.” Drawing Lootika aside, he pointed to a spot under a tamarind
tree and whispered: “It is very opportune that we have a tamarind tree
there. Go under it and call upon the West-facing Sadyojāta-rudra
surrounded by the 24 yoginī-s: Śarabhānanā, Suvīra, Vajribhā, Rāśibhā,
Cakravartī, Śauṇdī, Khadgakarṇā, Mahātapā, Cakravegā, Mahāyāmyā,
Subhadrā, Gajakarṇikā, Carā, Somādevī, Gavākṣī, Vāyuvegagā, Airāvatī,
Mahānāsā, Daṃṣṭrālī, Sukarkaśa, Vedhanī, Bhaṭṭā, Droṇā and Kākenakā. I
will call upon the Skanda in the midst of the four Vināyaka-s under that
kadamba tree. Then we shall go in.”

For half an hour, which seemed like a whole day, the rest of the group
was impatiently and tensely milling around their incapacitated friend
constantly remarking that they were taking a risk with Somakhya and
Lootika’s hocus-pocus. They suggested that they should try to support
her begin the gradual trudge back to the station for it would take a
while with Bhagyada in such a condition. However, Vidrum and Sharvamanyu
said they should give the two their chance and in any case giving her
some time to recover might not be a bad idea as her vitals seemed
alright beyond some elevation of her pulse rate. Having completed their
dhyāna, Somakhya and Lootika entered the spacious dolmen. They felt some
invisible barrier trying to keep them out but Lootika remarked: “I think
the great yoginī-s have drawn him into our control” as they pushed
through. Somakhya: “For a good mantravādin well-versed in the
Yoginīsaṃcara, there is no bhūta that cannot be subdued with Rudra and
the 24 devī-s emanating from the arṇa-s of the Tatpuruṣa-ṛk. But a
lesser mortal might need other mechanisms like the śakti of Kumāra with
the Vināyaka-s, or Khaḍgarāvaṇa or Caṇḍāsi.” Once inside, they saw a
peculiar figure drawn on the ceiling — it almost seemed like a hybrid of
old rock art on which was superimposed a more recent marking of letters.
The two made an etching of it on paper and placed it in the circle of
the 24 and performed bhūta-bandhana. Just as they were finishing, they
heard the relieved shouts of their companions. As they emerged from the
dolmen, they saw Bhagyada quite completely recovered. Bh: “I think I
might have hit my head on the rock and lost my wits from trauma.”
Heaving a collective sigh of relief, they decided to return from that
place which had clearly frightened most of them. Lootika placed the
etchings in her backpack and told Somakhya that she would make a fair
copy and send it over to him.

![bhagya1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya1.jpg?w=640)

As they hopped off the train at their home station, they shouted out
goodbyes and reached for their local conveyances to get back home.
Bhagyada gave Lootika a ride home on her motorized two-wheeler. She hung
around with Lootika for a while yarning about the strange incident whose
focus she was. As Lootika chatted with her friend, she made a clear
color copy of the etching and handed it over to Bhagyada as she was
parting: “Bhagya, you stay close to Somakhya’s house — just drop this
with him as you head home. I’m going to be busy with some experiments
next two days but we’ll go to the clothing-stores on Friday afternoon.”
Bhagyada was flush with some cash from her internship. Hence she decided
to call her friend Charusmita to accompany her to an eatery for dinner.
Later that night, as Somakhya was writing an entry of the day’s
adventures in his scrapbook, his mother came into his room. She seemed a
bit agitated: “Do you know of the whereabouts of your classmate
Bhagyada. Her mother is on the phone — she has apparently not returned
home.” S: “Call Lootika’s mom — she was to drop off Lootika at her
house.” Somakhya overheard his mother speaking to Lootika’s mother and
learning that Bhagyada had left her home a long time ago and suggesting
that they file a missing person report.

The next day Lootika was to help her mother in teaching the secret
kula-prayoga of the Śrī-sūkta to her sisters Varoli and Jhilleeka. She
was excited about it as she had obtained a picture from Somakhya’s
mother of an archaeological site in the North that informed her of its
unexpectedly ancient origins. However, Lootika found her mother was
rather restless with the case of her friend’s disappearance. Just then
Vrishchika came out of her study and gave them the news of what had
happened. As Bhagyada had said goodbye to her friend after dinner and
was headed to the parking lot she was accosted by Samikaran and his
friend Mohammad Omar. They asked her to join them for some recreational
substance inhalation. She refused but they kept engaging her and
preventing her from leaving the spot. After some time it got more
threatening and an aggressive encounter ensued. She tried to reach her
vehicle and flee but her accosters pulled out its carburetor and threw
it away into a gutter. She then tried to make a call when they seized
her phone and backpack. Just then a jeep of the cops passed by and they
fled with her belongings after pushing her into the drain. Eventually,
the cops brought her home but told her that any investigation of
Mohammad Omar without stronger evidence would not be easy as he was
connected with the much-feared boss of the Majlis Party and that
Samikaran was a respectable medical intern. L: “Oh dear! That’s awful.
But Vrishchika you are such a lokasaṃcāriṇi. How did you get to know
this — she is my classmate after all.” Vrishchika smirked at her sister
and said: “They had taken her to the college hospital for a checkup;
thus, I learnt from my sources.” L: “Let me go and check on her.” Her
mother was a bit alarmed: “Lootika, why don’t you do that later. Let us
finish the lesson now. I don’t want you or Vrishchika picking up any
more scraps with those rowdies. This or worse could have happened to
both of you’ll a few days back. These are dangerous guys and nobody can
save you if they kidnap you all.”

![bhagya4](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya4-1.jpg?w=361&h=180)

Several years had passed since those incidents. Dr. Samikaran was
preparing for a beef party at his house along with Rabri Chatterjee of
the Maoist Party. The big man in attendance was going to be the rising
star, Mohammad Omar. He had just been appointed as the country head of
the multinational, Social Platforms, by its mleccha bosses Joe Dremel
and Joanna Ting. In the honor of his guest, Samikaran had ensured that
there was going to no alcohol, and the beef was halal; nevertheless, to
sweeten the deal for all the party-goers, different recreational
substances were being provided. Soon Mohammad Omar was in attendance and
he made a speech about how his company was going to make a big donation
for Samikaran’s Bamman Haṭāo organization for its drive for medical
assistance to the hill-tribes of the Nahali territory. He received a
long ovation and many a young woman crept up beside him seeking his
attention. He occasionally complimented one or the other of them for
their progressive ideals and asked them to drop him a call and send
along their CVs. Some minor players from the movie industry would also
mill around him begging for a special account on Social Platforms. Thus,
they partied hard till little after midnight, when Samikaran and
Mohammad Omar rounded up some of the women whom they had picked and
asked them to continue partying in a smaller room to the side. They said
they would join them a little later as they had to briefly attend to
some official issues.

Locking up the women in that room Chatterjee, Samikaran and Mohammad
Omar retired to a secret chamber. There MO guffawed loudly and stroking
his ample beard remarked that the party was great and that Samikaran had
done a good job with the guest list. He then said that now that he was
in control he had a mechanism to ban all Hindutva accounts on Social
Platforms. He also said he had legion of “players” who would set up fake
Hindutva accounts and make them a “heck of a laughing stock very soon,
all the way to the prime minister.” He said he had the full secret
backing of justice Shashi Yabhak and his network of contacts if it ever
got legal. Samikaran smiled in acknowledgment even as Chatterjee asked
him about the planned riots to disrupt the speech of the Finance
Minister Danesh Gupta. MO declared that it would be a riot like none
before and the government will be embarrassed beyond words before an
international audience. He then excused himself with a wink saying he
“wanted to spend some time with the ladies”. Samikaran said that was
what the party was for and asked him to have fun. However, Mohammad Omar
was soon rudely interrupted in his fun as Chatterjee rushed in and told
him that Samikaran wanted him back as there was something very serious
happening.

MO: “Why the \#\*%! did you want me, Sami?” Smk: “Listen, this is
super-serious stuff. My spies have just informed me that the Special
Task Force has been activated to arrest you for the killing of the
intelligence officer during the March riots and are headed this way.”
MO: “How the hell could they know?” Smk: “See, I’ve told you to be
careful with the girls. I believe it is one of them who was a mole.” MO:
“I’ll burn her alive.” Smk: “We will do that later; now you need to run.
I suggest you quickly get on to the mofussil road leading to Amirpur and
make your way to the bunker I’ve installed under Sultanganj Mohalla with
the help of our Chinese comrades. Our agents can then sneak you out of
the country.” MO: “Bro, why panic so much. My lawyers and his honor’s
network will get me out in hours. I can then use that as good propaganda
for our cause.” Chatterjee: “This is serious. They know that you have
done that before. This time around they might either “encounter” you or
have some thug bump you off as soon as you’re in jail. So, listen and
run.” MO: “What about you guys?” Smk: “Nobody can do much to a
respectable MD whom even politicians consult.”

Suddenly, it dawned on Mohammad Omar that the noose might indeed be
tightening around him. He quickly jumped into his truck and started
driving away as Samikaran had suggested.

![bhagya4](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya4-1.jpg?w=339&h=169)

Lootika suddenly sat up on the bed, as though startled by a dream.
Somakhya was half-awakened by it but instinctively pulled wife back on
to the pillow and lapsed in slumber again. That morning at breakfast, S:
“Gautami, did something bother you in your sleep.” L: “Why? I don’t
know. Now that you ask, I think I woke up from a tense dream and then
had a really good sleep for some reason. Ah! Now I recall. For some
reason, that strange rock art we had seen in the dolmen at Siddhakoṭa
flashed vividly in my sleep.” S: “I’d almost forgotten that. Did you
ever save the etching we made? That was supposed to be a khārkhoḍa. I
wonder what is going to happen with a khārkhoḍa binding an aggressive
fellow like that one floating around.” L: “Let me think… I remember now.
I did send the khārkhoḍa over to you with Bhagya but that was the day
she was assailed by the louts and I believe it was among the items
stolen from her and never recovered.”

A little later Vidrum was hosting Bhagyada and her husband Sandeep at
his residence. As they were rambling about the old days, the topic
veered to the Siddhakoṭa adventure and its aftermath. Bhagyada was still
rather shaken by its mention. Vidrum: “I think in the least you might
feel some comfort from this news item I saw a little while back.” Let me
read it: “ June 27th. The Special Task Force had identified the head of
Social Platforms, India, as the mastermind of the recent riots in
various cities. It was alleged that he had created a network of
university students, doctoral scholars and street ruffians to
orchestrate these riots in various cities and that he was directly
involved in arranging the assassination of the intelligence officer Mr.
Vir Singh. It was also alleged that he had used his power to ban various
pro-Hindutva accounts on Social Platforms and spreading false rumors
about them and the government. As the Special Task Force headed to
arrest him, he is said to have driven off on his truck via the mofussil
roads. The observers say that for some unknown reason he suddenly veered
his truck on to the Siddhakoṭa road and speed straight to the
archaeological site in the hills. He abruptly abandoned his truck and
ran up the hills to a dolmen where he was found dead with his skull
smashed in. In his truck, several goods were recovered, which the STF
claimed to have been stolen over the years from female victims whom he
had lured. His case was heard yesterday and Justice Shashi Yabhak
dismissed the charges against the deceased as frivolous and his death
was ruled a suicide. Social Platforms CEO Joe Dremel condoled the death
of his employee and declared him as a greater fighter against the dark
forces of fascism, Hindutva and brahminist supremacy that were shredding
the democratic fabric of India.” Vidrum: “Bhagya, I wonder if your
stolen items were among those recovered in the truck.”

