+++
title = "The culmination of Galtonism or pandemicxa0days-3"

+++
We saw a list of famous elderly people whom the virus has already placed
in the abode of Vaivasvata at the time of writing. We recognized at
least two names: (1) Robert Carroll the paleontologist, whose hard to
find book on vertebrate evolution had influenced us as a youth. (2) John
Conway, the creative mathematician, whose work influenced us in a
similar way as Hofstader, his rival in the realm of sequences.

But are we seeing the first glimmer of light at the end of tunnel? In
this note we shall look at the turning of the curve in parts of the
world beyond the root-source, the neo-empire of the “sons” of Chin Shi
Huang.

[![covid19.npluscSun.Apr.12.2020](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.npluscsun.apr_.12.2020.png?w=613&h=536)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.npluscsun.apr_.12.2020.png)

Figure 1: This is the daily infection curve after the first 35 cases to
date for selected countries in the
![\\log\_{10}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Clog_%7B10%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\log_{10}") scale. One can see that the worst hit countries in Europe,
Italy and Spain, are turning the curve suggesting that this round of the
infection has run its course and is flattening. France is on a similar
trajectory as the other Romance European nations but earlier in the
game; however, its curve has also probably already begun to turn.
Germany too, which was hit by a large number of cases but has had fewer
deaths, has turned the curve suggesting that they have a reasonable
chance of emerging looking better than the rest. England has done much
worse than its continental cousin and old enemy Germany. We cannot make
much of its case load because they are not testing as much. But if what
we see is a reasonably random sample they could be near a turn.
England’s bigger cousin across the pond, the US, is also showing signs
of having begun turning. India, while keeping the infection load
relatively low is still in the growth phase and it is not clear when the
turn might happen. South Korea may be seen as the control case where the
curve has been successfully flattened.

[![covid19.nplusrSun.Apr.12.2020](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.nplusrsun.apr_.12.2020.png?w=617&h=540)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.nplusrsun.apr_.12.2020.png)

Figure 2: This shows the rate of infection averaged over 3 days since
the first 30 cases. South Korea is the only country that has brought the
rate down successfully. India has kept a lower rate than the rest but as
of now it still seems to be growing. The European states seem to
generally cluster together and the rate plot does indicate that they
have already or have begun flattening the curve. US has also begun the
flattening process albeit at a much larger rate commensurate with it
being a bigger country with many parallel outbreaks.

Now, let us take a closer look at Italy for which was the first to be
hit in Europe and for which I was able to find detailed data made
available on GitHub by Umberto Rosini et al:

[![italy\_mort.Sun.Apr.12.2020](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/italy_mort.sun_.apr_.12.2020.png?w=653&h=475)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/italy_mort.sun_.apr_.12.2020.png)

Figure 3. The daily progression of various disease statistics is
presented starting from 24th Feb 2020. On Mon Mar 09 2020 after a steady
increase in death rate and mortality percentage Italy went into
lock-down. The effects were first seen approximately 2 weeks later and
it took nearly 21 days for sustained flattening of the infection rate,
decline in hospitalizations, and gradual decline in death rates to be
achieved. So Italy is test case of a country with a severe epidemic
where the lock-down did do its job. A similar trend is being observed in
the other hard hit countries. So in the least this shows that the
lock-down can consistently control the epidemic and perhaps there is
light at the end of the tunnel.

Noting this we are seeing the
“[*economists*](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/04/05/the-culmination-of-galtonism-or-pandemic-days-1/)”
raise their head again saying all this shutdown is an over-reaction
after all and it is not as threatening as it was made out to be by the
“[*epidemicists*](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/04/05/the-culmination-of-galtonism-or-pandemic-days-1/)”.
Their opinion is buoyed by preliminary reports of the serological survey
coming from the Gangelt town in Germany that many of the asymptomatics
(\~15%) have developed antibodies against the virus. While we would all
be happy to be done with this thing, we should add that one can hardly
get over-confident or think that this thing is over from the above
evidence of the turning of the curve. The curve has turned because of
the logical and easily demonstrable consequence of limiting social
interaction and movement in the population and not by itself. The one
country that is for most part letting the virus run through it is
Islamic Iran and we do not have reliable information of what really has
happened to them. While entirely anecdotal, statements by their head
Ayatollah that they do not want to lock-down even if a “2 million”
Islamic Iranians die suggests that they are facing much higher tolls
than acknowledged. Indeed the figure stated by the head Ayatollah might
be close to the order of the deaths in an unmitigated epidemic.

In this regard let us consider the following:  
(1) At this stage letting up on the lock-down because the curve is
beginning to turn would simply waste all the effort that has gone in.
The case of Italy (Figure 3) shows that the climb down is a gradual one
and even after 5 weeks of lock-down things are hardly close to life as
usual.  
(2) Let us assume there are lot more asymptomatics and untested
individuals than the actual numbers. For Italy, as of writing we have:
156363 cases. It has tested 1.674% of its population at the time of
writing. Let us assume that the true infected numbers are 50 times the
detected cases: in our opinion a reasonably relaxed assumption for the
asymptomatics and those not tested (taking that Gangelt study at face
value: in reality could lower). That means ![\\approx
13\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+13%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx 13\\%") of the population of Italy has been infected. Let us
next assume they are all immune to the disease in the near future. That
is a lot but still not enough to give you the so-called herd immunity.
Hence, we have our doubts that even assuming massive under-detection
Italy has reached state of herd immunity against this virus, which would
need 50-70% of the population to be immune.  
(3) The presence of antibodies does not necessarily mean complete
immunity: we still do not have a clear idea of: (i) how protective are
these antibodies; (ii) how dependent is such immunity on infection dose;
(iii) how long this immunity lasts.  
(4) Finally, when the infections finally fall to a manageable level how
well can a country take the next step of more specific tracing and
containment of the holdouts? If that cannot be worked out, given the
above that we are likely not near herd-immunity, there is considerable
risk to at least some countries (more on this below).

All these are considerations at the gross country level but what about
more circumscribed systems like New York City? 103208 people in this
giant city of ![\\approx 8.242624 \\times
10^6](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+8.242624+%5Ctimes+10%5E6&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx 8.242624 \\times 10^6") were reported as being infected at the
time of writing. That makes it ![\\approx
1.25\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+1.25%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\approx 1.25\\%") of the city. Now, if they were under-testing by 50
times then the city might be closer to herd immunity. However, given
that they comprise roughly 15% of the tests done in the US, they are
likely not under-testing by 50 times but perhaps more like 15 times. So,
even in NYC probably only about 18..20% of the population has been
infected, which is still short of herd immunity. Serological tests will
tell us how far these estimates are from the reality. In light of all
this uncertainty, as the Lebanese thinker N. N. Taleb has often pointed
out, there is much reason to be conservative and cautious, i.e., keep
over-reacting rather than the opposite in the coming days despite the
fatigue we are facing.

Now we come to some geopolitical considerations. There are some natural
systems where a parasite is mild in one host and severe in another.
These might be used by the first against the second host if they are in
a biological conflict with each other. One classic example is the
Dhole-*Sarcocystis*-herbivore system. Here, part of the population of
the dhole, a social canid found in Indian jungles, is infected by the
apicomplexan parasite *Sarcocystis* which it sheds via feces. The effect
of *Sarcocystis* in the gut of the dhole seems to be relatively mild.
However, when herbivores like hare or deer consume the fecally
contaminated plants they get infected by the parasite, which invades
their heart muscles and weakens their stamina and probably speed. This
makes them easier prey for the dholes and allows completion of the
parasite cycle. Bats harbor lots of coronaviruses and filoviruses among
others to which some of them might be immune. Bats are also social and
engaging in communal behaviors such as guarding of pups and harems. One
wonders if their partly domesticated viruses help in the warfare against
rival assemblages of bats competing for similar nesting resources or
harems.

In the current crisis it is possible that some nations have used their
relative success against the virus in a similar capacity as above. Some
hold that the Urheimat of the virus, Cīna-deśa, at first sight, might
seem to have benefited in the net from unleashing this on the world by
way of their lies and manipulation of information. However, this is not
certain for now because of their [Galtonian linkage with the
Occiden](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/02/26/the-plague-historical-biographical-and-current-a-brief-roundup/)t.
The Occident being in lock-down is no longer serving as a good market
for the Cīna-s. Further, there is at least some impetus from the
pandemic in the Occident, Japan and India to decouple from the Cīna-s.
If this goes through then the Cīna gains from this might be limited and
it could even prove detrimental for them. While the Cīna-s are trying to
use the opportunity to acquire ailing assets in Europe or Australia,
there is a concerted effort to try to limit this. Hence, their gains
remain unknown. An election result in the US presidential elections that
unseats the current ruler could, however, change this and place the
Cīna-s in an advantageous position. This can be amplified by the Cīna
assets among the left-liberals and academics in the West who are
ceaselessly batting for them as we speaking. Indeed, the removal of dogs
from the list of consumable livestock by the Cīna-s rather than being a
public health measure is a signal to these assets in the West who are
typically cynophilic in their orientation. In Europe, the relative
success of Germany might mean its even greater ascendancy in the
continent perhaps along with the German-speaking Austria — this was not
certain until recently given that they could have been badly hit by the
large number of vallūra-dasyu-s streaming in from the marusthala. Their
traditional rivals the English are also doing poorly suggesting that
they ability to limit the śūla-puruṣa-s in the near future might be
limited. But we must confess that the long-term prognostics of this
event are not entirely clear for we are hardly done with it and the
aftermath could have its own fluctuations. In Asia, so far Vietnam,
Taiwan, S. Korea and Japan have done relatively well at differing levels
and this might help them to differing degrees. The low-fertility Koreans
might not be able to gain much beyond surviving this, but the Vietnamese
and Taiwanese could benefit from any manufacturing shifts from China.
The Japanese might have shown a middling success against the Wuhan
disease but, as ever having the islands for themselves, they are
probably going to suffer economically to a lesser degree than some of
their rivals.

Finally, we come to India, which has done well in two ways: (i) It
started mitigation early with the Dillīśvara realizing the threat from
this virus early. (ii) For reasons which are not entirely clear India
has kept relatively low rate of infection (Figures 1 and 2). This has
puzzled a lot of people in the Occident, even as the traditional
constituents of the mleccha-marūmattābhisaṃdhi are hoping that Bhārāta
goes down to the virus. We routinely see that public Western
liberal/academic types egged by their iriṇavātūla friends are barely
concealing their wish for the worst to happen to India on the internet —
just ask yourself if these types would hope the same for Cīna-s,
śāntidūta-s or mūlavātūla-s. Initially, people thought it was the
weather and more recently the theory regarding the role of the BCG
vaccine has gained some traction. We are not certain of either of these
because a counter-argument can been made for both proposal based on the
countries which are doing badly.

However, we are not entirely unsympathetic towards the BCG explanation.
It reminded us of an inquiry we did with Aurvaśeyī as undergrads. She
was at that point still in the MBBS course and asked me what I thought
about something she had dug up: Albert Calmette one of the inventors of
the vaccine had noted that the mortality of children who had received
the vaccine was significantly lower first few years of their life than
that of children who had not. She pointed out that this had since been
reproduced in India, where both of us had received the vaccine. I did
not have an immediate explanation but became curious about this. We soon
dug up some information that in some places people receiving BCG even
had reduced mortality from malaria and other febrile illnesses. Other
studies have shown that BCG vaccination reduced hospitalizations from
respiratory diseases other than TB in children under 14 years. Thus, it
became clear that the BCG vaccine was activating a more general immune
response that had a broadly protective value. Hence, this can in
principle be a factor in the resistance to the Wuhan disease in India.
Our review of the BCG immunology revealed that a lot of good stuff seems
to happen upon vaccination: First, the adaptive T-cell based immune
response involving both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with
Interferon-![\\gamma](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cgamma&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\gamma") production and enhancement of anti-mycobacterial activity of
macrophages occurs. This
IFN-![\\gamma](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cgamma&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\gamma") also activates B-cell based immunity via antibody generation
against the TB actinobacterium. Second, 1-2 months after BCG vaccination
there is induction long-lived memory B cells that can provide long-term
TB protection. More non-specifically, it might also induce IgG and IgA
production against other pathogens. Third, it seems to have a complex
role in regulating various immune responses, such as one hand inducing
TH1/TH17 responses to unrelated pathogens. On the other it might induce
a Treg based immunomodulation or one where activated CD4+ T cells
undergo
IFN-![\\gamma](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cgamma&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\gamma")-induced apoptosis. This could control the hypercytokinenemia
seen in SARS-CoV-2 pathology — indeed BCG has shown promise in certain
autoimmune conditions. There could be other actions that we poorly
understand like the immunity-enhancing roles of *Mycobacterium indicus
pranii* or *Mycobacterium vaccae*. Indeed, we have wondered if M. vaccae
might have general health benefits that can be widely exploited further
along with a BCG vaccination.

Whatever the case, so far the basic growth of the Wuhan disease in India
is at a lower rate. However, in India it has become a weapon for
bioterrorism in the hands of the ārtanarākṣasa-s who have been the
primary cause for countering the otherwise rather effective measures of
the Lāṭanareśa. Hence, we fear this could cause the disease to fester in
the deśa because contact-tracing and enforcement of isolation is
difficult in the deśa and particularly so in the mini-Pakistans that dot
it. The śāntipravartaka-s having seen an opening could continue to use
it to their advantage even as their rākṣasotsava breaks out. However,
there are things which cannot be stated in public and if the opportunity
is seized in conjunction with mollifying the mleccha-s with
hydroxychloroquine and the like the Hindus could still come out
relatively less harmed by the pandemic. At this time it is we remain
cautious about the prognosis of the deśa and the conflict between the
opposing forces hangs in balance.
