+++
title = "The Plague: historical, biographical and current: a briefxa0roundup"

+++
Globalization is not a new thing. The Indo-European empire of the
steppes was perhaps the first one. In addition to having a serious
component of our genetic ancestry and most of our memetic inheritance in
it, we can still see its impact worldwide. It perhaps laid the
foundations for the human global system (the idea that a world system
could exist) but there is not much that remains in terms of the precise
memory of it. However, the empire founded by Chingiz Khan and his
capable successors is still very much a part of our historical memory.
At its peak under the grandsons of Chingiz Khan it resulted in a
globalization not entirely different from modernity. The Qubilai Khan
even imagined the Phags-pa script based on the Brāhmī family as a means
to write all languages of the world. The support for paper currency, a
postal system, efficient passport control and the ability to conduct
trade through the known world under Pax Mongolica created a certain
globalization that contributed to the prosperity of the Mongol empire
and its neighbors. But concomitant with its collapse a great plague came
out of East Asia and spread westwards to destroy anywhere between 1/3 to
1/2 of Europe’s population with the trading cities in Italy being
particularly hard hit. The effects of this Black Death plague caused by
*Yersinia pestis* on Europe are widely documented but it is not entirely
clearly if it seriously affected India. There is little evidence for
such from inscriptional records even though we have documents like the
Vilāsa copper plates which record the contemporaneous destruction on the
scale of the Black Death in India caused by the śānti-dūta-s bearing the
third West Asian disease of the mind. The plague did strike India later
around the time we were locked in a life-and-death struggle for
independence from the English in 1857 CE and later after their conquest
was complete. Nevertheless, this combination of the destruction caused
by the Black Death, that spread by the throat-slicing śānti-dūta-s and
the collapse of the Mongol empire brought an end to this globalization
of the 12-1300s.

In the 11th year of our life we became interested in deciphering the
grand picture of evolutionary history of viruses. We have off and on
returned to that project to this date whenever we have had resources
with a degree of success. From that time on a more informal thought used
to run through in our head: Could a repeat of the scenario like the
Black death bubonic plague happen again? We wondered about the mleccha
use of *Bacillus anthracis* in Africa and if that might go out of hand
or if *Yersinia pestis* might gain antibiotic resistance. Such a fear
still remains as the plague outbreaks in Madagascar cause death on the
island and some AB resistant strains have been found there. However,
given antibiotics we wondered if a more likely modern scenario for such
an outbreak was a viral one. There was the excitement over HIV in those
days but it was clear that it was mostly avoidable with behavioral
corrections. The stories of the outbreaks of Lassa fever and the
Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever caused by Bunyaviruses, Marburg and
Ebola caused by filoviruses raised the possibility of such a viral
outbreak being reality. This fear came back when we were in the deśa
about 9 years ago and the Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever sent the
patient along with his nurse and doctor to the abode of Vivasvān’s son.
In another direction it also led us to thinking about whether such
highly infectious and fatal viruses might eventually evolve to
self-limit even as the Myxoma poxvirus introduced by the mleccha-s to
kill the rabbits that they had brought along to Australia. This in turn
got us interested the mathematics of the logistic map.

In our early explorations of viruses we only briefly studied the
nidoviruses in 1995 CE being largely focused on other positive-strand
RNA viruses in which we discovered multiple families of thiol
peptidases. It was at the dawn of the new millennium that we revisited
them in course of discovering a new RNA-processing enzyme in a branch of
nidoviruses known as coronaviruses. Shortly, thereafter there was a
major outbreak of a coronavirus in the form of the SARS epidemic. This
again brought to mind our old musing on a viral replay of the Black
Death plague but it mostly died out without being anything of such
proportions. However, it added the coronavirus as another candidate to
the list which was otherwise impressively populated by negative strand
RNA viruses. This was only reinforced by the Arabian disease cause by
another related clade of coronaviruses MERS. But this apparently was
just the beginning and these viruses were destined to hit the world in a
bigger way.

In what follows we give some background for a lay reader: coronaviruses
belong to a clade of RNA viruses (i.e. have RNA as their genome) known
as nidoviruses. The nidoviruses are among the RNA viruses with the
largest genomes that are currently known to us (e.g. the 31 kb genome of
the Mouse Hepatitis Virus). Their genomes appear to have grown in size
because of acquiring a proof-reading exoRNase enzyme, similar to what
cellular organisms use to proofread their DNA during replication, and
some RNA end-processing enzymes like the one we discovered. The
nidoviruses in turn belong to a vast and ancient radiation of
positive-strand RNA viruses (i.e. their genome can directly serve as a
template for translation into proteins) that are marked by a particular
type of RNA polymerase (enzyme that replicates the virus) which in turn
belongs to a vast radiation of replicative polymerase enzymes that
include those that replicate the retroviruses like HIV and also DNA in
our own cells. Thus, these viruses have their ultimate roots in an
ancient world of replicators from which all life has arise. Within the
nidovirus clade, there are viruses like: 1) *Plasmopara viticola*
nidovirus which infects an eponymous oomycete, which in turn infects the
grapevine to cause the downy mildew; 2) the *Aplysia californica*
nido-like virus which infects the eponymous slugs; 3) Yellow Head Virus
which infects arthropods like shrimps; 4) Dak Nong, Cavally and Nam Dinh
viruses which infect arthropods like mosquitoes; 5) the White Bream
Virus (WBV) which infects fishes; 6) Coronoviruses which infect mammals
and dinosaurs. 7) Toroviruses related to WBV Ateriviruses which infect
mammals. In mammals and dinosaurs these mostly cause gastrointestinal
and respiratory tract diseases.

There is some information in the public domain that gives some
misleading claims that the known coronaviruses have all diverged
relatively recently from their common ancestor: like in the past 10000
years and for the more terminal divergences in the past few centuries.
As some researchers have already pointed, out this is false. Given this
distribution of nidoviruses they are very unlikely to have the recent
divergence times, which are likely the result of the application of
wrong molecular clock assumptions to infer branching times on their
tree. Instead we think they probably have been around from early in
animal evolution with the coronavirus branch itself being over 20-30
![\\times
10^6](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctimes+10%5E6&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\times 10^6")Y in age. The scenario we favor is thus: the nidoviruses
first entered vertebrates from them feeding on invertebrates like
molluscs or crustaceans. Alternatively (less likely), blood-feeding
invertebrates like mosquitoes transmitted them to vertebrates. Once in
vertebrates they have mainly transmitted through the oral and
respiratory route (that’s why latter alternative is less likely). The
prevalence of coronaviruses in bats and birds raises the possibility
that these flying vertebrates contributed to their wide dissemination
with a likely early exchange between birds and bats perhaps from shared
nesting sites.

Fast forward to 2020 CE. The civil year began with the news report of a
SARS-like pneumonia disease in Wuhan, China. The first cases were
noticed in December of the earlier year. By Jan 10th it was clear that
we were seeing something big which the Cīna-s were probably covering up.
In the month that followed the Cīna cover-up and the epidemic only kept
increasing. Now, it is poised to be a pandemic. The hit to the
globalization of our age is already being seen. As of today people are
talking of breaks in the supply lines and the stocks are in a state of
volatility. A researcher mentioned in the Cell journal that it is
shaping much like the pathogen that we had imagined in our scenarios of
the replay of the Black Death plague (termed pathogen X in the report).
This pathogen is a coronavirus related to SARS dubbed SARS-CoV-2 and the
disease has been named COVID-19. The attention is shifting away from the
Cīna epicenter, perhaps much as the Cīna-s had hoped, because as of the
time of writing, the virus is now rapidly spreading in Japan, Korea,
Iran and Italy and sporadic cases are turning up throughout western
Europe bringing home the global threat it poses \[between the time we
started and finished this note a situation has unfolded at a hotel in
Tenerife and had established a bridgehead in Spain\]. Countries like the
US which despite their wealth look rather ill-prepared to handle it
hitting the country. Supposedly, the 3 Indian cases have recovered and
there are no new ones. Is this because of the increasing temperatures a
known susceptibility of the lipid-coated coronaviruses? Africa is
another strange case which despite intimate contact with the Cīna-s in
several nations has not reported much dissemination. We suspect they
might not be closely monitoring or reporting the cases and we could hear
of them in the near future (But could sub-Saharan Africans have a degree
of natural immunity?).

A serious blame for this disaster lies with Cīna-s for their cover-up.
But the Cīna cover-up comes directly from the fact that they are deeply
entangled with the Occident. Since Francis Galton the Occident has had a
certain kind of Cīna-fetish: Galton had hoped that the Cīna-s, whom he
held to be superior to the Hindoos, could be placed in Africa where they
could take over the land from the Black Africans evidently under the
benign stewardship of the English. The American component of the
Occident first used the Black Africans as slaves to get their dirty jobs
done as they lived in relative prosperity. As slavery ended and the
post-World War-2 world unfolded they need a new mechanism to lead large
lives. This mechanism was Galtonian in its conception as it shipped
skilled labor to the Cīna-s who provided the Occident with modern goods
at a low price. This in turn helped raise the Cīna-s out of poverty but
also created a serious dependency on the western consumption of finished
commodities. This dependency is entwined with their national pride and
calls for not halting production at any cost. This facilitated the
suppression of the news of the seriousness of the outbreak with outright
denial in the beginning followed by fudged numbers. With long supply
lines of the Occident and even of traditional trading partners like
India leading into the depths of China the spillover of this agent was a
given. This raises one of the biggest questions about the sustainability
of the long supply lines and argues for the value of self-contained
localism. The other side of this surfacing of the fear of the alien
which happens under such crises. During the Black Death plague various
trading and mobile communities came under attack and were massacred in
different European cities. Even with the current episode we are hearing
reports of attacks on Cīna-s in the West and even associated bystander
Hindus.

Like SARS, COVID-19 seems primarily to kills via respiratory failure.
However, going by the reports outside China, which are likely more
reliable, its mortality rate seems lower than SARS but certainly much
higher than influenza. Ironically just a few weeks back people were
saying the influenza is a bigger danger than COVID-19\! In any case it
has several nasty features: 1) It seems to have a fairly long incubation
time which could go over 2 weeks. 2) It is highly infectious as the
infections on the cruise-ship docked in Japan showed. We would say it
has a higher mean
![R\_0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=R_0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"R_0") than SARS, i.e. the mean number of individuals an infected
individual transmits the virus to. 3) Several patients are asymptomatic
but appear potentially capable of shedding and transmitting the virus.
4) It is still not very clear if means of transmission other than
through droplets exist. This combination of features make it a rather
dangerous thing: it has all the stealth features for wide dissemination
on one hand and enough of a mortality rate to be fear-inducing on the
other.

Finally, we comment on one point that ignorant or lay people often ask
us about. Is this an engineered biological warfare agent? People could
ask what about the experiments which were done several years ago on the
high mortality bird flu H5N1 to partly engineer it and partly select it
to turn it into one which transmits between mammals (ferrets). Could
such a thing have been done with SARS to get this virus. Given that we
have now spent sometime closely examining its genome and have even found
some interesting features we can say this is not the case. It is very
much a natural virus in all ways particularly close to a SARS-clade
virus that infects bats. Now a milder variant of the question is whether
it has escaped from a lab in China. The proponents of such a hypothesis
would point out that the epicenter of the epidemic, Wuhan, is a famous
center for virological research in China. Indeed, most the previously
published SARS-like coronaviruses were sequenced and published by the
lab in Wuhan. Further, in China there are incidents of the unscrupulous
consumption of lab animals after the experiments are done on them.
However, the key argument against this is that the Wuhan group published
several viral sequences in the past few years and none of them is
identical to SARS-CoV-2, even though, as mentioned above, one of them is
close. However, even this close relative could not have evolved into
SARS-CoV-2 in the lab from the time of its relatively recent isolation
given the number of substitutions in their RNA. However, one possibility
which cannot be entirely ruled out is that they had only recently
isolated this particular virus and it escaped the lab even before they
could publish its genome. However, given the timeline of their research
on SARS-like viruses this is not evident in anyway.

One could point out that the Russians have a long history of developing
biological weapons. During WW2 they deployed *Francisella tularensis*
against the Germans. Few years later while assisting the Indian smallpox
vaccination program they look a particularly virulent Indian strain to
develop smallpox weapons in Russia which apparently caused some deaths
during accidental deployment. Another case was their development of the
Marburg Virus weapon which accidentally killed one of their virologists
involved in the program. Could the Cīna-s have been doing something like
that and could this be an escape like the Russian cases? If so it would
imply considerable sophistication on part of the Cīna-s for which we do
not any evidence currently.

Whatever the cases this promises to be a serious global threat in the
coming days. We had an old fictitious story about the deployment of an
[engineered
virus](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/05/06/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth/).
Something from [the last part of that tale
applies](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth-the-end/)
to these SARS-like coronaviruses. Hopefully, with time it can see the
light of the day.
