+++
title = "Pandemic days-4: viruses get newxa0hosts"

+++
That we have come to be in these pandemic days evokes some wonderment or
even disbelief among laypeople. The general thinking of a large section
of the populace is that this event is something completely unexpected or
out of the way. Hence, some of them are quite prone to invoke different
kinds of outre explanations, the most common being: “It must be a Cīna
bioweapon (I hear from Cīna-s that in their midst it is common to think
of it as a mleccha bioweapon).” In the least many of them might say it
is something “unnatural”. However, for those more familiar with the
natural history of these matters it is more of an expected thing that
was almost waiting to happen and events specifically like this have
probably happened going back some time into the past. The only thing we
could not say is when exactly it would happen. In this note we shall
rehash these matters in the language of an educated layperson. In our
earlier writings on this we sort of took it for granted that this is
probably clear to everyone but apparently it is not and in any case
there are some interesting points to place out there for the reader.

First, it is not that pandemics are a distant memory; they happen quite
frequently with the the negative-strand RNA viruses of the influenza
genus: many people might remember H1N1 influenza and some may have even
gotten it. Older people will remember how the retrovirus HIV-1 caused
the AIDS pandemic. Of course none of these were anywhere as crippling as
the current Wuhan disease but these at least give us a feel for the
potentialities of such things and that they are not a matter of distant
folktale. Second, apart from pandemics there have been several smaller
viral outbreaks like Ebolavirus and Henipavirus, both also
negative-strand RNA viruses. Third, there is also the regular
vector-borne pestilence of the positive-strand RNA viruses from which
you or somebody in your family might have suffered or died: the
flaviviruses, like the Yellow fever virus, Japanese encephalitis virus,
West Nile virus, Dengue virus and Zika virus and their more distant
relative the togavirus, Chikungunya virus. Not be left behind we even
have the occasional Nucleo-cytoplasmic Large DNA virus like the
Monkeypox virus give a smallpox look-alike to its victims. Thus,
infectious viral disease is very much part of our existence and it does
not take much imagination to see one of these will emerge to deliver a
punch more to the extreme right end of the distribution of effects.

Of course when this is pointed out someone would say: “Come on, did any
of those put us in a state like what we are in right now? This
coronavirus is special \!” There is a reason I did not mention
coronaviruses in the above list — they are indeed special in a way to
deserve separate consideration but what we are experiencing is also
quite expected given what we know of the natural history of these the
coronaviruses. To apprehend this distinction let us first look at some
examples of other viruses acquired by humans from non-human animals.
There have been numerous crossovers of viruses between different species
in course of evolution. For example, the positive-strand RNA
hepeliviruses, which include the likes of the animal Rubella and
Hepatitis E viruses on one hand and the plant Beet necrotic yellow vein
viruses on the other represent an extreme crossover between plants and
animals. Thus, this process is an unavoidable part of life. There many
more cases of recent crossovers of viruses from non-human animals to
humans, some of which are well-studied. However, the mode in which these
crossovers get established in humans makes a big difference: the
vector-borne flaviviruses and togaviruses are easy to establish in
humans from the bite of an insect like the ubiquitous mosquito but to
keep transmitting they need more of those bites in the critical phase of
viremia (when the virus is in the blood). This is in principle
preventable to quite a degree by relatively simple means like the use of
insect repellents (already mentioned in the Atharvaveda) or mosquito
nets (a luxury that even the normally morose tathāgata allowed for his
saṃgha around 2500 years ago). Indeed, some countries have done quite
well with with various insect-borne viruses by relatively simple but
rigorous prevention programs.  
[![HIV1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/hiv1.png?w=660&h=453)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/hiv1.png)Figure
1. A cryo-electron micrographic image of the capsid of the HIV-1 virus:
a beautiful object.

Another very well-studied example of crossover from non-human animals to
human is AIDS, which is caused by two distinct but related viruses,
HIV-1 and HIV-2. Of these, HIV-1 was transmitted from chimpanzees and
gorillas to humans in west central Africa on at least 4 distinct
occasions (2 times from chimps, 1 time from gorilla and 1 time from
either). Only one of these (HIV-1 M) after festering in Africa for
nearly 30-50 years radiated out of the Kinshasa region to establish a
global pandemic. Chimps in turn acquired the chimp precursor of HIV-1,
SIVcpz, from the SIV infecting Cercopithecus and Cercocebus monkeys
which they prey upon. The monkeys infected with SIV are unaffected by
the virus and lead a mostly normal life. However, in chimps it is
sexually transmitted with roughly the same probability per heterosexual
coitus (0.0008–0.0015 ) as in humans (0.0011) and greatly increases the
mortality of the infected ape. Its dispersion through the chimp
populations appears to have been primarily driven by the mobility of
infected females. Gorillas appear to have acquired SIVgor from chimps.
Since gorillas do not hunt chimps or vice versa but both live in
overlapping ranges, it raises the possibility of rare gorilla-chimp
matings during which the infection was transmitted. The acquisition of
HIV-2 by humans was from a Cercocebus monkey (sooty mangabey) precursor,
SIVsmm. Given that in the monkey community the highest infection by
SIVsmm is seen in high-ranked females, it is evidently harmless to the
monkeys. In humans too only a minority of the infected individuals
proceed to developing AIDS and it is limited to West Africa. While
human-chimp/gorilla matings might have occurred on rare occasions, the
relatively low and similar probability of sexual transmission in humans
and chimps, and the HIV-2 crossover from monkeys suggest that both HIVs
primarily originated from mucosal contacts or blood during “bush-meat”
hunting — thus humans and chimps got AIDS in a similar way from their
prey. However, after crossover from monkeys its transmission in all
three great apes (Homo included) is primarily sexual. At least in
humans, this is still a relatively low probability event per coitus and
quite preventable by behavioral means. Thus, even the famous AIDS
pandemic took a long time to break out and only one out 5 independent
non-human to human crossovers resulted in a pandemic. Not surprisingly,
it was eventually managed quite effectively in the general population
except for the locations with exaggerated sexual promiscuity.

Coming to coronaviruses proper, apart from being in the hall of fame for
having the largest single-segmented RNA genomes, they are specialists of
transmission by the respiratory and the orofecal route. Since, you
cannot avoid getting air, food or water into your body these viruses are
much harder to manage than the rest once they jump to humans. Moreover,
primates being very “facially” oriented creatures, have particular risk
to infection by these modes. It is this distinction that makes them one
of the most likely viral agents to pack a big punch if they establish a
pandemic. In evolutionary terms, the crown clade of coronaviruses
consists of 4 major subclades: the alphacoronaviruses (alpha-CoV) and
betacoronaviruses (beta-CoV) which primarily infect mammals form one
higher order group. Basal to them are the deltacoronaviruses and
gammacoronaviruses primarily infect birds (Figure 2; but see below for
exceptions). Outside of these lie the more basal Gull Coronavirus and
the lizard-infecting Guangdong Chinese water skink coronavirus. This
suggests that the original radiation of the coronaviruses was likely in
the late Paleozoic-Mesozoic where they emerged in reptiles and probably
infected both the great branches of reptiles lepidosaurs (including
lizards) and archosaurs (including dinosaurs). With the close of the
Mesozoic they lingered on in the surviving dinosaurs, i.e. the birds, as
the delta-CoV and gamma-CoV lineages. From birds it is likely that they
made at least two major jumps to mammals probably facilitated by these
vertebrates sharing a warm-blooded physiology with body temperatures in
the same general range. One was to bats, which was probably via shared
nesting sites and this founded the alpha-CoV and beta-CoV lineages
within bats. The next primary transmission, probably due to predation of
birds by dolphins transmitted the gamma-CoVs to dolphins/whales. The
alpha-CoV and beta-CoV radiated extensively in bats alongside numerous
other viruses such as the negative-strand RNA filoviruses (Ebola-like),
henipaviruses, and lyssaviruses (rabies) for which bats play great
hosts. Further, from bats and birds coronaviruses appear to have
episodically invaded a wide range of placental mammals.

[![coronaviruses](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/coronaviruses.jpg?w=700&h=285)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/coronaviruses.jpg)

Figure 2. Modified from original figure published in “Discovery of a
Novel Coronavirus, China Rattus Coronavirus HKU24, from Norway Rats
Supports the Murine Origin of Betacoronavirus 1 and Has Implications for
the Ancestor of Betacoronavirus Lineage A” by Susanna K. P. Lau et al.

In the past 20 years we have been witness to several such invasions of
humans and domesticated mammals (Figure 2):  
1\) SARS-CoV of the Beta-CoV clade, the agent of the SARS outbreak which
began in November 2002 in Foshan City, Guangdong, China, definitely
started from bats but reached humans via civets, which are eaten by the
Cīna-s. In August 2003 a virology student in Singapore and in April 2004
two laboratory personnel at the Chinese Institute of Virology in Beijing
were independently infected by laboratory SARS-CoV due to poor
virological technique.  
2\) In 2012 MERS outbreak started in Arabia with the transmission of a
distinct beta-CoV from dromedaries to humans. Dromedaries are often
imported to Arabia from Africa where a closely related virus has been
found in bats suggesting that the camels first acquired it from bats in
Africa and then transmitted it humans.  
3\) Again in 2012, the coronavirus HKU15 was detected in pigs in Hong
Kong. This delta-CoV appears to have jumped from birds to mammals
probably in the unhygienic live markets of China. In 2014 it caused
outbreaks of a diarrheal disease in several states of the USA. In Asia
it seems to have further spread from pigs to wild cats.  
4\) In 2017, not far from the place of original SARS outbreak, in
Guangdong, China, a novel alpha-CoV caused a major outbreak of acute
swine diarrhea syndrome (SADS-CoV) decimating a large number of piglets,
which are an important food item of the Cīna-s. It was transmitted from
bats which are infected by a related HKU2r-CoV. Outbreaks of this virus
have continued in Chinese pig populations till as of an year back.  
5\) In November of 2019 a repeat performance of the SARS event happened
in Wuhan, China, with the related SARS-CoV-2 jumping from bats to humans
directly or via an intermediate which could have been something like
cats that are consumed by the Cīna-s. This has become the agent of the
current pandemic.

One thing we have learned from the intense scrutiny of the few proteins
encoded by the HIVs and SIVs it that they have evolved 3 independent
mechanisms (via the proteins Vpu in HIV-1 M, via Nef in SIV of chimps,
gorilla and monkeys, and Env in HIV-2) of countering a key general
purpose host immunity mechanism against enveloped viruses, namely
inhibition of the surface protein BST-2 (tetherin), which blocks the
budding of virions (viral particles). Interestingly, the SARS
coronavirus has evolved its own independent mechanism to do the same and
we believe a similar mechanism is used by its cousin SARS-CoV-2, the
causative agent of the Wuhan disease, and more generally by both
alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses. We shall not dilate on that
here (as it will touched upon in a more formal venue) but shall simply
state that such adaptations that allow disabling of this general
immunity mechanism appear to be one general convergent feature common to
distant viruses that might facilitate the jump to humans and closely
related apes.

Cīna authors themselves have stated in no unclear terms that the Cīna
love for “live (i.e. slaughtered on the pan) meat”, which is held to be
more nutritious in traditional Cīna medicine, provides huge
opportunities for such outbreaks to happen. Given that 4 different
coronavirus outbreaks have happened from crossovers with connections to
bush-meat or unhygienic live markets prior to 2019, from a natural
history standpoint the current pandemic was just a matter of time.
Further, the lab accidents resulting in infections and human-to-human
transmission in the Chinese case indicate that those too in principle
could be further sources of infection, especially in the Cīna context.
Notably, the way MERS reached the other end of Asia in the form of the
Korean outbreak and killed tens of people there showed how globalization
and
[Galtonism](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/04/05/the-culmination-of-galtonism-or-pandemic-days-1/)
would drive local epidemics to pandemics. Given all this, the current
pandemic is not unexpected since one of these outbreaks was eventually
going to hit the “sweet spot” like SARS-CoV-2, especially, as noted
above, coronaviruses are imminently suited for something like this. In
light of this, the utter failure in the response of several governments
all over the world shows that certain forms of predictive knowledge,
especially in the mathematical or biological domain, remain rather
privileged and are not easily grasped by the elite.

Given that we have had 5 coronaviral outbreaks in humans and livestock
in the past 20 years, one question that comes to mind is whether there
have been such coronaviral outbreaks/pandemics in the past? As we noted
before, pandemics from globalization is not a new thing; so, there is no
strong reason why there should not have been past coronaviral outbreaks.
Before SARS, coronaviruses were hardly seen as threatening to humans and
little effort was expended on the two human coronaviruses discovered in
the 1960s (see below). After SARS more attention was paid to the
apparently milder coronaviruses that infect humans yielding a wealth of
data. This growing interest led the discovery of a new alpha-CoV, HCoV
NL63, in 2004 as an agent of human respiratory disease. Subsequent
studies have shown that it is responsible for croup in children (a
condition already described in old Hindu medicine as caused by the
Śvagraha, an agent of the god Kumāra) and sometimes more serious lower
respiratory track involvement in both children and adults. Like
SARS-CoV-2, it appears to trigger rare instances of the Kawasaki disease
in children. Despite its recent discovery, HCoV NL63 does not represent
a recent crossover from non-human animals because at the time of its
discovery it was already a well-established pandemic. Nevertheless, its
closest relatives are viruses infecting bats which suggest that it might
have invaded humans ultimately from bats about 1000-500 years ago.
Another related alpha-CoV, HCoV 229E, which was discovered in 1966 and
has subsequently been shown to be a notable cause respiratory infections
throughout the world with a preponderance in immunocompromised
individuals. Interestingly, an early serological study in the 1960s
showed that HCoV 229E antibodies were detected primarily in adults as
opposed to near absence in children — something which reminds one of the
higher severity of SARS-CoV-2 in adults as opposed to children. The
closest relatives of HCoV 229E are again found in bats and suggest a
crossover perhaps in the last 2000 years.

Another comparable pair of human coronaviruses are HCoV OC43 and HCoV
HKU1 that belong to the so-called “lineage A” of Beta-CoV. The HCoV
OC43, the first human coronavirus to be discovered, was reported in 1965
as “a novel type of common-cold virus.” Subsequently, it has been widely
reported as major cause of upper respiratory tract infections (perhaps
5-30% of such infections) and a more severe lower respiratory track
involvement as a pneumonia in elderly people. Interestingly, it has been
reported to also cause rare instances of fatal encephalitis and
Kawasaki’s disease, both of which have also been seen with SARS-CoV-2.
Notably, in one survey up to 57% of the patients with HCoV OC43
infections reported enteric tract manifestations. Indeed, early studies
in the 1980s associated strains of HCoV OC43 with human gastroenteritis.
This is again rather reminiscent of the enteric involvement suggested
for SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Following the renewed interest in
these viruses in the post-SARS era, a related virus HCoV HKU1 was
reported in 2004 from a 71-year-old man with pneumonia who had just
returned to Hong Kong from Shenzhen, China. A subsequent survey showed
that it was also widely established in humans across the world and
primarily caused a “cold-like” URTI though in some cases it might worsen
to a pneumonia. However, it causes a significantly higher incidence of
febrile seizures than other respiratory tract viruses. These two
beta-CoVs have no particularly close relatives among bat viruses.
Instead, HCoV OC43 belongs to a complex of closely viruses in “lineage
A” including the bovine coronavirus (BCoV) and the equine coronavirus
(ECoV) both of which cause episodic outbreaks of enteric disease,
sometimes with respiratory manifestations in livestock. Of the two, HCoV
OC43 is closer to the the BCoV. In 1994, a recent crossover of BCoV to
humans was reported resulting in a case of acute diarrhea in a human
patient (HECV-4408). This suggests that HCoV OC43 represents another
such earlier crossover from cattle that got established in humans as a
pandemic. It is not clear when exactly this happened but likely it
happened sometime after the domestication of cattle by humans. Some have
proposed that OC43 was the agent of the “Russian flu” in 1889-1890 CE.
However, we believe that this is based on erroneous molecular clocks
estimates. However, it cannot be ruled out that the “Russian flu” was
another viral cross over. In contrast, HCoV HKU1 defines a distinct
subclade within “lineage A” but is nested among rodent coronaviruses
such as the Murine Hepatitis virus, the Rat-CoV and the China Rat HKU24.
This suggests that it might have crossed over from rodents which are
widely consumed by humans in East Asia (Figure 2).

There are some interesting common features of above-discussed four human
coronaviruses: today they cause relatively mild URTIs in healthy
individuals but have the potential for causing more serious conditions
including fatal pneumonia or neural complications. This is reminiscent
of SARS-CoV-2, which is relatively mild in majority of individuals but
causes a far more severe infection in the rest (of course at a much
higher rate than the above-mentioned CoVs). This raises the possibility
that they were once virulent viruses comparable to SARS-CoV-2 that
crossed over directly or indirectly from bats, cattle and rodents in the
past and have now evolved to a mild state due to selection on the host
and virus. Thus, in these milder human CoVs we might be seeing remnants
of a past outbreaks that might have begun as severe infections in some
ways comparable to the current one. What might be the scenarios in which
they might have begun? At least HCoV OC43 may have started early with
cattle domestication. In contrast, HCoV NL63 and HCoV 229E from bats and
HCoV HKU1 from rodents probably originated in China or elsewhere East
Asia where consumption of such animals is prevalent. Africa is another
possibility, though the relatively low connectivity of Africa to the
rest of the world until not long ago makes it less likely. The 2007, the
camelids known as alpacas (llamas) were found to be infected by a novel
coronavirus closely related to HCoV 229E resulting in the  alpaca
respiratory disease. This points to a recent crossover from another
animal source — this evidently parallels the original crossover of the
related virus to humans. These pre-modern events probably spread more
slowly than today’s SARS-CoV-2 and could have even involved a relatively
severe local epidemic followed by attenuation of the virus before a
wider spread. This also suggests that, barring successful intervention,
such a trajectory is probably the one by which SARS-CoV-2 will become
less threatening.

This course of attenuation seems to follow a full circle: Both SIV/HIV
and coronaviruses are asymptomatic or mild respectively in monkeys and
bats. Once they crossover to apes the disease is way more severe and
fitness reducing. Then eventually they might reconfigure to a milder
state in the new host. Indeed, in traditionally bat-eating tribes of
Africa, India and East Asia there might have been past epidemics which
were generally limited due to the isolation of these tribe and over time
attenuated forms of the virus probably emerged giving them higher
immunity against such viruses. Those viruses that established a severe
infection in humans probably limited themselves in the pre-modern era as
they rapidly destroyed the populations they invaded before they could
access another population. Thus, the drive tends to be towards a more
attenuated state over time unless other factors are in play. However,
this is a complex process as the virus first undergoes selection for
better establishment in the new host which might not necessarily
attenuate it in the early stages and then probably it undergoes more
attenuating changes. The first set of such changes happened in both the
SIV/HIV and also in parallel in SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. In SARS-CoV it
is primarily in the form of the disruption or loss of a viral protein
called ORF8 whose mystery we have finally solved and will be presented
in a more formal venue. This happened independently in Singaporean
isolates of SARS-CoV-2 suggesting that the two viruses are likely under
similar selection from human immunity.

Studies on SIV/HIV infectivity has shown that Old World monkeys are
resistant to HIV-1 because they likely have multiple defenses against
it. The best studied is the TRIM5 protein which inactivates the virus by
interfering with the proper uncoating of the viral capsid inside the
cell. Old World Monkeys also produce a cyclic peptide retrocyclin-2,
which is a broad-spectrum anti-microbial killing both bacteria and
HIV-1. Neither does the human TRIM5 bind HIV efficiently nor do humans
produce retrocyclin-2. Such changes illustrate things happening on the
host side due to natural selection by episodes of viral outbreaks. One
may ask why lose such potent defenses? First, TRIM5 is under selection
depending on the episodes of retroviral epidemics a population goes
through; thus, it may evolve away from one specificity towards what is
the latest danger. So a past epidemic evidently drew TRIM5 specificity
in great apes of our lineage away from HIV-1 binding because that was a
more demanding pressure. Thus, when HIV-1 entered human populations they
were in a state of adaptation that was likely still directed at a now
gone virus. Second, the case of SARS-CoV-2 illustrates that much of the
human morbidity appears to arise from self-damage caused by an
unregulated immune response in some individuals. Thus, viral pressure
can also select against some immune weaponry that can cause such
self-damage. This can result in evolution of a more attenuated
interaction of the host with the virus. However, this can also come at
the expense of once effective weaponry which is lost under such
selection — it is possible that we lost retrocyclin-2 due to some past
pathogen pressure acting at the base of the great ape lineage. This also
reminds one the actions of the Cīna researcher who created Crispr Ding
and Crispr Dong by editing out the gene for the CCR5 7-transmembrane
receptor — the receptor used by HIV-1 to get into cells. However, CCR5
is a receptor protein for at least 5 signaling proteins called
chemokines in the immune system. While it might provide resistance to
HIV-1 and in the past might have also interacted with the Smallpox
Virus, it is rather useful for immunity against other viruses like the
West Nile virus. Hence, docking it might actually increase
susceptibility in a different direction.
