+++
title = "Matters of religion-4"

+++
Pinakasena was visiting Somakhya and Lootika. He was seeking instruction
on the Sadyojāta-mantra from his hosts: “O Ātharvaṇa and Śāradvatī, I
wish to learn the rahasya-s pertaining to the deployment of the
Sadyojāta-mantra to the great god Kumāra, the patron deity of all our
clans. We have borne his worship since the time our ancestors were in
the now fallen lands of Gandhāra in Uttarāpatha. Then they bore it to
the Yaudheya republic and then to Kānyakubja during the reign of emperor
of Harṣavardhana and finally to Dakṣiṇāpatha.”

His hosts led him to their fire room and seated him on the western side
of their aupāsana-vedi. There, they asked him to purify himself for the
ritual with the sprinkling using the mantra-s to divine horse
Dadhikrāvan and the waters. Lootika then signaled to him: “Offer the
pouring with with incantation to the daughters of Rudra”. Pinakasena did
as instructed:

namo rudriyābhyo .adbhyaH svāhā ||

Obeisance to the daughters of Rudra. Hail to the waters.

Somakhya: “Now invoke Prajāpati the lord of the Bhṛgu-s and Aṅgiras-es
and offer fire sticks to him”.

He did as instructed:

namaḥ parameṣṭhine prajāpataye svāhā hiraṇyagarbhāya svāhā bhṛgūṇāṃ
patye svāhā .aṅgirasāṃ pataye svāhā ||

Then he offered tarpaṇa-s:

vasubhyo namo rudrebhyo nama ādityebhyo marudbhyo namo mārutebhyo namo
.aśvibhyāṃ namo vaiśravaṇāya namo dharmāya namaḥ kāmāya namo ṛṣibhyo
nama ārṣeyebhyo namo aṅgirobhyo nama āṅgirasebhyo namo atharvebhyo nama
ātharvaṇebhyo namaḥ ||

Then he recited after his hosts and made oblations at the appropriate
calls:

yaś chandasām ṛṣabho viśvarūpaś chandobhyaś chandāṃsy āviveśa | satāṃ
śakyaḥ provācopaniṣad indro jyeṣṭa indriyāya ṛṣibhyo namo devebhyaḥ
svadhā pitṛbhyo bhūr-bhuvaḥ-suvaś chanda oṃ ||

He \[Indra\], who is the bull among the meters, of all forms, emerging
from the meters entered into the meters. The great one, Indra, who is
possible to be \[reached\] by the good, proclaimed the upaniṣat to the
Ṛṣi-s for attaining powers (full experience). Obeisance to the gods,
for the ancestors the good station, the 3 vyāhṛtis, the Veda, OṂ.

Then stressing to Pinakasena that his instruction was a continuation of
the tradition imparted by the god Indra to their ancient ancestors,
Somakhya began his instruction after placing a fire stick for the
repelling of the non-sacrificing foes:

|| ayajvanaḥ sākṣi viśvasmin bharo3m ||

Thereafter he instructed Pinakasena to offer a fire stick after he
recited the
[incantation](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/12/30/matters-of-religion-3/):

tvaṃ devānām asi rudra śreṣṭha

tavas tavasām ugrabāho |

hṛṇīyasā manasā modamāna

ā babhūvitha rudrasya sūno || + svāhā + idaṃ na mama |

Somakhya: “The ṛṣi of the Sadyojāta-mantra is Gopatha. Its meter is
anuṣṭubh, though it has an additional bhakti that is non-metrical
and its devatā is Kumāra Bhavodbhava. Alternatively depending on the
prayoga there is a variant form where the devatā is Skanda-Viśākhau. The
mantra itself goes thus:

sadyojātaṃ prapadyāmi sadyojātāya vai namaḥ |

bhave-bhave nādibhave bhajasva māṃ bhavodbhava ||

I take refuge in the one who had instantly arisen (Sadyojāta). Verily
obeisance to him who has arisen instantly. In existence and after
existence do not partition my share; provide me a share of the ultimate
existence, O one born of Bhava\!

This is the core anuṣṭubh to which in regular practice the bhakti:
bhavāya namaḥ || is appended at the end.

There are some key points that you must understand in relation to this
ṛk: Why is Skanda known as Sadyojāta? It relates to him arising
instantly from the semen of Rudra in the Śaravana or Gaṅgā river. The
term is also used for Agni, the father of Skanda, in the ancient Āprī of
the Bhārgava-s:

sadyo jāto vy amimīta yajñam agnir devānām abhavat purogāḥ |

At birth he instantly measured out the ritual \[space\]; Agni became the
leader of the gods.

This is reminiscent Skanda becoming the leader, i.e. senāni, of the
gods. In the old tradition of the Bhāllavi-s, he is said to have emerged
from Rudra as the dual of Agni to burn down the piśācī when invoked by
Vṛśa Jāna, the badger-like purohita of the Ikṣvāku lord Tryaruṇa. That
is why this ṛk is associated with the mūlamantra of Kumāra: OṂ
vacadbhuve namaḥ || or that of Bodhāyana: OṂ bhuve namaḥ svāha ||.
Indeed, one may do japa of the mantra using the following yantra. In the
corners of the central tryaśra-yamala (forming the hexagonal star) one
must place the syllables of one of the above ṣaḍakṣari-s. The in a
circle around the central star one must place the 32 syllables of the
core anuṣṭubh. Then in the central hexagonal hub of the star one must
place the bhakti of 5 syllables. The name of Kumāra, Vacadbhū, is
evidently an old linguistic fossil and indicates the emergence of the
god from the piśacī-repelling incantation.”

PS:“How is the second part of the mantra to be understood?”

Lootika: “The imperative verb bhajasva is to be applied twice once with
the negation particle na and once without it. The na is coupled with the
locative āmreḍita bhave-bhave. When with the negation particle bhava is
understood in more than one way depending on the votary and their
interests. For people of the world, like us, a bhava can be each unit of
conscious existence — it could be each time we get up from sleep and
return to conscious ahaṃ-bhāva. Here the negated verb na bhajasva might
be understood as do not divide what is ours. In the positive sense it is
applied to ādibhava — the primal state or when the consciousness
associated with you is in an identity loop — a state of bliss. For the
yati-s, like the practitioners of the pūrvāṃnāya of yore in the Vaṅga or
the Karṇāṭa country, it implies not being partitioned into multiple
rebirths and being instead given mokṣa (ādibhava).”

Somakhya: “While performing japa you may meditate on the deva mounted on
a peacock with a fowl-banner surrounded by the troops Marut-s bearing
spears, backed by Agni riding a rhinoceros. He is in the midst of a
fierce battle leading the deva-s against the daitya-s and showering
arrows on his foes. Thus one must meditate on him for the destruction of
brahmadviṣ-es and dasyu-s. Alternatively, you may meditate on him in his
dual form as Skanda-Viśākha. In this case one must replace the terminal
bhakti with: namo bhavāya ca śarvāya cobhābhyām akaraṃ namaḥ ||. One may
also perform the prayoga where Skanda is visualized as surrounded by the
12 awful goddesses:

1\) Vimocinī; 2) Mohinī; 3) Sunandā; 4) Pūtanā; 5) Āsurī; 6) Revatī; 7)
Śakunī; 8) Piśācikā; 9) Pāśinī; 10) Mahāmārī; 11) Kālikā; 12) Bhāminī.

Certain traditions holds them to be Paulastyā-s, the 12 sisters of
Rāvaṇa and call it the Rākṣasī-prayoga but we do not subscribe to
that. This may be done for pediatric purposes.

One may also deploy the mantra visualizing Kumāra along with Viśākha,
Śākha, Nejameṣa and Ṣaṣṭhī along with Kauśikī, the daughter Rudra and
Umā. They should be accompanied by the following therocephalic and
avicephalic goddesses who accompany Kauśikī:

1\) Vāyasī, crow-headed; 2) Upakā, owl-headed; 3) Pracaṇḍā, lion-headed;
4) Ugrā, tiger-headed; 5) Jayā, elephant-headed; 6) Jayantī,
peahen-headed; 7) Jayamānā, horse-headed; 8) Prabhā, goose-headed; 9)
Śivā, jackal-headed; 10) Saramā, dog-headed; 11) Vijayā, falcon-headed;
12) Prabhāvatī, sheldrake-headed; 13) Mṛtyu, crane-headed; 14) Niyati,
grebe-headed; 15) Aśani, fowl-headed; 16) Vṛṣadaṃśā, badger-headed; 17)
Śakunī, thrush-headed; 18) Potakī, munia-headed; 19) Vānarī,
monkey-headed.

The following devī-s are visualized with human heads:

20\) Revatī (some say she is cat-headed); 21) Pūtanā; 23) Kaṭapūtanā;
24) Ālambā; 25) Kiṃnarī; 26) Mukhamaṇḍikā; 27) Alakṣmī or Jyeṣthā; 28)
Adhṛtiː 29) Lakṣmī; 30) Spṛhā.

Along with Ṣaṣṭhī and Kauśikī these constitute the 32 aṛṇa-devī-s of the
Sadyojāta-ṛk and should be worshiped with bīja-s derived from each of
the syllables of the ṛk. The meditation on Kumāra and his emanations
visualized in the midst of these devī-s is the highest sādhanā of his
mantra and may be deployed for Ṣaṭkarmāṇi. This sādhanā may be
accompanied by the use of the ![4 \\times
4](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=4+%5Ctimes+4&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"4 \\times 4") pan-diagonal magic square that adds up to 34 comprised of
numbers from 1:16 with each representing a pair of the 32 goddesses. Of
the sum, 32 are the goddesses that I’ve just mentioned. The remaining 2
are are Skanda and Ṣaṣṭhī.

``` wp-block-preformatted
```

Now, Pinaki, what śruti-vākya do these goddesses with an avicephalic
emphasis bring to your mind?”

PS:“I’m reminded of the mysterious words of my ancestor Atri Bhauma:

vayaś cana subhva āva yanti

kṣubhā martam anuyataṃ vadhasnaiḥ |

And like mighty birds \[the Marut-s\] swoop down here, turbulently, to
the mortal pursued by deadly weapons.

They are again compared the birds by Gotama:

vayo na sīdan adhi barhishi priye |

Like birds \[the Marut-s\] sit down on the dear sacred grass.”

Given the genetic connection of [Skanda and his retinue to the
Marut-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/11/23/the-seven-fold-agni-and-the-seven-fold-troops-of-the-maruts/),
who are said to descend like birds to the sacrificer, I find this
avicephalic emphasis resonant.

Lootika “Good. Indeed, these goddesses accompanying Ṣanmukha are the
precedents of the yoginī-s of kula practice. They reveal themselves to
the sādhaka usually in the form of certain reptiles and mammals. Thus,
you may get the confirmation of your mantra-sādhana with your dūtī
Shallaki by the apparition of yoginī-s in the form of certain birds in
quiet sylvan spots.”

Somakhyaː “To conclude, Lootika will show you how to prepare the
dhatturādi-viṣa for the viṣa-prayoga.”

After Lootika showed him how to prepare the guhyaviṣa from oṣadhi-s, she
said: “The details of these plants are not something you might know
offhand. You can get them from your brother or my sister. In addition to
Skanda, Viśākha, Śākha and Nejameṣa you have to invoke and worship the
32 aṛṇa-devī-s when making the viṣa. When a devadatta is subject this
prayoga he is seized by a dreadful graha and with a crooked look on his
face he wanders yelling and singing: Rudraḥ Skando Viśākho .aham Indro
.aham | even as old Vagbhaṭa has described the graha seizure. Such a
seizure could also happen due to other reasons by agents of Kumāra such
as the ovine sprite or the caprine sprite or the Āpastamba sprite. It
could also happen among the ritually weak when they visit Lankā,
Mālādvīpa or Kāshmīra where various piśāca-graha-s naturally reside.
The seizure often manifests differently among males and females. In
females it might manifest as the state of pinning for ones lover as the
old Drāviḍa-s would say. In such cases one may deploy this mantra with
the visualization of Kumāra with the Mātṛ-s. One also worships them when
goes to the holy spots specially to around Eurasia.”

PS: “Indeed, I heard from Shallaki of such a seizure of one of her
relatives when he visited Kāshmīra. My brother informs me of the
Kaubera-vrata-s that need to be performed in Kāshmīra to invoke
Kaubera-piśāca-s to counter seizures.”

Somakhyaː“Thus, go ahead an practice this mantra. Sleep on the ground,
avoid eating sweets and drinking sweet beverages, and sitting on
cushions. Now you should conclude by performing the tarpaṇa as
promulgated by Bodhāyana”:

OṂ skandaṃ tarpayāmi | Om indraṃ tarpayāmi | OṂ ṣaṣṭhīṃ tarpayāmi |
ṣaṇmukhaṃ tarpayāmi | OṂ jayantaṃ tarpayāmi | OṂ viśākhaṃ tarpayāmi
| OṂ mahāsenaṃ tarpayāmi | OṂ subrahmaṇyaṃ tarpayāmi | OṂ
skanda-pārṣadāṃs tarpayāmi | OṂ skanda-pārṣadīś ca tarpayāmi ||
