+++
title = "The culmination of Galtonism or pandemic days-1"

+++
While many thoughts crowd our mind we have hardly felt the drive to put
them down on a more visible medium. Such is the nature of the times when
things happen reminding you of the inexorable turning of the yuga-cakra.
Though you know what is going to play out in advance, when you watch the
event unfold, and have it impinge on your life and finally open up a new
horizon of uncertainty you are left with a certain paralysis where you
are a spectator who is unable to narrate the unfolding spectacle. There
are nights when the rush of thoughts break into your hypnogogia and
there are days when you get up thinking of the steps you need to take
while heading out for the purchase of essential groceries. Then the
passing of days and weeks start to feel like a blur and all the
omissions and commissions you might have done in the preparation
knowingly or unknowingly unfold under the 20-20 vision of hindsight.
Though proximal time might feel indistinct and yuga-cakra is
ever-turning it is not often that we feel its turn like this: “vartate
vartate iti kālavādino vadanti |”

There is no doubt that the utterly evil ways of the Chinese Communist
Party, the contra-urban food and medical customs of the Cīnaka-s, and
their questionable scientific practices are at the root of this. If
someone were to object that the second point is “racist”, all one needs
is to note the tacit admission of the CCP itself in the form of a
cosmetic ban on the bush-meat and “wet” markets. Instead of providing
proper information of the epidemic that had started in their midst they
doctored the numbers and used the WHO to spread propaganda even as they
rushed to publish crappy papers in the much sought-after scientific
tabloids to the adulation of their gullible peers in the Occident. But
history does not care and on the other side is particularly harsh to
those who despite having prior intelligence fail to take steps of
self-preservation.

As the event scrambled our existence, in the backdrop were the
progressivists who used to be convinced of the “success” of humans. In
our youth we saw them in the form of the Soviets and the socialists
inspired by them. They used to talk breathlessly about Man’s triumph
over nature and the end of the superstitions like the many gods of the
Hindus. “An unimaginative crowd” we used to think. Later, we saw their
counterparts in the academe of Krauñcadvīpa. They talked of the end of
human disease being at hand, if only a little after driverless cars.
Some spoke of the great revolution of artificial intelligence in
classifying chest X-rays or micrographs of sputum smears as the biggest
thing in medicine; others chattered about “big data” as the next savior
almost on par with the messiah whose psychosis had memetically infected
their ancestors; yet others were almost ready to celebrate the dawning
of an “Aquarian age” with personalized precision medicine ensuing from a
USB drive sequencer plugged to their smartphones. Their voices found
resonance far and wide, well beyond their political sphere. The layfolk
in my family, mouthing biological and biochemical jargon they hardly
understand, would ask me when \[insert some technical jargon here\]
would be bringing the great panacea for all humanity. Seeing my
unexcited responses or words like “Time will tell” they would cock a
barely concealed snoot as to why my work didn’t concern itself with
things which might place my name in the newspapers. The general
triumphalism apart, there as a specific type which largely saw
infectious disease as “something that mainly troubles Africans” who
needed their benign favor and was something which was mostly conquered
by the “triumph of evidence-based medicine”.

In contrast to these were those who either had some real biology
education (experience has shown us that this is not a very widespread
commodity) or those with an uncanny intuition, which again is not
necessarily common. The former know by virtue of their saṃskāra that the
battle between the viral and cellular genomes is a quintessence of life
itself and is essentially an eternal process even as our Iranic cousins
imagined the struggle between Ahura Mazdha and Angra Mainyu. Once one
gains the upper hand and then other and it goes on. Having been a
student of the work of Leigh Van Valen in our youth, followed by
investigations of our own into these matters for several years we had
come to realize that biological conflict is an inseparable feature of
life. The apparent state of conquest of infectious disease that many of
the “progressivists” saw was merely a passing phase — it was an unstable
state which could easily breakdown some day and shift to another more
dismal equilibrium. Of course we did not know when it might happen and
certainly in December of 2019 CE we had no inkling that it was at hand.

What we got was the ultimately the fruit of Galtonism, the consequence
of entanglement of China and the Occident. While seen as rivals at the
superficial level the two have had a certain symbiosis, whose early
expression was seen in Galton’s admiration for the Cīna-s and
willingness to concede to them a sphere of their own which the rapacious
Anglosphere had no intention to concede to any other people (his letter
to The Times in 1873). In turn the Cīna-s have come to intensely value
the standards set by the Occident as their own. Even as the Kauśika is
said to have sought above all the validation of the Kauṇdinya the Cīna-s
value that of their Occidental rivals. [As we noted
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/02/26/the-plague-historical-biographical-and-current-a-brief-roundup/)
when this is combined with a hunger for large lives in the Occident it
led to an intimate entanglement of the incompatibles: One sheds no tear
while gulping down a cow or a turkey, all while going apoplectic at the
other devouring a roasted dog or a cat. That coupling exploded in the
form of a virus whose invasion of Homo sapiens stems directly from this
unstated intimacy. The Galtonian spirit which has spread beyond the
Anglosphere to much of the Leukosphere was hale and bold when the
depredations of the virus were still in the distant Orient. Several in
the Western academe had in the recent years come to be recipients of the
Chinese largess — jobs, grants, pleasure trips to the Great Wall of the
father of the nation Chin Shi Huang, sometimes even sexual favors, and
above all a fulfilling validation of their hope of a rightly enacted
socialist paradise. Thus, there was an Ivy League virologist who was
shrilly decrying any sort of barrier to travel relating to the Cīna-s,
while others were enacting ritual embracing of the Cīna-s, even as a
deśi physician, signaling his imbibition of Occidental virtues, was
admonishing his listeners about their racism. But the world changed even
before people processed any of that.

Even as the virions were permeating the atmosphere in the Orient, we saw
two camps emerge in the lands distant from it. There were those who kept
telling us *ad nauseum* that the risk from the virus to the average
person was minimal or that it would fade away like SARS — after all the
virus was (almost) a boring brother of the old SARS-CoV with an even
lesser mortality rate. Some bought into the Cīna numbers and said that
it was not particularly fatal — you know 1000-3000 old people might die,
at worst a few times that of SARS. Even people whom we know personally
were telling us that it was just a “cold” or in the worst case a “flu”
or that it does not seriously affect “healthy” people. If this was one
camp, some of us belong to the opposite camp, which saw the obvious and
tried to tell them that it was not a joke and that we were actually on
the brink of the precipice. It did not matter whether we convinced them
or not for soon they had the pratyakṣa drop on their heads dragging all
of us together into house-arrest.

Even as one of these camps was rallying around Michael Levitt or
whoever, nations throughout the world were going into lock-down. In some
places like Islamic Iran, which had embraced the Cīna-s for reasons
distinct from the Occident, the true price of dependence on the Cīna-s
was brutally revealed. Even as the viral fires were ablaze in Islamic
Iran they were more bothered about taking shots at the Hindus, despite
the fact that India is one of the few nations that shows them some
sympathy (perhaps due to some vāsana of our pre-Islamic shared
ancestry). The virus was to soon knock them down, leaving them fighting
for survival. Likewise, in faraway Ecuador which was almost being
purchased by the Cīna-s corpses have been literally piling on the
streets under the unstoppable viral assault. In Europe, the Italians,
who had in the past decade gotten closer to the Cīna-s than everyone
else and signed up for latter’s imperialist Belt and Road Initiative,
were the first to be struck. As of the time of writing 1 in every 485
Italians is known to be infected by the virus (the real number is
definitely higher) and 1 in every 3937 Italians is dead from it. Then
the Spanish (while writing 1 in every \~358 Spaniard is infected) and
the French (1 in every 725 Frenchman is infected) went down to the
invasive RNA. The English and Dutch still thought life could continue as
usual but they were soon kicked into submission by the virus with
notable losses. A similar case played out in Sweden which responded
slower than its Scandinavian neighbors, showing that no nation which
ignored this virus could hold out against the punch it delivered via the
exponential function. Mysteriously, while the Germans, Austrians and
Portuguese registered a lot of infections like their neighbors, they
have had significantly fewer fatalities than the Italians or the
Spanish. The European Leukosphere was mostly defeated by the virus and
it is not over yet.

[![covid19.box.Sun.Apr.05.2020](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.box_.sun_.apr_.05.2020.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.box_.sun_.apr_.05.2020.png)

The sole superpower of the world was also dealt its worst defeat in
recent memory by the virus, exposing it as the frontier nation rather
than a complete superpower. As a frontier nation it enjoys the great
defensive moats of the Atlantic and the Pacific that separate it from
the rest of the world but the Galtonian entanglement meant that these
moats were no defense against the viral invasion. The results are
devastating — at the time of writing this one person is dying of this
Wuhan disease nearly every minute in the US and that is only going up
for now. The causes for this dismal failure of the US are many, and a
grim reminder that military superiority does not guarantee safety from a
pathogen:  
1\) Even as the virions were swirling through the Eastern air the US had
ample time to prepare but smug in it narrative of exceptionalism failed
to take critical steps.  
2\) Instead, its leftward political elite were lost in fighting the
emperor and trying to impeach him. For them the virus was for most part
a means of getting at their political opponents rather than a real cause
of fear. In fact they were more eager to bat for the Cīna-s than take
care of their own home.  
3\) While a military superpower, as is typical of a frontier nation the
US is imminently ill-equipped to handle serious medical and natural
crises. We see this on a small scale when calamities like hurricanes or
tornadoes strike. But the generally low disease load of the North
American continent has meant that there is no pressure for a good
medical system. People pay a crushing amount for substandard care, often
by incompetent physicians. The physicians are given enormous autonomy
and power in medical decisions but they are not very responsive to the
patient’s conditions or actual needs beyond mechanical prescription of
medications and procedures. Further, many are part of a triumvirate with
the insurance companies and the drug makers as the other two nodes who
ensure that they get rich while the patient suffers. Such a system can
easily come apart when hit by something as devastating as this virus.  
4\) The decentralized nature of the States with each state having its
own style of doing things can prove to be advantageous in certain
circumstances but in a situation like this it is a recipe for disaster.
While one arm of the American elite was saying how a totalitarian system
like China cannot handle this epidemic they did little
self-introspection of whether they were capable of handling it
themselves. On the other side the liberal elite, which is an antithesis
of dharma, was watching with bated breath if India might go down to the
virus while caring little to look into whether their own house was
secure.  
5\) Major failure of the political leadership: at every level there were
failures in the political leadership across party lines. Politicians did
not prepare the people for the onslaught. As a frontier nation they had
little in place to ensure that all people got basic protective supplies
such as hand sanitizers, disinfectants, gloves and masks. In such an
epidemic population-wide protection is critical not just that of a few
who bought such in advance. These critical supplies were scraped by
price-gouging hoarders and others who might have even been Cīna agents
(we know for certain they did in Australia). Even today there are people
who don’t have these critical supplies. Further, several politicians
showed little will to enforce lock-downs and put an appropriate testing
plan in place.  
6\) Given that they had outsourced manufacturing to the Cīna-s, key
medical equipment like ventilators or N95 mask are not available in
sufficient quantities. If the Cīna-s block raw material supply several
critical drugs could be in short supply.  
7\) Failure in public medical advise and action: People were seriously
misinformed by health agencies at various levels. People were told that
the risk to them was low and they were asked to go about their lives as
usual, including attending large gatherings. Even after the risk of
cruise ships became apparent people were not advised against taking them
for while. To this date we have sick people from cruises trying to get
back home. They were told to wear masks only recently after the
infections had crossed 300000. Screening at the airports was a disaster
causing more people to congregate in close proximity in several places.
Testing was not gotten off the ground quickly with a lot of problems
ranging from faulty kits to shortfalls of RNA extraction reagents.
Importantly, proper planning to screen, sort and treat the infected
patients from those seeking other treatments or tests was not properly
managed. Here, they could have learned from the Cīna-s to set up a chain
of action where first one screens for fever, followed by a flu test,
followed by a CAT scan and finally tops it with a SARS-CoV-2 test with
those testing negative being taken out of the pipeline in each step.  
8\) Social irresponsibility: far too many people took this to be a
party. Not just them but everyone around them is now paying the price.  
9\) The politicians and administrators have no plan for what to do after
the lock-down is released.  
10\) The above are all rather apparent to any observer and are mistakes
in part committed elsewhere in the Occident. However, there is something
more subtle which we cannot articulate fully in public. It concerns a
certain ideology which has taken deep grip of the Occidental
institutions and forcibly drives people farther from reality towards a
certain solipsism which can only be compared to the state of the New
Zealand paradise of birds before the coming of their Austronesian
butcher. We have been noticing this for while and felt that it will
result in the ultimate demise of the Anglospheric ascendancy. The
inability to properly respond to the virus in large part stems from this
— when you have a system that rewards and lavishly funds insubstantial
falsehoods as education rather than basic scientific education that
helps people understand such diseases, survivorship in face of them, the
result can be similar to what we are seeing now. Sadly, the purveyors of
this ideology are mostly well-heeled and perhaps more insulated from the
blows falling on the population. This virus may not by itself bring the
end of the system but it will definitely have reverberations that are
not going to die out anytime soon.

Finally, we come to the peculiar situation of India. While there is lot
of trade between India and China the degree of entanglement is not
exactly Galtonian. This shielded India in the initial phase of the
pandemic. However, with fires lit all over the world it was just a
matter of time before new sparks fell on India and sure they did. Now
they are being spread by the arsonist śantidūta-s supported by the
Occidental liberals even as they spread the viral infection alongside
their memetic infection. What turn it would take the coming days would
tell us.

In all this, as a good part of the world is confined within the four
walls (so much so that the earth is apparently quaking less from our
confinement), we again see the emergence of two camps. We can call one
the “economists” and the other the “epidemicists”. The “economists”
oppose the lockdown as it rather obviously demolishes the economy. The
“epidemicists” hold that there is really no way out of it for now.
While it is undeniable that most of people are losing money (us
included) or worse have no employment, there is really no alternative
the “economists” can offer. The pratyakṣa of the Cīna-s is there for all
to see. The CCP has nurtured a nation of arthasādhaka-s who value
kārṣāpaṇa-s over all else. Now if they shutdown their country then
this thing must be really bad. As we noted above, those who failed to do
so elsewhere were soon confronted with mounting deaths and overwhelming
of the medical system such that the economy could fall apart like in a
catastrophic military defeat.

Does that mean “epidemicists” like us are suggesting a perpetual
lock-down. No we all understand that there has to be a plan to restore
continuity of economic activity and the lock-down is only a means to buy
time. But you cannot really buy time unless you have a clear plan for
you are going to do next. This leaves us with tremendous uncertainty
about the future. It is not all clear if most nations have a clear plan
forward. This is especially true of countries with: 1) low social trust
due to juxtaposition of fundamentally incompatible populations; 2) those
with governmental structures which cannot quickly divide their
population into “dirty” and “clean” zones and restrict internal movement
between them. In the absence of such drastic or alternatively smart
measures we are more or less destined the let the virus ravage the
population at some rate before a significant population acquires some
kind of immunity. While this might sound alright on paper, even with low
mortality estimates it would mean a large absolute count of deaths and
long-term morbidity that would seriously limit the functioning of modern
urban systems. Indeed, a crisis like this reveals true alliances. One
can see precisely why the Hungarians have decided to invest their leader
with sweeping powers and break with their indignant fellow Europeans
neighbors. In the immediate future there are urgent production issues,
dealing with which is easier said than done: everyone needs to have good
quality masks, sufficient supply of disinfectants and the health-care
workers who are like soldiers being sent into the battlefield without
proper gear need the appropriate supplies to do their difficult jobs.
From a biological perspective the essential steps can be plainly
stated:  
First, on the prevention side, yes, the virus is highly infectious but
there needs to be better understanding of its transmission so that it
can translate to engineering solutions: 1) What is the relationship of
the probability of contracting infection to the duration and distance of
contact with an infected individual? 2) What is the fraction of
asymptomatics and how infectious are they? 3) What are the weak-points
of the virus? What are the best ways to inactivate virions on surfaces
and in the air? The final point would require a quick translation to
engineering solutions: right irradiation treatments, redoing fittings
using copper etc. This is where our modern technological achievements
can actually help in a substantial way; however, it should be kept in
mind that the engineering solutions would span an entire range from
simple things like making masks to tasks needing complex programmatic
automation.

Second, in terms of actual biology, we need to understand the immunity
against this virus. How long does protective immunity last after
exposure to the antigen? Being a coronavirus it is likely to be mostly
slow-evolving; hence, the vaccine strategy might work but on the other
hand its main cause of mortality and morbidity is from an immunological
sideshow. Hence, this could in theory place an impediment to easy
development of a safe vaccine. So, the next question is there a genetic
background that predisposes individuals towards a bad immunological
response? There is prior knowledge that natural genetic variants are
associated with predisposition to different forms of hypercytokinemia.
Whether any of these or others have a role in the hypercytokinemia
associated with the morbidity from SARS-CoV-2 needs to be investigated
on a war-footing. Finally, the an immediate step for restarting economic
activity is combining serological detection of viral exposure with the
existing RT-PCR based methods. This should be done in setups emulating
the Korean model that has been one of the few which has had a measure of
success in this war. If the protective immunity is reasonably
long-lasting then seropositive individuals can be at the forefront of
re-entering the workforce without fear and restart the frozen economy to
a degree.

There are lots of other thoughts that crowd our mind but we shall stop
here. We have not covered the geopolitical consequences or the
socio-biological factors. The latter have some important implications
and need to be seen from the viewpoint of the “public health” responses
of social arthropods such as hymenopterans and blattodeans which have
had the longest lived social systems on earth. The conclusions, while
deeply troubling to the Occidentally conditioned minds, have
considerable consequences for the emergence of disease responses in
social groups. If the gods favor us we might cover that in the future.

[![covid19.mort.Sun.Apr.05.2020](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.mort_.sun_.apr_.05.2020.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/covid19.mort_.sun_.apr_.05.2020.png)

We end with a plot of number deaths versus number of infections for
countries with over 10 deaths (names abbreviated by first 4 letters).
The lines of different colors represent 1..5% mortality rates. The
results show that not all countries have fared the same. While some of
this is from trivial stuff like amount of testing, overwhelming of the
system or plain lying, not all the differences are purely from these
factors. Hence, we need understand the underlying causes better as we go
forward.
