---
title: THE FUTURE OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](the_work_before_us.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_charity.htm)

  

## THE FUTURE OF INDIA

This is the ancient land where wisdom made its home before it went into
any other country, the same India whose influx of spirituality is
represented, as it were, on the material plane, by rolling rivers like
oceans, where the eternal Himalayas, rising tier above tier with their
snowcaps, look as it were into the very mysteries of heaven. Here is the
same India whose soil has been trodden by the feet of the greatest sages
that ever lived. Here first sprang up inquiries into the nature of man
and into the internal world. Here first arose the doctrines of the
immortality of the soul, the existence of a supervising God, an immanent
God in nature and in man, and here the highest ideals of religion and
philosophy have attained their culminating points. This is the land from
whence, like the tidal waves, spirituality and philosophy have again and
again rushed out and deluged the world, and this is the land from whence
once more such tides must proceed in order to bring life and vigour into
the decaying races of mankind. It is the same India which has withstood
the shocks of centuries, of hundreds of foreign invasions of hundreds of
upheavals of manners and customs. It is the same land which stands
firmer than any rock in the world, with its undying vigour,
indestructible life. Its life is of the same nature as the soul, without
beginning and without end, immortal; and we are the children of such a
country.

Children of India, I am here to speak to you today about some practical
things, and my object in reminding you about the glories of the past is
simply this. Many times have I been told that looking into the past only
degenerates and leads to nothing, and that we should look to the future.
That is true. But out of the past is built the future. Look back,
therefore, as far as you can, drink deep of the eternal fountains that
are behind, and after that, look forward, march forward and make India
brighter, greater, much higher than she ever was. Our ancestors were
great. We must first recall that. We must learn the elements of our
being, the blood that courses in our veins; we must have faith in that
blood and what it did in the past; and out of that faith and
consciousness of past greatness, we must build an India yet greater than
what she has been. There have been periods of decay and degradation. I
do not attach much importance to them; we all know that. Such periods
have been necessary. A mighty tree produces a beautiful ripe fruit. That
fruit falls on the ground, it decays and rots, and out of that decay
springs the root and the future tree, perhaps mightier than the first
one. This period of decay through which we have passed was all the more
necessary. Out of this decay is coming the India of the future; it is
sprouting, its first leaves are already out; and a mighty, gigantic
tree, the Urdhvamula, is here, already beginning to appear; and it is
about that that I am going to speak to you.

The problems in India are more complicated, more momentous, than the
problems in any other country. Race, religion, language, government —
all these together make a nation The elements which compose the nations
of the world are indeed very few, taking race after race, compared to
this country. Here have been the Aryan, the Dravidian, the Tartar, the
Turk, the Mogul, the European — all the nations of the world, as it
were, pouring their blood into this land. Of languages the most
wonderful conglomeration is here; of manners and customs there is more
difference between two Indian races than between the European and the
Eastern races.

The one common ground that we have is our sacred tradition, our
religion. That is the only common ground, and upon that we shall have to
build. In Europe, political ideas form the national unity. In Asia,
religious ideals form the national unity. The unity in religion,
therefore, is absolutely necessary as the first condition of the future
of India. There must be the recognition of one religion throughout the
length and breadth of this land. What do I mean by one religion? Not in
the sense of one religion as held among the Christians, or the
Mohammedans, of the Buddhists. We know that our religion has certain
common grounds, common to all our sects, however varying their
conclusions may be, however different their claims may be. So there are
certain common grounds; and within their limitation this religion of
ours admits of a marvellous variation, an infinite amount of liberty to
think and live our own lives. We all know that, at least those of us who
have thought; and what we want is to bring out these lifegiving common
principles of our religion, and let every man, woman, and child,
throughout the length and breadth of this country, understand them, know
them, and try to bring them out in their lives. This is the first step;
and, therefore, it has to be taken.

We see how in Asia, and especially in India, race difficulties,
linguistic difficulties, social difficulties, national difficulties, all
melt away before this unifying power of religion. We know that to the
Indian mind there is nothing higher than religious ideals, that this is
the keynote of Indian life, and we can only work in the line of least
resistance. It is not only true that the ideal of religion is the
highest ideal; in the case of India it is the only possible means of
work; work in any other line, without first strengthening this, would be
disastrous. Therefore the first plank in the making of a future India,
the first step that is to be hewn out of that rock of ages, is this
unification of religion. All of us have to be taught that we Hindus —
dualists, qualified monists, or monists, Shaivas, Vaishnavas, or
Pâshupatas — to whatever denomination we may belong, have certain common
ideas behind us, and that the time has come when for the well-being of
ourselves, for the well-being of our race, we must give up all our
little quarrels and differences. Be sure, these quarrels are entirely
wrong; they are condemned by our scriptures, forbidden by our
forefathers; and those great men from whom we claim our descent, whose
blood is in our veins, look down with contempt on their children
quarrelling about minute differences.

With the giving up of quarrels all other improvements will come. When
the life-blood is strong and pure, no disease germ can live in that
body. Our life-blood is spirituality. If it flows clear, if it flows
strong and pure and vigorous, everything is right; political, social,
any other material defects, even the poverty of the land, will all be
cured if that blood is pure. For if the disease germ be thrown out,
nothing will be able to enter into the blood. To take a simile from
modern medicine, we know that there must be two causes to produce a
disease, some poison germ outside, and the state of the body. Until the
body is in a state to admit the germs, until the body is degraded to a
lower vitality so that the germs may enter and thrive and multiply,
there is no power in any germ in the world to produce a disease in the
body. In fact, millions of germs are continually passing through
everyone's body; but so long as it is vigorous, it never is conscious of
them. It is only when the body is weak that these germs take possession
of it and produce disease. Just so with the national life. It is when
the national body is weak that all sorts of disease germs, in the
political state of the race or in its social state, in its educational
or intellectual state, crowd into the system and produce disease. To
remedy it, therefore, we must go to the root of this disease and cleanse
the blood of all impurities. The one tendency will be to strengthen the
man, to make the blood pure, the body vigorous, so that it will be able
to resist and throw off all external poisons.

We have seen that our vigour, our strength, nay, our national life is in
our religion. I am not going to discuss now whether it is right or not,
whether it is correct or not, whether it is beneficial or not in the
long run, to have this vitality in religion, but for good or evil it is
there; you cannot get out of it, you have it now and for ever, and you
have to stand by it, even if you have not the same faith that I have in
our religion. You are bound by it, and if you give it up, you are
smashed to pieces. That is the life of our race and that must be
strengthened. You have withstood the shocks of centuries simply because
you took great care of it, you sacrificed everything else for it. Your
forefathers underwent everything boldly, even death itself, but
preserved their religion. Temple alter temple was broken down by the
foreign conqueror, but no sooner had the wave passed than the spire of
the temple rose up again. Some of these old temples of Southern India
and those like Somnâth of Gujarat will teach you volumes of wisdom, will
give you a keener insight into the history of the race than any amount
of books. Mark how these temples bear the marks of a hundred attacks and
a hundred regenerations, continually destroyed and continually springing
up out of the ruins, rejuvenated and strong as ever! That is the
national mind, that is the national life-current. Follow it and it leads
to glory. Give it up and you die; death will be the only result,
annihilation the only effect, the moment you step beyond that
life-current. I do not mean to say that other things are not necessary.
I do not mean to say that political or social improvements are not
necessary, but what I mean is this, and I want you to bear it in mind,
that they are secondary here and that religion is primary. The Indian
mind is first religious, then anything else. So this is to be
strengthened, and how to do it? I will lay before you my ideas. They
have been in my mind for a long time, even years before I left the
shores of Madras for America, and that I went to America and England was
simply for propagating those ideas. I did not care at all for the
Parliament of Religions or anything else; it was simply an opportunity;
for it was really those ideas of mine that took me all over the world.

My idea is first of all to bring out the gems of spirituality that are
stored up in our books and in the possession of a few only, hidden, as
it were, in monasteries and in forests — to bring them out; to bring the
knowledge out of them, not only from the hands where it is hidden, but
from the still more inaccessible chest, the language in which it is
preserved, the incrustation of centuries of Sanskrit words. In one word,
I want to make them popular. I want to bring out these ideas and let
them be the common property of all, of every man in India, whether he
knows the Sanskrit language or not. The great difficulty in the way is
the Sanskrit language — the glorious language of ours; and this
difficulty cannot be removed until — if it is possible — the whole of
our nation are good Sanskrit scholars. You will understand the
difficulty when I tell you that I have been studying this language all
my life, and yet every new book is new to me. How much more difficult
would it then be for people who never had time to study the language
thoroughly! Therefore the ideas must be taught in the language of the
people; at the same time, Sanskrit education must go on along with it,
because the very sound of Sanskrit words gives a prestige and a power
and a strength to the race. The attempts of the great Ramanuja and of
Chaitanya and of Kabir to raise the lower classes of India show that
marvellous results were attained during the lifetime of those great
prophets; yet the later failures have to be explained, and cause shown
why the effect of their teachings stopped almost within a century of the
passing away of these great Masters. The secret is here. They raised the
lower classes; they had all the wish that these should come up, but they
did not apply their energies to the spreading of the Sanskrit language
among the masses. Even the great Buddha made one false step when he
stopped the Sanskrit language from being studied by the masses. He
wanted rapid and immediate results, and translated and preached in the
language of the day, Pâli. That was grand; he spoke in the language of
the people, and the people understood him. That was great; it spread the
ideas quickly and made them reach far and wide. But along with that,
Sanskrit ought to have spread. Knowledge came, but the prestige was not
there, culture was not there. It is culture that withstands shocks, not
a simple mass of knowledge. You can put a mass of knowledge into the
world, but that will not do it much good. There must come culture into
the blood. We all know in modern times of nations which have masses of
knowledge, but what of them? They are like tigers, they are like
savages, because culture is not there. Knowledge is only skin-deep, as
civilisation is, and a little scratch brings out the old savage. Such
things happen; this is the danger. Teach the masses in the vernaculars,
give them ideas; they will get information, but something more is
necessary; give them culture. Until you give them that, there can be no
permanence in the raised condition of the masses. There will be another
caste created, having the advantage of the Sanskrit language, which will
quickly get above the rest and rule them all the same. The only safety,
I tell you men who belong to the lower castes, the only way to raise
your condition is to study Sanskrit, and this fighting and writing and
frothing against the higher castes is in vain, it does no good, and it
creates fight and quarrel, and this race, unfortunately already divided,
is going to be divided more and more. The only way to bring about the
levelling of caste is to appropriate the culture, the education which is
the strength of the higher castes. That done, you have what you want

In connection with this I want to discuss one question which it has a
particular bearing with regard to Madras. There is a theory that there
was a race of mankind in Southern India called Dravidians, entirely
differing from another race in Northern India called the Aryans, and
that the Southern India Brâhmins are the only Aryans that came from the
North, the other men of Southern India belong to an entirely different
caste and race to those of Southern India Brahmins. Now I beg your
pardon, Mr. Philologist, this is entirely unfounded. The only proof of
it is that there is a difference of language between the North and the
South. I do not see any other difference. We are so many Northern men
here, and I ask my European friends to pick out the Northern and
Southern men from this assembly. Where is the difference? A little
difference of language. But the Brahmins are a race that came here
speaking the Sanskrit language! Well then, they took up the Dravidian
language and forgot their Sanskrit. Why should not the other castes have
done the same? Why should not all the other castes have come one after
the other from Northern India, taken up the Dravidian language, and so
forgotten their own? That is an argument working both ways. Do not
believe in such silly things. There may have been a Dravidian people who
vanished from here, and the few who remained lived in forests and other
places. It is quite possible that the language may have been taken up,
but all these are Aryans who came from the North. The whole of India is
Aryan, nothing else.

Then there is the other idea that the Shudra caste are surely the
aborigines. What are they? They are slaves. They say history repeats
itself. The Americans, English, Dutch, and the Portuguese got hold of
the poor Africans and made them work hard while they lived, and their
children of mixed birth were born in slavery and kept in that condition
for a long period. From that wonderful example, the mind jumps back
several thousand years and fancies that the same thing happened here,
and our archaeologist dreams of India being full of dark-eyed
aborigines, and the bright Aryan came from — the Lord knows where.
According to some, they came from Central Tibet, others will have it
that they came from Central Asia. There are patriotic Englishmen who
think that the Aryans were all red-haired. Others, according to their
idea, think that they were all black-haired. If the writer happens to be
a black-haired man, the Aryans were all black-haired. Of late, there was
an attempt made to prove that the Aryans lived on the Swiss lakes. I
should not be sorry if they had been all drowned there, theory and all.
Some say now that they lived at the North Pole. Lord bless the Aryans
and their habitations! As for the truth of these theories, there is not
one word in our scriptures, not one, to prove that the Aryan ever came
from anywhere outside of India, and in ancient India was included
Afghanistan. There it ends. And the theory that the Shudra caste were
all non-Aryans and they were a multitude, is equally illogical and
equally irrational. It could not have been possible in those days that a
few Aryans settled and lived there with a hundred thousand slaves at
their command. These slaves would have eaten them up, made "chutney" of
them in five minutes. The only explanation is to be found in the
Mahâbhârata, which says that in the beginning of the Satya Yuga there
was one caste, the Brahmins, and then by difference of occupations they
went on dividing themselves into different castes, and that is the only
true and rational explanation that has been given. And in the coming
Satya Yuga all the other castes will have to go back to the same
condition.

The solution of the caste problem in India, therefore, assumes this
form, not to degrade the higher castes, not to crush out the Brahmin.
The Brahminhood is the ideal of humanity in India, as wonderfully put
forward by Shankaracharya at the beginning of his commentary on the
Gitâ, where he speaks about the reason for Krishna's coming as a
preacher for the preservation of Brahminhood, of Brahminness. That was
the great end. This Brahmin, the man of God, he who has known Brahman,
the ideal man, the perfect man, must remain; he must not go. And with
all the defects of the caste now, we know that we must all be ready to
give to the Brahmins this credit, that from them have come more men with
real Brahminness in them than from all the other castes. That is true.
That is the credit due to them from all the other castes. We must be
bold enough, must be brave enough to speak of their defects, but at the
same time we must give the credit that is due to them. Remember the old
English proverb, "Give every man his due". Therefore, my friends, it is
no use fighting among the castes. What good will it do? It will divide
us all the more, weaken us all the more, degrade us all the more. The
days of exclusive privileges and exclusive claims are gone, gone for
ever from the soil of India, and it is one of the great blessings of the
British Rule in India. Even to the Mohammedan Rule we owe that great
blessing, the destruction of exclusive privilege. That Rule was, after
all, not all bad; nothing is all bad, and nothing is all good. The
Mohammedan conquest of India came as a salvation to the downtrodden, to
the poor. That is why one-fifth of our people have become Mohammedans.
It was not the sword that did it all. It would be the height of madness
to think it was all the work of sword and fire. And one-fifth — one-half
— of your Madras people will become Christians if you do not take care.
Was there ever a sillier thing before in the world than what I saw in
Malabar country? The poor Pariah is not allowed to pass through the same
street as the high-caste man, but if he changes his name to a
hodge-podge English name, it is all right; or to a Mohammedan name, it
is all right. What inference would you draw except that these Malabaris
are all lunatics, their homes so many lunatic asylums, and that they are
to be treated with derision by every race in India until they mend their
manners and know better. Shame upon them that such wicked and diabolical
customs are allowed; their own children are allowed to die of
starvation, but as soon as they take up some other religion they are
well fed. There ought to be no more fight between the castes.

The solution is not by bringing down the higher, but by raising the
lower up to the level of the higher. And that is the line of work that
is found in all our books, in spite of what you may hear from some
people whose knowledge of their own scriptures and whose capacity to
understand the mighty plans of the ancients are only zero. They do not
understand, but those do that have brains, that have the intellect to
grasp the whole scope of the work. They stand aside and follow the
wonderful procession of national life through the ages. They can trace
it step by step through all the books, ancient and modern. What is the
plan? The ideal at one end is the Brahmin and the ideal at the other end
is the Chandâla, and the whole work is to raise the Chandala up to the
Brahmin. Slowly and slowly you find more and more privileges granted to
them. There are books where you read such fierce words as these: "If the
Shudra hears the Vedas, fill his ears with molten lead, and if he
remembers a line, cut his tongue out. If he says to the Brahmin, 'You
Brahmin', cut his tongue out". This is diabolical old barbarism no
doubt; that goes without saying; but do not blame the law-givers, who
simply record the customs of some section of the community. Such devils
sometimes arose among the ancients. There have been devils everywhere
more or less in all ages. Accordingly, you will find that later on, this
tone is modified a little, as for instance, "Do not disturb the Shudras,
but do not teach them higher things". Then gradually we find in other
Smritis, especially in those that have full power now, that if the
Shudras imitate the manners and customs of the Brahmins they do well,
they ought to be encouraged. Thus it is going on. I have no time to
place before you all these workings, nor how they can be traced in
detail; but coming to plain facts, we find that all the castes are to
rise slowly and slowly. There are thousands of castes, and some are even
getting admission into Brahminhood, for what prevents any caste from
declaring they are Brahmins? Thus caste, with all its rigour, has been
created in that manner. Let us suppose that there are castes here with
ten thousand people in each. If these put their heads together and say,
we will call ourselves Brahmins, nothing can stop them; I have seen it
in my own life. Some castes become strong, and as soon as they all
agree, who is to say nay? Because whatever it was, each caste was
exclusive of the other. It did not meddle with others' affairs; even the
several divisions of one caste did not meddle with the other divisions,
and those powerful epoch-makers, Shankaracharya and others, were the
great caste-makers. I cannot tell you all the wonderful things they
fabricated, and some of you may resent what I have to say. But in my
travels and experiences I have traced them out, and have arrived at most
wonderful results. They would sometimes get hordes of Baluchis and at
once make them Kshatriyas, also get hold of hordes of fishermen and make
them Brahmins forthwith. They were all Rishis and sages, and we have to
bow down to their memory. So, be you all Rishis and sages; that is the
secret. More or less we shall all be Rishis. What is meant by a Rishi?
The pure one. Be pure first, and you will have power. Simply saying, "I
am a Rishi", will not do; but when you are a Rishi you will find that
others obey you instinctively. Something mysterious emanates from you,
which makes them follow you, makes them hear you, makes them
unconsciously, even against their will, carry out your plans. That is
Rishihood.

Now as to the details, they of course have to be worked out through
generations. But this is merely a suggestion in order to show you that
these quarrels should cease. Especially do I regret that in Moslem times
there should be so much dissension between the castes. This must stop.
It is useless on both sides, especially on the side of the higher caste,
the Brahmin, because the day for these privileges and exclusive claims
is gone. The duty of every aristocracy is to dig its own grave, and the
sooner it does so, the better. The more it delays, the more it will
fester and the worse death it will die. It is the duty of the Brahmin,
therefore, to work for the salvation of the rest of mankind in India. If
he does that, and so long as he does that, he is a Brahmin, but he is no
Brahmin when he goes about making money. You on the other hand should
give help only to the real Brahmin who deserves it; that leads to
heaven. But sometimes a gift to another person who does not deserve it
leads to the other place, says our scripture. You must be on your guard
about that. He only is the Brahmin who has no secular employment.
Secular employment is not for the Brahmin but for the other castes. To
the Brahmins I appeal, that they must work hard to raise the Indian
people by teaching them what they know, by giving out the culture that
they have accumulated for centuries. It is clearly the duty of the
Brahmins of India to remember what real Brahminhood is. As Manu says,
all these privileges and honours are given to the Brahmin, because "with
him is the treasury of virtue". He must open that treasury and
distribute its valuables to the world. It is true that he was the
earliest preacher to the Indian races, he was the first to renounce
everything in order to attain to the higher realisation of life before
others could reach to the idea. It was not his fault that he marched
ahead of the other caste. Why did not the other castes so understand and
do as he did? Why did they sit down and be lazy, and let the Brahmins
win the race?

But it is one thing to gain an advantage, and another thing to preserve
it for evil use. Whenever power is used for evil, it becomes diabolical;
it must be used for good only. So this accumulated culture of ages of
which the Brahmin has been the trustee, he must now give to the people
at large, and it was because he did not give it to the people that the
Mohammedan invasion was possible. It was because he did not open this
treasury to the people from the beginning, that for a thousand years we
have been trodden under the heels of every one who chose to come to
India. It was through that we have become degraded, and the first task
must be to break open the cells that hide the wonderful treasures which
our common ancestors accumulated; bring them out and give them to
everybody and the Brahmin must be the first to do it. There is an old
superstition in Bengal that if the cobra that bites, sucks out his own
poison from the patient, the man must survive. Well then, the Brahmin
must suck out his own poison. To the non-Brahmin castes I say, wait, be
not in a hurry. Do not seize every opportunity of fighting the Brahmin,
because, as I have shown, you are suffering from your own fault. Who
told you to neglect spirituality and Sanskrit learning? What have you
been doing all this time? Why have you been indifferent? Why do you now
fret and fume because somebody else had more brains, more energy, more
pluck and go, than you? Instead of wasting your energies in vain
discussions and quarrels in the newspapers, instead of fighting and
quarrelling in your own homes — which is sinful — use all your energies
in acquiring the culture which the Brahmin has, and the thing is done.
Why do you not become Sanskrit scholars? Why do you not spend millions
to bring Sanskrit education to all the castes of India? That is the
question. The moment you do these things, you are equal to the Brahmin.
That is the secret of power in India.

Sanskrit and prestige go together in India. As soon as you have that,
none dares say anything against you. That is the one secret; take that
up. The whole universe, to use the ancient Advaitist's simile, is in a
state of self-hypnotism. It is will that is the power. It is the man of
strong will that throws, as it were, a halo round him and brings all
other people to the same state of vibration as he has in his own mind.
Such gigantic men do appear. And what is the idea? When a powerful
individual appears, his personality infuses his thoughts into us, and
many of us come to have the same thoughts, and thus we become powerful.
Why is it that organizations are so powerful? Do not say organization is
material. Why is it, to take a case in point, that forty millions of
Englishmen rule three hundred millions of people here? What is the
psychological explanation? These forty millions put their wills together
and that means infinite power, and you three hundred millions have a
will each separate from the other. Therefore to make a great future
India, the whole secret lies in organization, accumulation of power,
co-ordination of wills.

Already before my mind rises one of the marvellous verses of the
Rig-Veda Samhitâ which says, "Be thou all of one mind, be thou all of
one thought, for in the days of yore, the gods being of one mind were
enabled to receive oblations." That the gods can be worshipped by men is
because they are of one mind. Being of one mind is the secret of
society. And the more you go on fighting and quarrelling about all
trivialities such as "Dravidian" and "Aryan", and the question of
Brahmins and non-Brahmins and all that, the further you are off from
that accumulation of energy and power which is going to make the future
India. For mark you, the future India depends entirely upon that. That
is the secret — accumulation of will-power, co-ordination, bringing them
all, as it here, into one focus. Each Chinaman thinks in his own way,
and a handful of Japanese all think in the same way, and you know the
result. That is how it goes throughout the history of the world. You
find in every case, compact little nations always governing and ruling
huge unwieldy nations, and this is natural, because it is easier for the
little compact nations to bring their ideas into the same focus, and
thus they become developed. And the bigger the nation, the more unwieldy
it is. Born, as it were, a disorganised mob, they cannot combine. All
these dissensions must stop.

There is yet another defect in us. Ladies, excuse me, but through
centuries of slavery, we have become like a nation of women. You
scarcely can get three women together for five minutes in this country
or any other country, but they quarrel. Women make big societies in
European countries, and make tremendous declarations of women's power
and so on; then they quarrel, and some man comes and rules them all. All
over the world they still require some man to rule them. We are like
them. Women we are. If a woman comes to lead women, they all begin
immediately to criticise her, tear her to pieces, and make her sit down.
If a man comes and gives them a little harsh treatment, scolds them now
and then, it is all right, they have been used to that sort of
mesmerism. The whole world is full of such mesmerists and hypnotists. In
the same way, if one of our countrymen stands up and tries to become
great, we all try to hold him down, but if a foreigner comes and tries
to kick us, it is all right. We have been used to it, have we not? And
slaves must become great masters! So give up being a slave. For the next
fifty years this alone shall be our keynote — this, our great Mother
India. Let all other vain gods disappear for the time from our minds.
This is the only god that is awake, our own race — "everywhere his
hands, everywhere his feet, everywhere his ears, he covers everything."
All other gods are sleeping. What vain gods shall we go after and yet
cannot worship the god that we see all round us, the Virât? When we have
worshipped this, we shall be able to worship all other gods. Before we
can crawl half a mile, we want to cross the ocean like Hanumân! It
cannot be. Everyone going to be a Yogi, everyone going to meditate! It
cannot be. The whole day mixing with the world with Karma Kânda, and in
the evening sitting down and blowing through your nose! Is it so easy?
Should Rishis come flying through the air, because you have blown three
times through the nose? Is it a joke? It is all nonsense. What is needed
is Chittashuddhi, purification of the heart. And how does that come? The
first of all worship is the worship of the Virat — of those all around
us. Worship It. Worship is the exact equivalent of the Sanskrit word,
and no other English word will do. These are all our gods — men and
animals; and the first gods we have to worship are our countrymen. These
we have to worship, instead of being jealous of each other and fighting
each other. It is the most terrible Karma for which we are suffering,
and yet it does not open our eyes!

Well, the subject is so great that I do not know where to stop, and I
must bring my lecture to a close by placing before you in a few words
the plans I want to carry out in Madras. We must have a hold on the
spiritual and secular education of the nation. Do you understand that?
You must dream it, you must talk it, you must think its and you must
work it out. Till then there is no salvation for the race. The education
that you are getting now has some good points, but it has a tremendous
disadvantage which is so great that the good things are all weighed
down. In the first place it is not a man-making education, it is merely
and entirely a negative education. A negative education or any training
that is based on negation, is worse than death. The child is taken to
school, and the first thing he learns is that his father is a fool, the
second thing that his grandfather is a lunatic, the third thing that all
his teachers are hypocrites, the fourth that all the sacred books are
lies! By the time he is sixteen he is a mass of negation, lifeless and
boneless. And the result is that fifty years of such education has not
produced one original man in the three Presidencies. Every man of
originality that has been produced has been educated elsewhere, and not
in this country, or they have gone to the old universities once more to
cleanse themselves of superstitions. Education is not the amount of
information that is put into your brain and runs riot there, undigested,
all your life. We must have life-building, man-making, character-making
assimilation of ideas. If you have assimilated five ideas and made them
your life and character, you have more education than any man who has
got by heart a whole library यथा खरश्चन्दनभारवाही भारस्य वेत्ता न तु
चन्दनस्य। — "The ass carrying its load of sandalwood knows only the
weight and not the value of the sandalwood." If education is identical
with information, the libraries are the greatest sages in the world, and
encyclopaedias are the Rishis. The ideal, therefore, is that we must
have the whole education of our country, spiritual and secular, in our
own hands, and it must be on national lines, through national methods as
far as practical.

Of course this is a very big scheme, a very big plan. I do not know
whether it will ever work out. But we must begin the work. But how? Take
Madras, for instance. We must have a temple, for with Hindus religion
must come first. Then, you may say, all sects will quarrel about it. But
we will make it a non-sectarian temple, having only "Om" as the symbol,
the greatest symbol of any sect. If there is any sect here which
believes that "Om" ought not to be the symbol, it has no right to call
itself Hindu. All will have the right to interpret Hinduism, each one
according to his own sect ideas, but we must have a common temple. You
can have your own images and symbols in other places, but do not quarrel
here with those who differ from you. Here should be taught the common
grounds of our different sects, and at the same time the different sects
should have perfect liberty to come and teach their doctrines, with only
one restriction, that is, not to quarrel with other sects. Say what you
have to say, the world wants it; but the world has no time to hear what
you think about other people; you can keep that to yourselves.

Secondly, in connection with this temple there should be an institution
to train teachers who must go about preaching religion and giving
secular education to our people; they must carry both. As we have been
already carrying religion from door to door, let us along with it carry
secular education also. That can be easily done. Then the work will
extend through these bands of teachers and preachers, and gradually we
shall have similar temples in other places, until we have covered the
whole of India. That is my plan. It may appear gigantic, but it is much
needed. You may ask, where is the money. Money is not needed. Money is
nothing. For the last twelve years of my life, I did not know where the
next meal would come from; but money and everything else I want must
come, because they are my slaves, and not I theirs; money and everything
else must come. Must — that is the word. Where are the men? That is the
question. Young men of Madras, my hope is in you. Will you respond to
the call of your nation? Each one of you has a glorious future if you
dare believe me. Have a tremendous faith in yourselves, like the faith I
had when I was a child, and which I am working out now. Have that faith,
each one of you, in yourself — that eternal power is lodged in every
soul — and you will revive the whole of India. Ay, we will then go to
every country under the sun, and our ideas will before long be a
component of the many forces that are working to make up every nation in
the world. We must enter into the life of every race in India and
abroad; shall have to *work* to bring this about. Now for that, I want
young men. "It is the young, the strong, and healthy, of sharp intellect
that will reach the Lord", say the Vedas. This is the time to decide
your future — while you possess the energy of youth, not when you are
worn out and jaded, but in the freshness and vigour of youth. Work —
this is the time; for the freshest, the untouched, and unsmelled flowers
alone are to be laid at the feet of the Lord, and such He receives.
Rouse yourselves, therefore, or life is short. There are greater works
to be done than aspiring to become lawyers and picking quarrels and such
things. A far greater work is this sacrifice of yourselves for the
benefit of your race, for the welfare of humanity. What is in this life?
You are Hindus, and there is the instinctive belief in you that life is
eternal. Sometimes I have young men come and talk to me about atheism; I
do not believe a Hindu can become an atheist. He may read European
books, and persuade himself he is a materialist, but it is only for a
time. It is not in your blood. You cannot believe what is not in your
constitution; it would be a hopeless task for you. Do not attempt that
sort of thing. I once attempted it when I was a boy, but it could not
be. Life is short, but the soul is immortal and eternal, and one thing
being certain, death, let us therefore take up a great ideal and give up
our whole life to it. Let this be our determination, and may He, the
Lord, who "comes again and again for the salvation of His own people",
to quote from our scriptures — may the great Krishna bless us and lead
us all to the fulfilment of our aims!

</div>
