---
title: ON CHARITY

---
<div>

[←](the_future_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](address_of_welcome_presented_at_calcutta_and_reply.htm)

  

## ON CHARITY

During his stay in Madras the Swami presided at the annual meeting of
the Chennapuri Annadâna Samâjam, an institution of a charitable nature,
and in the course of a brief address referred to a remark by a previous
speaker deprecating special alms-giving to the Brahmin over and above
the other castes. Swamiji pointed out that this had its good as well as
its bad side. All the culture, practically which the nation possessed,
was among the Brahmins, and they also had been the thinkers of the
nation. Take away the means of living which enabled them to be thinkers,
and the nation as a whole would suffer. Speaking of the indiscriminate
charity of India as compared with the legal charity of other nations, he
said, the outcome of their system of relief was that the vagabond of
India was contented to receive readily what he was given readily and
lived a peaceful and contented life: while the vagabond in the West,
unwilling to go to the poor-house — for man loves liberty more than food
— turned a robber, the enemy of society, and necessitated the
organisation of a system of magistracy, police, jails, and other
establishments. Poverty there must be, so long as the disease known as
civilisation existed: and hence the need for relief. So that they had to
choose between the indiscriminate charity of India, which, in the case
of Sannyâsins at any rate, even if they were not sincere men, at least
forced them to learn some little of their scriptures before they were
able to obtain food; and the discriminate charity of Western nations
which necessitated a costly system of poor-law relief, and in the end
succeeded only in changing mendicants into criminals.

</div>
