---
title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME PRESENTED AT CALCUTTA AND REPLY

---
<div>

[←](on_charity.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_vedanta_in_all_its_phases.htm)

  

## ADDRESS OF WELCOME PRESENTED AT CALCUTTA AND REPLY

On his arrival in Calcutta, the Swami Vivekananda was greeted with
intense enthusiasm, and the whole of his progress through the decorated
streets of the city was thronged with an immense crowd waiting to have a
sight of him. The official reception was held a week later, at the
residence of the late Raja Radha Kanta Deb Bahadur at Sobha Bazar, when
Raja Benoy Krishna Deb Bahadur took the chair. After a few brief
introductory remarks from the Chairman, the following address was read
and presented to him, enclosed in a silver casket:

TO SRIMAT VIVEKANANDA SWAMI

DEAR BROTHER,

We, the Hindu inhabitants of Calcutta and of several other places in
Bengal, offer you on your return to the land of your birth a hearty
welcome. We do so with a sense of pride as well as of gratitude, for by
your noble work and example in various parts of the world you have done
honour not only to our religion but also to our country and to our
province in particular.

At the great Parliament of Religions which constituted a Section of the
World's Fair held in Chicago in 1893, you presented the principles of
the Aryan religion. The substance of your exposition was to most of your
audience a revelation, and its manner overpowering alike by its grace
and its strength. Some may have received it in a questioning spirit, a
few may have criticised it, but its general effect was a revolution in
the religious ideas of a large section of cultivated Americans. A new
light had dawned on their mind, and with their accustomed earnest ness
and love of truth they determined to take fun advantage of it. Your
opportunities widened; your work grew. You had to meet call after call
from many cities in many States, answer many queries, satisfy many
doubts, solve many difficulties. You did an this work with energy,
ability, and sincerity; and it has led to lasting results. Your teaching
has deeply influenced many an enlightened circle in the American
Commonwealth, has stimulated thought and research, and has in many
instances definitely altered religious conceptions in the direction of
an increased appreciation of Hindu ideals. The rapid growth of clubs and
societies for the comparative study of religions and the investigation
of spiritual truth is witness to your labour in the far West. You may be
regarded as the founder of a College in London for the teaching of the
Vedanta philosophy. Your lectures have been regularly delivered,
punctually attended, and widely appreciated. Their influence has
extended beyond the walls of the lecture-rooms. The love and esteem
which have been evoked by your teaching are evidenced by the warm
acknowledgements, in the address presented to you on the eve of your
departure from London, by the students of the Vedanta philosophy in that
town.

Your success as a teacher has been due not only to your deep and
intimate acquaintance with the truths of the Aryan religion and your
skill in exposition by speech and writing, but also, and largely, to
your personality. Your lectures, your essays, and your books have high
merits, spiritual and literary, and they could not but produce their
effect. But it has been heightened in a manner that defies expression by
the example of your simple, sincere, self-denying life, your modesty,
devotion, and earnestness.

While acknowledging your services as a teacher of the sublime truths of
our religion, we feel that we must render a tribute to the memory of
your revered preceptor, Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. To him we largely
owe even you. With his rare magical insight he early discovered the
heavenly spark in you and predicted for you a career which happily is
now in course of realisation. He it was that unsealed the vision and the
faculty divine with which God had blessed you, gave to your thoughts and
aspirations the bent that was awaiting the holy touch, and aided your
pursuits in the region of the unseen. His most precious legacy to
posterity was yourself.

Go on, noble soul, working steadily and valiantly in the path you have
chosen. You have a world to conquer. You have to interpret and vindicate
the religion of the Hindus to the ignorant, the sceptical, the wilfully
blind. You have begun the work in a spirit which commands our
admiration, and have already achieved a success to which many lands bear
witness. But a great deal yet remains to be done; and our own country,
or rather we should say your own country, waits on you. The truths of
the Hindu religion have to be expounded to large numbers of Hindus
themselves. Brace yourself then for the grand exertion. We have
confidence in you and in the righteousness of our cause. Our national
religion seeks to win no material triumphs. Its purposes are spiritual;
its weapon is a truth which is hidden away from material eyes and yields
only to the reflective reason. Call on the world, and where necessary,
on Hindus themselves, to open the inner eye, to transcend the senses, to
read rightly the sacred books, to face the supreme reality, and realise
their position and destiny as men. No one is better fitted than yourself
to give the awakening or make the call, and we can only assure you of
our hearty sympathy and loyal co-operation in that work which is
apparently your mission ordained by Heaven.

We remain, dear brother,

Your loving FRIENDS AND ADMIRERS.

The Swami's reply was as follows:

One wants to lose the individual in the universal, one renounces, flies
off, and tries to cut himself off from all associations of the body of
the past, one works hard to forget even that he is a man; yet, in the
nears of his heart, there is a soft sound, one string vibrating, one
whisper, which tells him, East or West, home is best. Citizens of the
capital of this Empire, before you I stand, not as a Sannyasin, no, not
even as a preacher, but I come before you the same Calcutta boy to talk
to you as I used to do. Ay, I would like to sit in the dust of the
streets of this city, and, with the freedom of childhood, open my mind
to you, my brothers. Accept, therefore, my heartfelt thanks for this
unique word that you have used, "Brother". Yes, I am your brother, and
you are my brothers. I was asked by an English friend on the eve of my
departure, "Swami, how do you like now your motherland after four years'
experience of the luxurious, glorious, powerful West?" I could only
answer, "India I loved before I came away. Now the very dust of India
has become holy to me, the very air is now to me holy; it is now the
holy land, the place of pilgrimage, the Tirtha." Citizens of Calcutta —
my brothers — I cannot express my gratitude to you for the kindness you
have shown, or rather I should not thank you at all, for you are my
brothers, you have done only a brother's duty, ay, only a Hindu
brother's duty; for such family ties, such relationships, such love
exist nowhere beyond the bounds of this motherland of ours.

The Parliament of Religions was a great affair, no doubt. From various
cities of this land, we have thanked the gentlemen who organised the
meeting, and they deserved all our thanks for the kindness that has been
shown to us; but yet allow me to construe for you the history of the
Parliament of Religions. They wanted a horse, and they wanted to ride
it. There were people there who wanted to make it a heathen show, but it
was ordained otherwise; it could not help being so. Most of them were
kind, but we have thanked them enough.

On the other hand, my mission in America was not to the Parliament of
Religions. That was only something by the way, it was only an opening,
an opportunity, and for that we are very thankful to the members of the
Parliament; but really, our thanks are due to the great people of the
United States, the American nation, the warm hearted, hospitable, great
nation of America, where more than anywhere else the feeling of
brotherhood has been developed. An American meets you for five minutes
on board a train, and you are his friend, and the next moment he invites
you as a guest to his home and opens the secret of his whole living
there. That is the character of the American race, and we highly
appreciate it. Their kindness to me is past all narration, it would take
me years yet to tell you how I have been treated by them most kindly and
most wonderfully. So are our thanks due to the other nation on the other
side of the Atlantic. No one ever landed on English soil with more
hatred in his heart for a race than I did for the English, and on this
platform are present English friends who can bear witness to the fact;
but the more I lived among them and saw how the machine was working —
the English national life — and mixed with them, I found where the
heartbeat of the nation was, and the more I loved them. There is none
among you here present, my brothers, who loves the English people more
than I do now. You have to see what is going on there, and you have to
mix with them. As the philosophy, our national philosophy of the
Vedanta, has summarised all misfortune, all misery, as coming from that
one cause, ignorance, herein also we must understand that the
difficulties that arise between us and the English people are mostly due
to that ignorance; we do not know them, they do not know us.

Unfortunately, to the Western mind, spirituality, nay, even morality, is
eternally connected with worldly prosperity; and as soon as an
Englishman or any other Western man lands on our soil and finds a land
of poverty and of misery, he forthwith concludes that there cannot be
any religion here, there cannot be any morality even. His own experience
is true. In Europe, owing to the inclemency of the climate and many
other circumstances poverty and sin go together, but not so in India. In
India on the other hand, my experience is that the poorer the man the
better he is in point of morality. Now this takes time to understand,
and how many foreign people are there who will stop to understand this,
the very secret of national existence in India? Few are there who will
have the patience to study the nation and understand. Here and here
alone, is the only race where poverty does not mean crime, poverty does
not mean sin; and here is the only race where not only poverty does not
mean crime but poverty has been deified, and the beggar's garb is the
garb of the highest in the land. On the other hand, we have also
similarly, patiently to study the social institutions of the West and
not rush into mad judgments about them Their intermingling of the sexes,
their different customs their manners, have all their meaning, have all
their grand sides, if you have the patience to study them. Not that I
mean that we are going to borrow their manners and customs, not that
they are going to borrow ours, for the manners and customs of each race
are the outcome of centuries of patient growth in that race, and each
one has a deep meaning behind it; and, therefore, neither are they to
ridicule our manners and customs, nor we theirs.

Again, I want to make another statement before this assembly. My work in
England has been more satisfactory to me than my work in America. The
bold, brave and steady Englishman, if I may use the expression, with his
skull a little thicker than those of other people — if he has once an
idea put into his brain, it never comes out; and the immense
practicality and energy of the race makes it sprout up and immediately
bear fruit. It is not so in any other country. That immense
practicality, that immense vitality of the race, you do not see anywhere
else. There is less of imagination, but more of work, and who knows the
well-spring, the mainspring of the English heart? How much of
imagination and of feeling is there! They are a nation of heroes, they
are the true Kshatriyas; their education is to hide their feelings and
never to show them. From their childhood they have been educated up to
that. Seldom will you find an Englishman manifesting feeling, nay, even
an Englishwoman. I have seen Englishwomen go to work and do deeds which
would stagger the bravest of Bengalis to follow. But with all this
heroic superstructure, behind this covering of the fighter, there is a
deep spring of feeling in the English heart. If you once know how to
reach it, if you get there, if you have personal contact and mix with
him, he will open his heart, he is your friend for ever, he is your
servant. Therefore in my opinion, my work in England has been more
satisfactory than anywhere else. I firmly believe that if I should die
tomorrow the work in England would not die, but would go on expanding
all the time.

Brothers, you have touched another chord in my heart, the deepest of
all, and that is the mention of my teacher, my master, my hero, my
ideal, my God in life - Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. If there has been
anything achieved by me, by thoughts, or words, or deeds, if from my
lips has ever fallen one word that has helped any one in the world, I
lay no claim to it, it was his. But if there have been curses falling
from my lips, if there has been hatred coming out of me, it is all mine
and not his. All that has been weak has been mine, and all that has been
life-giving, strengthening, pure, and holy, has been his inspiration,
his words, and he himself. Yes, my friends, the world has yet to know
that man. We read in the history of the world about prophets and their
lives, and these come down to us through centuries of writings and
workings by their disciples. Through thousands of years of chiselling
and modelling, the lives of the great prophets of yore come down to us;
and yet, in my opinion, not one stands so high in brilliance as that
life which I saw with my own eyes, under whose shadow I have lived, at
whose feet I have learnt everything —the life of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa. Ay, friends, you all know the celebrated saying of the
Gitâ:

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत ।  
अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् ॥  
परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम् ।  
धर्मासंस्थापनार्थाय संभवामि युगे युगे ॥

"Whenever, O descendant of Bharata, there is decline of Dharma, and rise
of Adharma, then I body Myself forth. For the protection of the good,
for the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of Dharma I
come into being in every age."

Along with this you have to understand one thing more. Such a thing is
before us today. Before one of these tidal waves of spirituality comes,
there are whirlpools of lesser manifestation all over society. One of
these comes up, at first unknown, unperceived, and unthought of,
assuming proportion, swallowing, as it were, and assimilating all the
other little whirlpools, becoming immense, becoming a tidal wave, and
falling upon society with a power which none can resist. Such is
happening before us. If you have eyes, you will see it. If your heart is
open, you will receive it. If you are truth-seekers, you will find it.
Blind, blind indeed is the man who does not see the signs of the day!
Ay, this boy born of poor Brahmin parents in an out-of-the-way village
of which very few of you have even heard, is literally being worshipped
in lands which have been fulminating against heathen worship for
centuries. Whose power is it? Is it mine or yours? It is none else than
the power which was manifested here as Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. For, you
and I, and sages and prophets, nay, even Incarnations, the whole
universe, are but manifestations of power more or less individualized,
more or less concentrated. Here has been a manifestation of an immense
power, just the very beginning of whose workings we are seeing, and
before this generation passes away, you will see more wonderful workings
of that power. It has come just in time for the regeneration of India,
for we forget from time to time the vital power that must always work in
India.

Each nation has its own peculiar method of work. Some work through
politics, some through social reforms, some through other lines. With
us, religion is the only ground along which we can move. The Englishman
can understand even religion through politics. Perhaps the American can
understand even religion through social reforms. But the Hindu can
understand even politics when it is given through religion; sociology
must come through religion, everything must come through religion. For
that is the theme, the rest are the variations in the national
life-music. And that was in danger. It seemed that we were going to
change this theme in our national life, that we were going to exchange
the backbone of our existence, as it were, that we were trying to
replace a spiritual by a political backbone. And if we could have
succeeded, the result would have been annihilation. But it was not to
be. So this power became manifest. I do not care in what light you
understand this great sage, it matters not how much respect you pay to
him, but I challenge you face to face with the fact that here is a
manifestation of the most marvellous power that has been for several
centuries in India, and it is your duty, as Hindus, to study this power,
to find what has been done for the regeneration, for the good of India,
and for the good of the whole human race through it. Ay, long before
ideas of universal religion and brotherly feeling between different
sects were mooted and discussed in any country in the world, here, in
sight of this city, had been living a man whose whole life was a
Parliament of Religions as it should be.

The highest ideal in our scriptures is the impersonal, and would to God
everyone of us here were high enough to realise that impersonal ideal;
but, as that cannot be, it is absolutely necessary for the vast majority
of human beings to have a personal ideal; and no nation can rise, can
become great, can work at all, without enthusiastically coming under the
banner of one of these great ideals in life. Political ideals,
personages representing political ideals, even social ideals, commercial
ideals, would have no power in India. We want spiritual ideals before
us, we want enthusiastically to gather round grand spiritual names. Our
heroes must be spiritual. Such a hero has been given to us in the person
of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. If this nation wants to rise, take my word
for it, it will have to rally enthusiastically round this name. It does
not matter who preaches Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, whether I, or you, or
anybody else. But him I place before you, and it is for you to judge,
and for the good of our race, for the good of our nation, to judge now,
what you shall do with this great ideal of life. One thing we are to
remember that it was the purest of all lives that you have ever seen, or
let me tell you distinctly, that you have ever read of. And before you
is the fact that it is the most marvellous manifestation of soul-power
that you can read of, much less expect to see. Within ten years of his
passing away, this power has encircled the globe; that fact is before
you. In duty bound, therefore, for the good of our race, for the good of
our religion, I place this great spiritual ideal before you. Judge him
not through me. I am only a weak instrument. Let not his character be
judged by seeing me. It was so great that if I or any other of his
disciples spent hundreds of lives, we could not do justice to a
millionth part of what he really was. Judge for yourselves; in the heart
of your hearts is the Eternal Witness, and may He, the same Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa, for the good of our nation, for the welfare of our country,
and for the good of humanity, open your hearts, make you true and steady
to work for the immense change which must come, whether we exert
ourselves or not. For the work of the Lord does not wait for the like of
you or me. He can raise His workers from the dust by hundreds and by
thousands. It is a glory and a privilege that we are allowed to work at
all under Him.

From this the idea expands. As you have pointed out to me, we have to
conquer the world. That we have to! India must conquer the world, and
nothing less than that is my ideal. It may be very big, it may astonish
many of you, but it is so. We must conquer the world or die. There is no
other alternative. The sign of life is expansion; we must go out,
expand, show life, or degrade, fester, and die. There is no other
alternative. Take either of these, either live or die. Now, we all know
about the petty jealousies and quarrels that we have in our country.
Take my word, it is the same everywhere. The other nations with their
political lives have foreign policies. When they find too much
quarrelling at home, they look for somebody abroad to quarrel with, and
the quarrel at home stops. We have these quarrels without any foreign
policy to stop them. This must be our eternal foreign policy, preaching
the truths of our Shâstras to the nations of the world. I ask you who
are politically minded, do you require any other proof that this will
unite us as a race? This very assembly is a sufficient witness.

Secondly, apart from these selfish considerations, there are the
unselfish, the noble, the living examples behind us. One of the great
causes of India's misery and downfall has been that she narrowed
herself, went into her shell as the oyster does, and refused to give her
jewels and her treasures to the other races of mankind, refused to give
the life-giving truths to thirsting nations outside the Aryan fold. That
has been the one great cause; that we did not go out, that we did not
compare notes with other nations — that has been the one great cause of
our downfall, and every one of you knows that that little stir, the
little life that you see in India, begins from the day when Raja
Rammohan Roy broke through the walls of that exclusiveness. Since that
day, history in India has taken another turn, and now it is growing with
accelerated motion. If we have had little rivulets in the past, deluges
are coming, and none can resist them. Therefore we must go out, and the
secret of life is to give and take. Are we to take always, to sit at the
feet of the Westerners to learn everything, even religion? We can learn
mechanism from them. We can learn many other things. But we have to
teach them something, and that is our religion, that is our
spirituality. For a complete civilisation the world is waiting, waiting
for the treasures to come out of India, waiting for the marvellous
spiritual inheritance of the race, which, through decades of degradation
and misery, the nation has still clutched to her breast. The world is
waiting for that treasure; little do you know how much of hunger and of
thirst there is outside of India for these wonderful treasures of our
forefathers. We talk here, we quarrel with each other, we laugh at and
we ridicule everything sacred, till it has become almost a national vice
to ridicule everything holy. Little do we understand the heart-pangs of
millions waiting outside the walls, stretching forth their hands for a
little sip of that nectar which our forefathers have preserved in this
land of India. Therefore we must go out, exchange our spirituality for
anything they have to give us; for the marvels of the region of spirit
we will exchange the marvels of the region of matter. We will not be
students always, but teachers also. There cannot be friendship without
equality, and there cannot be equality when one party is always the
teacher and the other party sits always at his feet. If you want to
become equal with the Englishman or the American, you will have to teach
as well as to learn, and you have plenty yet to teach to the world for
centuries to come. This has to be done. Fire and enthusiasm must be in
our blood. We Bengalis have been credited with imagination, and I
believe we have it. We have been ridiculed as an imaginative race, as
men with a good deal of feeling. Let me tell you, my friends, intellect
is great indeed, but it stops within certain bounds. It is through the
heart, and the heart alone, that inspiration comes. It is through the
feelings that the highest secrets are reached; and therefore it is the
Bengali, the man of feeling, that has to do this work.

उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत प्राप्य वरान्निबोधत। — Arise, awake and stop not till
the desired end is reached. Young men of Calcutta, arise, awake, for the
time is propitious. Already everything is opening out before us. Be bold
and fear not. It is only in our scriptures that this adjective is given
unto the Lord — Abhih, Abhih. We have to become Abhih, fearless, and our
task will be done. Arise, awake, for your country needs this tremendous
sacrifice. It is the young men that will do it. "The young, the
energetic, the strong, the well-built, the intellectual" — for them is
the task. And we have hundreds and thousands of such young men in
Calcutta. If, as you say, I have done something, remember that I was
that good-for-nothing boy playing in the streets of Calcutta. If I have
done so much, how much more will you do! Arise and awake, the world is
calling upon you. In other parts of India, there is intellect, there is
money, but enthusiasm is only in my motherland. That must come out;
therefore arise, young men of Calcutta, with enthusiasm in your blood.
This not that you are poor, that you have no friends. A who ever saw
money make the man? It is man that always makes money. The whole world
has been made by the energy of man, by the power of enthusiasm, by the
power of faith.

Those of you who have studied that most beautiful ail the Upanishads,
the Katha, will remember how the king was going to make a great
sacrifice, and, instead of giving away things that were of any worth, he
was giving away cows and horses that were not of any use, and the book
says that at that time Shraddhâ entered into the heart of his son
Nachiketâ. I would not translate this word Shraddha to you, it would be
a mistake; it is a wonderful word to understand, and much depends on it;
we will see how it works, for immediately we find Nachiketa telling
himself, "I am superior to many, I am inferior to few, but nowhere am I
the last, I can also do something." And this boldness increased, and the
boy wanted to solve the problem which was in his mind, the problem of
death. The solution could only be got by going to the house of Death,
and the boy went. There he was, brave Nachiketa waiting at the house of
Death for three days, and you know how he obtained what he desired. What
we want, is this Shraddha. Unfortunately, it has nearly vanished from
India, and this is why we are in our present state. What makes the
difference between man and man is the difference in this Shraddha and
nothing else. What make one man great and another weak and low is this
Shraddha. My Master used to say, he who thinks himself weak will become
weak, and that is true. This Shraddha must enter into you. Whatever of
material power you see manifested by the Western races is the outcome of
this Shraddha, because they believe in their muscles and if you believe
in your spirit, how much more will it work! Believe in that infinite
soul, the infinite power, which, with consensus of opinion, your books
and sages preach. That Atman which nothing can destroy, in It is
infinite power only waiting to be called out. For here is the great
difference between all other philosophies and the Indian philosophy.
Whether dualistic, qualified monistic, or monistic, they all firmly
believe that everything is in the soul itself; it has only to come out
and manifest itself. Therefore, this Shraddha is what I want, and what
all of us here want, this faith in ourselves, and before you is the
great task to get that faith. Give up the awful disease that is creeping
into our national blood, that idea of ridiculing everything, that loss
of seriousness. Give that up. Be strong and have this Shraddha, and
everything else is bound to follow.

I have done nothing as yet; you have to do the task. If I die tomorrow
the work will not die. I sincerely believe that there will be thousands
coming up from the ranks to take up the work and carry it further and
further, beyond all my most hopeful imagination ever painted. I have
faith in my country, and especially in the youth of my country. The
youth of Bengal have the greatest of all tasks that has ever been placed
on the shoulders of young men. I have travelled for the last ten years
or so over the whole of India, and my conviction is that from the youth
of Bengal will come the power which will raise India once more to her
proper spiritual place. Ay, from the youth of Bengal, with this immense
amount of feeling and enthusiasm in the blood, will come those heroes
who will march from one corner of the earth to the other, preaching and
teaching the eternal spiritual truths of our forefathers. And this is
the great work before you. Therefore, let me conclude by reminding you
once more, "Arise, awake and stop not till the desired end is reached."
Be not afraid, for all great power, throughout the history of humanity,
has been with the people. From out of their ranks have come all the
greatest geniuses of the world, and history can only repeat itself. Be
not afraid of anything. You will do marvellous work. The moment you
fear, you are nobody. It is fear that is the great cause of misery in
the world. It is fear that is the greatest of all superstitions. It is
fear that is the cause of our woes, and it is fearlessness that brings
heaven even in a moment. Therefore, "Arise, awake, and stop not till the
goal is reached."

Gentlemen, allow me to thank you once more for all the kindness that I
have received at your hands. It is my wish — my intense, sincere wish —
to be even of the least service to the world, and above all to my own
country and countrymen.

</div>
