---
title: THE VEDANTA IN ALL ITS PHASES

---
<div>

[←](address_of_welcome_presented_at_calcutta_and_reply.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](address_of_welcome_at_almora_and_reply.htm)

  

## THE VEDANTA IN ALL ITS PHASES

(*Delivered in Calcutta*)

Away back, where no recorded history, nay, not even the dim light of
tradition, can penetrate, has been steadily shining the light, sometimes
dimmed by external circumstances, at others effulgent, but undying and
steady, shedding its lustre not only over India, but permeating the
whole thought-world with its power, silent, unperceived, gentle, yet
omnipotent, like the dew that falls in the morning, unseen and
unnoticed, yet bringing into bloom the fairest of roses: this has been
the thought of the Upanishads, the philosophy of the Vedanta. Nobody
knows when it first came to flourish on the soil of India. Guesswork has
been vain. The guesses, especially of Western writers, have been so
conflicting that no certain date can be ascribed to them. But we Hindus,
from the spiritual standpoint, do not admit that they had any origin.
This Vedanta, the philosophy of the Upanishads, I would make bold to
state, has been the first as well as the final thought on the spiritual
plane that has ever been vouchsafed to man.

From this ocean of the Vedanta, waves of light from time to time have
been going Westward and Eastward. In the days of yore it travelled
Westward and gave its impetus to the mind of the Greeks, either in
Athens, or in Alexandria, or in Antioch. The Sânkhya system must clearly
have made its mark on the minds of the ancient Greeks; and the Sankhya
and all other systems in India hail that one authority, the Upanishads,
the Vedanta. In India, too, in spite of all these jarring sects that we
see today and all those that have been in the past, the one authority,
the basis of all these systems, has yet been the Upanishads, the
Vedanta. Whether you are a dualist, or a qualified monist, an Advaitist,
or a Vishishtâdvaitist, a Shuddhâdvaitist, or any other Advaitist, or
Dvaitist, or whatever you may call yourself, there stand behind you as
authority, your Shastras, your scriptures, the Upanishads. Whatever
system in India does not obey the Upanishads cannot be called orthodox,
and even the systems of the Jains and the Buddhists have been rejected
from the soil of India only because they did not bear allegiance to the
Upanishads. Thus the Vedanta, whether we know it or not, has penetrated
all the sects in India, and what we call Hinduism, this mighty banyan
with its immense, almost infinite ramifications, has been throughout
interpenetrated by the influence of the Vedanta. Whether we are
conscious of it or not, we think the Vedanta, we live in the Vedanta, we
breathe the Vedanta, and we die in the Vedanta, and every Hindu does
that. To preach Vedanta in the land of India, and before an Indian
audience, seems, therefore, to be an anomaly. But it is the one thing
that has to be preached, and it is the necessity of the age that it must
be preached. For, as I have just told you, all the Indian sects must
bear allegiance to the Upanishads; but among these sects there are many
apparent contradictions. Many times the great sages of yore themselves
could not understand the underlying harmony of the Upanishads. Many
times, even sages quarrelled, so much so that it became a proverb that
there are no sages who do not differ. But the time requires that a
better interpretation should be given to this underlying harmony of the
Upanishadic texts, whether they are dualistic, or non-dualistic,
quasi-dualistic, or so forth. That has to be shown before the world at
large, and this work is required as much in India as outside of India;
and I, through the grace of God, had the great good fortune to sit at
the feet of one whose whole life was such an interpretation, whose life,
a thousandfold more than whose teaching, was a living commentary on the
texts of the Upanishads, was in fact the spirit of the Upanishads living
in a human form. Perhaps I have got a little of that harmony; I do not
know whether I shall be able to express it or not. But this is my
attempt, my mission in life, to show that the Vedantic schools are not
contradictory, that they all necessitate each other, all fulfil each
other, and one, as it were, is the stepping-stone to the other, until
the goal, the Advaita, the Tat Tvam Asi, is reached. There was a time in
India when the Karma Kânda had its sway. There are many grand ideals, no
doubt, in that portion of the Vedas. Some of our present daily worship
is still according to the precepts of the Karma Kanda. But with all
that, the Karma Kanda of the Vedas has almost disappeared from India.
Very little of our life today is bound and regulated by the orders of
the Karma Kanda of the Vedas. In our ordinary lives we are mostly
Paurânikas or Tântrikas, and, even where some Vedic texts are used by
the Brahmins of India, the adjustment of the texts is mostly not
according to the Vedas, but according to the Tantras or the Puranas. As
such, to call ourselves Vaidikas in the sense of following the Karma
Kanda of the Vedas, I do not think, would be proper. But the other fact
stands that we are all of us Vedantists. The people who call themselves
Hindus had better be called Vedantists, and, as I have shown you, under
that one name Vaidantika come in all our various sects, whether dualists
or non-dualists.

The sects that are at the present time in India come to be divided in
general into the two great classes of dualists and monists. The little
differences which some of these sects insist upon, and upon the
authority of which want to take new names as pure Advaitists, or
qualified Advaitists, and so forth, do not matter much. As a
classification, either they are dualists or monists, and of the sects
existing at the present time, some of them are very new, and others seem
to be reproductions of very ancient sects. The one class I would present
by the life and philosophy of Râmânuja, and the other by Shankarâchârya.

Ramanuja is the leading dualistic philosopher of later India, whom all
the other dualistic sects have followed, directly or indirectly, both in
the substance of their teaching and in the organization of their sects
even down to some of the most minute points of their organization. You
will be astonished if you compare Ramanuja and his work with the other
dualistic Vaishnava sects in India, to see how much they resemble each
other in organization, teaching, and method. There is the great Southern
preacher Madhva Muni, and following him, our great Chaitanya of Bengal
who took up the philosophy of the Madhvas and preached it in Bengal.
There are some other sects also in Southern India, as the qualified
dualistic Shaivas. The Shaivas in most parts of India are Advaitists,
except in some portions of Southern India and in Ceylon. But they also
only substitute Shiva for Vishnu and are Ramanujists in every sense of
the term except in the doctrine of the soul. The followers of Ramanuja
hold that the soul is Anu, like a particle, very small, and the
followers of Shankaracharya hold that it is Vibhu, omnipresent. There
have been several non-dualistic sects. It seems that there have been
sects in ancient times which Shankara's movement has entirely swallowed
up and assimilated. You find sometimes a fling at Shankara himself in
some of the commentaries, especially in that of Vijnâna Bhikshu who,
although an Advaitist, attempts to upset the Mâyâvâda of Shankara. It
seems there were schools who did not believe in this Mayavada, and they
went so far as to call Shankara a crypto-Buddhist, Prachchhanna Bauddha,
and they thought this Mayavada was taken from the Buddhists and brought
within the Vedantic fold. However that may be, in modern times the
Advaitists have all ranged themselves under Shankaracharya; and
Shankaracharya and his disciples have been the great preachers of
Advaita both in Southern and in Northern India. The influence of
Shankaracharya did not penetrate much into our country of Bengal and in
Kashmir and the Punjab, but in Southern India the Smârtas are all
followers of Shankaracharya, and with Varanasi as the centre, his
influence is simply immense even in many parts of Northern India.

Now both Shankara and Ramanuja laid aside all claim to originality.
Ramanuja expressly tells us he is only following the great commentary of
Bodhâyana. भगवद्बोधायनकृतां विस्तीर्णां ब्रह्मसूत्रवृत्तिं पूर्वाचार्याः
संचिक्षिपुः तन्मतानुसारेण सूत्राक्षराणि व्याख्यास्यन्ते। — "Ancient
teachers abridged that extensive commentary on the *Brahma-sutras* which
was composed by the Bhagavân Bodhayana; in accordance with their
opinion, the words of the Sutra are explained." That is what Ramanuja
says at the beginning of his commentary, the *Shri-Bhâshya*. He takes it
up and makes of it a Samkshepa, and that is what we have today. I myself
never had an opportunity of seeing this commentary of Bodhayana. The
late Swami Dayânanda Saraswati wanted to reject every other commentary
of the *Vyâsa-Sutras* except that of Bodhayana; and although he never
lost an opportunity of having a fling at Ramanuja, he himself could
never produce the Bodhayana. I have sought for it all over India, and
never yet have been able to see it. But Ramanuja is very plain on the
point, and he tells us that he is taking the ideas, and sometimes the
very passages out of Bodhayana, and condensing them into the present
Ramanuja Bhashya. It seems that Shankaracharya was also doing the same.
There are a few places in his Bhashya which mention older commentaries,
and when we know that his Guru and his Guru's Guru had been Vedantists
of the same school as he, sometimes even more thorough-going, bolder
even than Shankara himself on certain points, it seems pretty plain that
he also was not preaching anything very original, and that even in his
Bhashya he himself had been doing the same work that Ramanuja did with
Bodhayana, but from what Bhashya, it cannot be discovered at the present
time.

All these Darshanas that you have ever seen or heard of are based upon
Upanishadic authority. Whenever they want to quote a Shruti, they mean
the Upanishads. They are always quoting the Upanishads. Following the
Upanishads there come other philosophies of India, but every one of them
failed in getting that hold on India which the philosophy of Vyasa got,
although the philosophy of Vyasa is a development out of an older one,
the Sankhya, and every philosophy and every system in India — I mean
throughout the world — owes much to Kapila, perhaps the greatest name in
the history of India in psychological and philosophical lines. The
influence of Kapila is everywhere seen throughout the world. Wherever
there is a recognised system of thought, there you can trace his
influence; even if it be thousands of years back, yet he stands there,
the shining, glorious, wonderful Kapila. His psychology and a good deal
of his philosophy have been accepted by all the sects of India with but
very little differences. In our own country, our Naiyâyika philosophers
could not make much impression on the philosophical world of India. They
were too busy with little things like species and genus, and so forth,
and that most cumbersome terminology, which it is a life's work to
study. As such, they were very busy with logic and left philosophy to
the Vedantists, but every one of the Indian philosophic sects in modern
times has adopted the logical terminology of the Naiyayikas of Bengal.
Jagadisha, Gadadhara, and Shiromani are as well known at Nadia as in
some of the cities in Malabar. But the philosophy of Vyasa, the
*Vyasa-Sutras*, is firm-seated and has attained the permanence of that
which it intended to present to men, the Brahman of the Vedantic side of
philosophy. Reason was entirely subordinated to the Shrutis, and as
Shankaracharya declares, Vyasa did not care to reason at all. His idea
in writing the Sutras was just to bring together, and with one thread to
make a garland of the flowers of Vedantic texts. His Sutras are admitted
so far as they are subordinate to the authority of the Upanishads, and
no further.

And, as I have said, all the sects of India now hold these
*Vyasa-Sutras* to be the great authority, and every new sect in India
starts with a fresh commentary on the *Vyasa-Sutras* according to its
light. The difference between some of these commentators is sometimes
very great, sometimes the text-torturing is quite disgusting. The
*Vyasa-Sutras* have got the place of authority, and no one can expect to
found a sect in India until he can write a fresh commentary on the
*Vyasa-Sutras*.

Next in authority is the celebrated Gita. The great glory of
Shankaracharya was his preaching of the Gita. It is one of the greatest
works that this great man did among the many noble works of his noble
life — the preaching of the Gita and writing the most beautiful
commentary upon it. And he has been followed by all founders of the
orthodox sects in India, each of whom has written a commentary on the
Gita.

The Upanishads are many, and said to be one hundred and eight, but some
declare them to be still larger in number. Some of them are evidently of
a much later date, as for instance, the Allopanishad in which Allah is
praised and Mohammed is called the Rajasulla. I have been told that this
was written during the reign of Akbar to bring the Hindus and
Mohammedans together, and sometimes they got hold of some word, as
Allah, or Illa in the Samhitâs, and made an Upanishad on it. So in this
Allopanishad, Mohammed is the Rajasulla, whatever that may mean. There
are other sectarian Upanishads of the same species, which you find to be
entirely modern, and it has been so easy to write them, seeing that this
language of the Samhitâ portion of the Vedas is so archaic that there is
no grammar to it. Years ago I had an idea of studying the grammar of the
Vedas, and I began with all earnestness to study Panini and the
*Mahâbhâshya*, but to my surprise I found that the best part of the
Vedic grammar consists only of exceptions to rules. A rule is made, and
after that comes a statement to the effect, "This rule will be an
exception". So you see what an amount of liberty there is for anybody to
write anything, the only safeguard being the dictionary of Yâska. Still,
in this you will find, for the most part, but a large number of
synonyms. Given all that, how easy it is to write any number of
Upanishads you please. Just have a little knowledge of Sanskrit, enough
to make words look like the old archaic words, and you have no fear of
grammar. Then you bring in Rajasulla or any other Sulla you like. In
that way many Upanishads have been manufactured, and I am told that that
is being done even now. In some parts of India, I am perfectly certain,
they are trying to manufacture such Upanishads among the different
sects. But among the Upanishads are those, which, on the face of them,
bear the evidence of genuineness, and these have been taken up by the
great commentators and commented upon, especially by Shankara, followed
by Ramanuja and all the rest.

There are one or two more ideas with regard to the Upanishads which I
want to bring to your notice, for these are an ocean of knowledge, and
to talk about the Upanishads, even for an incompetent person like
myself, takes years and not one lecture only. I want, therefore, to
bring to your notice one or two points in the study of the Upanishads.
In the first place, they are the most wonderful poems in the world. If
you read the Samhita portion of the Vedas, you now and then find
passages of most marvellous beauty. For instance, the famous Shloka
which describes Chaos — तम आसीत्तमसा गूढमग्रे etc. — "When darkness was
hidden in darkness", so on it goes. One reads and feels the wonderful
sublimity of the poetry. Do you mark this that outside of India, and
inside also, there have been attempts at painting the sublime. But
outside, it has always been the infinite in the muscles the external
world, the infinite of matter, or of space. When Milton or Dante, or any
other great European poet, either ancient or modern, wants to paint a
picture of the infinite, he tries to soar outside, to make you feel the
infinite through the muscles. That attempt has been made here also. You
find it in the Samhitas, the infinite of extension most marvellously
painted and placed before the readers, such as has been done nowhere
else. Mark that one sentence — तम आसीत् तमसा गूढम्, — and now mark the
description of darkness by three poets. Take our own Kâlidâsa —
"Darkness which can be penetrated with the point of a needle"; then
Milton — "No light but rather darkness visible"; but come now to the
Upanishad, "Darkness was covering darkness", "Darkness was hidden in
darkness". We who live in the tropics can understand it, the sudden
outburst of the monsoon, when in a moment, the horizon becomes darkened
and clouds become covered with more rolling black clouds. So on, the
poem goes; but yet, in the Samhita portion, all these attempts are
external. As everywhere else, the attempts at finding the solution of
the great problems of life have been through the external world. Just as
the Greek mind or the modern European mind wants to find the solution of
life and of all the sacred problems of Being by searching into the
external world. so also did our forefathers, and just as the Europeans
failed, they failed also. But the Western people never made a move more,
they remained there, they failed in the search for the solution of the
great problems of life and death in the external world, and there they
remained, stranded; our forefathers also found it impossible, but were
bolder in declaring the utter helplessness of the senses to find the
solution. Nowhere else was the answer better put than in the Upanishad:
यतो वाचो निवर्तन्ते अप्राप्य मनसा सह। — "From whence words come back
reflected, together with the mind"; न तत्रचक्षुर्गच्छति न वाग्गच्छति। —
"There the eye cannot go, nor can speech reach". There are various
sentences which declare the utter helplessness of the senses, but they
did not stop there; they fell back upon the internal nature of man, they
went to get the answer from their own soul, they became introspective;
they gave up external nature as a failure, as nothing could be done
there, as no hope, no answer could be found; they discovered that dull,
dead matter would not give them truth, and they fell back upon the
shining soul of man, and there the answer was found.

तमेवैकं जानथ आत्मानम् अन्या वाचो विमुञ्चथ। — "Know this Atman alone,"
they declared, "give up all other vain words, and hear no other." In the
Atman they found the solution — the greatest of all Atmans, the God, the
Lord of this universe, His relation to the Atman of man, our duty to
Him, and through that our relation to each other. And herein you find
the most sublime poetry in the world. No more is the attempt made to
paint this Atman in the language of matter. Nay, for it they have given
up even all positive language. No more is there any attempt to come to
the senses to give them the idea of the infinite, no more is there an
external, dull, dead, material, spacious, sensuous infinite, but instead
of that comes something which is as fine as even that mentioned in the
saying —

न तत्र सूर्यो भाति न चन्द्रतारकं नेमा विेद्युतो भान्ति कुतोऽयमग्निः।  
तमेव भान्तमनुभाति सर्वं तस्य भासा सर्वमिदं विभाति॥

What poetry in the world can be more sublime than this! "There the sun
cannot illumine, nor the moon, nor the stars, there this flash of
lightning cannot illumine; what to speak of this mortal fire!" Such
poetry you find nowhere else. Take that most marvellous Upanishad, the
Katha. What a wonderful finish, what a most marvellous art displayed in
that poem! How wonderfully it opens with that little boy to whom
Shraddhâ came, who wanted to see Yama, and how that most marvellous of
all teachers, Death himself, teaches him the great lessons of life and
death! And what was his quest? To know the secret of death.

The second point that I want you to remember is the perfectly impersonal
character of the Upanishads. Although we find many names, and many
speakers, and many teachers in the Upanishads, not one of them stands as
an authority of the Upanishads, not one verse is based upon the life of
any one of them. These are simply figures like shadows moving in the
background, unfelt, unseen, unrealised, but the real force is in the
marvellous, the brilliant, the effulgent texts of the Upanishads,
perfectly impersonal. If twenty Yâjnavalkyas came and lived and died, it
does not matter; the texts are there. And yet it is against no
personality; it is broad and expansive enough to embrace all the
personalities that the world has yet produced, and all that are yet to
come. It has nothing to say against the worship of persons, or Avataras,
or sages. On the other hand, it is always upholding it. At the same
time, it is perfectly impersonal. It is a most marvellous idea, like the
God it preaches, the impersonal idea of the Upanishads. For the sage,
the thinker, the philosopher, for the rationalist, it is as much
impersonal as any modern scientist can wish. And these are our
scriptures. You must remember that what the Bible is to the Christians,
what the Koran is to the Mohammedans, what the Tripitaka is to the
Buddhist, what the Zend Avesta is to the Parsees, these Upanishads are
to us. These and nothing but these are our scriptures. The Purânas, the
Tantras, and all the other books, even the *Vyasa-Sutras*, are of
secondary, tertiary authority, but primary are the Vedas. Manu, and the
Puranas, and all the other books are to be taken so far as they agree
with the authority of the Upanishads, and when they disagree they are to
be rejected without mercy. This we ought to remember always, but
unfortunately for India, at the present time we have forgotten it. A
petty village custom seems now the real authority and not the teaching
of the Upanishads. A petty idea current in a wayside village in Bengal
seems to have the authority of the Vedas, and even something better. And
that word "orthodox", how wonderful its influence! To the villager, the
following of every little bit of the Karma Kanda is the very height of
"orthodoxy", and one who does not do it is told, "Go away, you are no
more a Hindu." So there are, most unfortunately in my motherland,
persons who will take up one of these Tantras and say, that the practice
of this Tantra is to be obeyed; he who does not do so is no more
orthodox in his views. Therefore it is better for us to remember that in
the Upanishads is the primary authority, even the Grihya and Shrauta
Sutras are subordinate to the authority of the Vedas. They are the words
of the Rishis, our forefathers, and you have to believe them if you want
to become a Hindu. You may even believe the most peculiar ideas about
the Godhead, but if you deny the authority of the Vedas, you are a
Nâstika. Therein lies the difference between the scriptures of the
Christians or the Buddhists and ours; theirs are all Puranas, and not
scriptures, because they describe the history of the deluge, and the
history of kings and reigning families, and record the lives of great
men, and so on. This is the work of the Puranas, and so far as they
agree with the Vedas, they are good. So far as the Bible and the
scriptures of other nations agree with the Vedas, they are perfectly
good, but when they do not agree, they are no more to be accepted. So
with the Koran. There are many moral teachings in these, and so far as
they agree with the Vedas they have the authority of the Puranas, but no
more. The idea is that the Vedas were never written; the idea is, they
never came into existence. I was told once by a Christian missionary
that their scriptures have a historical character, and therefore are
true, to which I replied, "Mine have no historical character and
*therefore* they are true; yours being historical, they were evidently
made by some man the other day. Yours are man-made and mine are not;
their non-historicity is in their favour." Such is the relation of the
Vedas with all the other scriptures at the present day.

We now come to the teachings of the Upanishads. Various texts are there.
Some are perfectly dualistic, while others are monistic. But there are
certain doctrines which are agreed to by all the different sects of
India. First, there is the doctrine of Samsâra or reincarnation of the
soul. Secondly, they all agree in their psychology; first there is the
body, behind that, what they call the Sukshma Sharira, the mind, and
behind that even, is the Jiva. That is the great difference between
Western and Indian psychology; in the Western psychology the mind is the
soul, here it is not. The Antahkarana, the internal instrument, as the
mind is called, is only an instrument in the hands of that Jiva, through
which the Jiva works on the body or on the external world. Here they all
agree, and they all also agree that this Jiva or Atman, Jivatman as it
is called by various sects, is eternal, without beginning; and that it
is going from birth to birth, until it gets a final release. They all
agree in this, and they also all agree in one other most vital point,
which alone marks characteristically, most prominently, most vitally,
the difference between the Indian and the Western mind, and it is this,
that everything is in the soul. There is no inspiration, but properly
speaking, expiration. All powers and all purity and all greatness —
everything is in the soul. The Yogi would tell you that the Siddhis -
Animâ, Laghimâ, and so on — that he wants to attain to are not to be
attained, in the proper sense of the word, but are already there in the
soul; the work is to make them manifest. Patanjali, for instance, would
tell you that even in the lowest worm that crawls under your feet, all
the eightfold Yogi's powers are already existing. The difference has
been made by the body. As soon as it gets a better body, the powers will
become manifest, but they are there. निमित्तमप्रयोजकं प्रकृतीनां
वरणभेदस्तु ततः क्षेत्रिकवत्। — "Good and bad deeds are not the direct
causes in the transformations of nature, but they act as breakers of
obstacles to the evolutions of nature: as a farmer breaks the obstacles
to the course of water, which then runs down by its own nature." Here
Patanjali gives the celebrated example of the cultivator bringing water
into his field from a huge tank somewhere. The tank is already filled
and the water would flood his land in a moment, only there is a mud-wall
between the tank and his field. As soon as the barrier is broken, in
rushes the water out of its own power and force. This mass of power and
purity and perfection is in the soul already. The only difference is the
Âvarana — this veil — that has been cast over it. Once the veil is
removed, the soul attains to purity, and its powers become manifest.
This, you ought to remember, is the great difference between Eastern and
Western thought. Hence you find people teaching such awful doctrines as
that we are all born sinners, and because we do not believe in such
awful doctrines we are all born wicked. They never stop to think that if
we are by our very nature wicked, we can never be good — for how can
nature change? If it changes, it contradicts itself; it is not nature.
We ought to remember this. Here the dualist, and the Advaitist, and all
others in India agree.

The next point, which all the sects in India believe in, is God. Of
course their ideas of God will be different. The dualists believe in a
Personal God, and a personal only. I want you to understand this word
personal a little more. This word personal does not mean that God has a
body, sits on a throne somewhere, and rules this world, but means
Saguna, with qualities. There are many descriptions of the Personal God.
This Personal God as the Ruler, the Creator, the Preserver, and the
Destroyer of this universe is believed in by all the sects. The
Advaitists believe something more. They believe in a still higher phase
of this Personal God, which is personal-impersonal. No adjective can
illustrate where there is no qualification, and the Advaitist would not
give Him any qualities except the three —Sat-Chit-Ananda, Existence,
Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute. This is what Shankara did. But in the
Upanishads themselves you find they penetrate even further, and say,
nothing can be predicated of it except Neti, Neti, "Not this, Not this".

Here all the different sects of India agree. But taking the dualistic
side, as I have said, I will take Ramanuja as the typical dualist of
India, the great modern representative of the dualistic system. It is a
pity that our people in Bengal know so very little about the great
religious leaders in India, who have been born in other parts of the
country; and for the matter of that, during the whole of the Mohammedan
period, with the exception of our Chaitanya, all the great religious
leaders were born in Southern India, and it is the intellect of Southern
India that is really governing India now; for even Chaitanya belonged to
one of these sects, a sect of the Mâdhvas. According to Ramanuja, these
three entities are eternal — God, and soul, and nature. The souls are
eternal, and they will remain eternally existing, individualised through
eternity, and will retain their individuality all through. Your soul
will be different from my soul through all eternity, says Ramanuja, and
so will this nature — which is an existing fact, as much a fact as the
existence of soul or the existence of God — remain always different. And
God is interpenetrating, the essence of the soul, He is the Antaryâmin.
In this sense Ramanuja sometimes thinks that God is one with the soul,
the essence of the soul, and these souls — at the time of Pralaya, when
the whole of nature becomes what he calls Sankuchita, contracted —
become contracted and minute and remain so for a time. And at the
beginning of the next cycle they all come out, according to their past
Karma, and undergo the effect of that Karma. Every action that makes the
natural inborn purity and perfection of the soul get contracted is a bad
action, and every action that makes it come out and expand itself is a
good action, says Ramanuja. Whatever helps to make the Vikâsha of the
soul is good, and whatever makes it Sankuchita is bad. And thus the soul
is going on, expanding or contracting in its actions, till through the
grace of God comes salvation. And that grace comes to all souls, says
Ramanuja, that are pure and struggle for that grace.

There is a celebrated verse in the Shrutis, आहारशुध्दौ सत्त्वशुध्दिः
सत्त्वशुध्दौ ध्रुवास्मृतिः "When the food is pure, then the Sattva
becomes pure; when the Sattva is pure, then the Smriti" — the memory of
the Lord, or the memory of our own perfection — if you are an Advaitist
— "becomes truer, steadier, and absolute". Here is a great discussion.
First of all, what is this Sattva? We know that according to the Sankhya
— and it has been admitted by all our sects of philosophy — the body is
composed of three sorts of materials — not qualities. It is the general
idea that Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas are qualities. Not at all, not
qualities but the materials of this universe, and with Âhâra-shuddhi,
when the food is pure, the Sattva material becomes pure. The one theme
of the Vedanta is to get this Sattva. As I have told you, the soul is
already pure and perfect, and it is, according to the Vedanta, covered
up by Rajas and Tamas particles. The Sattva particles are the most
luminous, and the effulgence of the soul penetrates through them as
easily as light through glass. So if the Rajas and Tamas particles go,
and leave the Sattva particles, in this state the power and purity of
the soul will appear, and leave the soul more manifest.

Therefore it is necessary to have this Sattva. And the text says, "When
Ahara becomes pure". Ramanuja takes this word Ahara to mean food, and he
has made it one of the turning points of his philosophy. Not only so, it
has affected the whole of India, and all the different sects. Therefore
it is necessary for us to understand what it means, for that, according
to Ramanuja, is one of the principal factors in our life, Ahara-shuddhi.
What makes food impure? asks Ramanuja. Three sorts of defects make food
impure — first, Jâti-dosha, the defect in the very nature of the class
to which the food belongs, as the smell in onions, garlic, and suchlike.
The next is Âshraya-dosha, the defect in the person from whom the food
comes; food coming from a wicked person will make you impure. I myself
have seen many great sages in India following strictly that advice all
their lives. Of course they had the power to know who brought the food,
and even who had touched the food, and I have seen it in my own life,
not once, but hundreds of times. Then Nimitta-dosha, the defect of
impure things or influences coming in contact with food is another. We
had better attend to that a little more now. It has become too prevalent
in India to take food with dirt and dust and bits of hair in it. If food
is taken from which these three defects have been removed, that makes
Sattva-shuddhi, purifies the Sattva. Religion seems to be a very easy
task then. Then every one can have religion if it comes by eating pure
food only. There is none so weak or incompetent in this world, that I
know, who cannot save himself from these defects. Then comes
Shankaracharya, who says this word Ahara means thought collected in the
mind; when that becomes pure, the Sattva becomes pure, and not before
that. You may eat what you like. If food alone would purify the Sattva,
then feed the monkey with milk and rice all its life; would it become a
great Yogi? Then the cows and the deer would be great Yogis. As has been
said, "If it is by bathing much that heaven is reached, the fishes will
get to heaven first. If by eating vegetables a man gets to heaven, the
cows and the deer will get to heaven first."

But what is the solution? Both are necessary. Of course the idea that
Shankaracharya gives us of Ahara is the primary idea. But pure food, no
doubt, helps pure thought; it has an intimate connection; both ought to
be there. But the defect is that in modern India we have forgotten the
advice of Shankaracharya and taken only the "pure food" meaning. That is
why people get mad with me when I say, religion has got into the
kitchen; and if you had been in Madras with me, you would have agreed
with me. The Bengalis are better than that. In Madras they throw away
food if anybody looks at it. And with all this, I do not see that the
people are any the better there. If only eating this and that sort of
food and saving it from the looks of this person and that person would
give them perfection, you would expect them all to be perfect men, which
they are not.

Thus, although these are to be combined and linked together to make a
perfect whole, do not put the cart before the horse. There is a cry
nowadays about this and that food and about Varnâshrama, and the
Bengalis are the most vociferous in these cries. I would ask every one
of you, what do you know about this Varnashrama? Where are the four
castes today in this country? Answer me; I do not see the four castes.
Just as our Bengali proverb has it, "A headache without a head", so you
want to make this Varnashrama here. There are not four castes here. I
see only the Brâhmin and the Shudra. If there are the Kshatriyas and the
Vaishyas, where are they and why do not you Brahmins order them to take
the Yajnopavita and study the Vedas, as every Hindu ought to do? And if
the Vaishyas and the Kshatriyas do not exist, but only the Brahmins and
the Shudras, the Shastras say that the Brahmin must not live in a
country where there are only Shudras; so depart bag and baggage! Do you
know what the Shastras say about people who have been eating Mlechchha
food and living under a government of the Mlechchhas, as you have for
the past thousand years? Do you know the penance for that? The penance
would be burning oneself with one's own hands. Do you want to pass as
teachers and walk like hypocrisies? If you believe in your Shastras,
burn yourselves first like the one great Brahmin did who went with
Alexander the Great and burnt himself because he thought he had eaten
the food of a Mlechchha. Do like that, and you will see that the whole
nation will be at your feet. You do not believe in your own Shastras and
yet want to make others believe in them. If you think you are not able
to do that in this age, admit your weakness and excuse the weakness of
others, take the other castes up, give them a helping hand, let them
study the Vedas and become just as good Aryans as any other Aryans in
the world, and be you likewise Aryans, you Brahmins of Bengal.

Give up this filthy Vâmâchâra that is killing your country. You have not
seen the other parts of India. When I see how much the Vamachara has
entered our society, I find it a most disgraceful place with all its
boast of culture. These Vamachara sects are honeycombing our society in
Bengal. Those who come out in the daytime and preach most loudly about
Âchâra, it is they who carry on the horrible debauchery at night and are
backed by the most dreadful books. They are ordered by the books to do
these things. You who are of Bengal know it. The Bengali Shastras are
the Vamachara Tantras. They are published by the cart-load, and you
poison the minds of your children with them instead of teaching them
your Shrutis. Fathers of Calcutta, do you not feel ashamed that such
horrible stuff as these Vamachara Tantras, with translations too, should
be put into the hands of your boys and girls, and their minds poisoned,
and that they should be brought up with the idea that these are the
Shastras of the Hindus? If you are ashamed, take them away from your
children, and let them read the true Shastras, the Vedas, the Gita, the
Upanishads.

According to the dualistic sects of India, the individual souls remain
as individuals throughout, and God creates the universe out of
pre-existing material only as the efficient cause. According to the
Advaitists, on the other hand, God is both the material and the
efficient cause of the universe. He is not only the Creator of the
universe, but He creates it out of Himself. That is the Advaitist
position. There are crude dualistic sects who believe that this world
has been created by God out of Himself, and at the same time God is
eternally separate from the universe, and everything is eternally
subordinate to the Ruler of the universe. There are sects too who also
believe that out of Himself God has evolved this universe, and
individuals in the long run attain to Nirvâna to give up the finite and
become the Infinite. But these sects have disappeared. The one sect of
Advaitists that you see in modern India is composed of the followers of
Shankara. According to Shankara, God is both the material and the
efficient cause through Mâyâ, but not in reality. God has not become
this universe; but the universe is not, and God is. This is one of the
highest points to understand of Advaita Vedanta, this idea of Maya. I am
afraid I have no time to discuss this one most difficult point in our
philosophy. Those of you who are acquainted with Western philosophy will
find something very similar in Kant. But I must warn you, those of you
who have studied Professor Max Müller's writings on Kant, that there is
one idea most misleading. It was Shankara who first found out the idea
of the identity of time, space, and causation with Maya, and I had the
good fortune to find one or two passages in Shankara's commentaries and
send them to my friend the Professor. So even that idea was here in
India. Now this is a peculiar theory — this Maya theory of the Advaita
Vedantists. The Brahman is all that exists, but differentiation has been
caused by this Maya. Unity, the one Brahman, is the ultimate, the goal,
and herein is an eternal dissension again between Indian and Western
thought. India has thrown this challenge to the world for thousands of
years, and the challenge has been taken up by different nations, and the
result is that they all succumbed and you live. This is the challenge
that this world is a delusion, that it is all Maya, that whether you eat
off the ground with your fingers or dine off golden plates, whether you
live in palaces and are one of the mightiest monarchs or are the poorest
of beggars, death is the one result; it is all the same, all Maya. That
is the old Indian theme, and again and again nations are springing up
trying to unsay it, to disprove it; becoming great, with enjoyment as
their watchword, power in their hands, they use that power to the
utmost, enjoy to the utmost, and the next moment they die. We stand for
ever because we see that everything is Maya. The children of Maya live
for ever, but the children of enjoyment die.

Here again is another great difference. Just as you find the attempts of
Hegel and Schopenhauer in German philosophy, so you will find the very
same ideas brought forward in ancient India. Fortunately for us,
Hegelianism was nipped in the bud and not allowed to sprout and cast its
baneful shoots over this motherland of ours. Hegel's one idea is that
the one, the absolute, is only chaos, and that the individualized form
is the greater. The world is greater than the non-world, Samsâra is
greater than salvation. That is the one idea, and the more you plunge
into this Samsara the more your soul is covered with the workings of
life, the better you are. They say, do you not see how we build houses,
cleanse the streets, enjoy the senses? Ay, behind that they may hide
rancour, misery, horror — behind every bit of that enjoyment.

On the other hand, our philosophers have from the very first declared
that every manifestation, what you call evolution, is vain, a vain
attempt of the unmanifested to manifest itself. Ay, you the mighty cause
of this universe, trying to reflect yourself in little mud puddles! But
after making the attempt for a time you find out it was all in vain and
beat a retreat to the place from whence you came. This is Vairâgya, or
renunciation, and the very beginning of religion. How can religion or
morality begin without renunciation itself? The Alpha and Omega is
renunciation. "Give up," says the Veda, "give up." That is the one way,
"Give up". न प्रजया धनेन त्यागेनैकेऽमृतत्वमानशुः — "Neither through
wealth, nor through progeny, but by giving up alone that immortality is
to be reached." That is the dictate of the Indian books. Of course,
there have been great givers-up of the world, even sitting on thrones.
But even (King) Janaka himself had to renounce; who was a greater
renouncer than he? But in modern times we all want to be called Janakas!
They are all Janakas (lit. fathers) of children — unclad, ill-fed,
miserable children. The word Janaka can be applied to them in that sense
only; they have none of the shining, Godlike thoughts as the old Janaka
had. These are our modern Janakas! A little less of this Janakism now,
and come straight to the mark! If you can give up, you will have
religion. If you cannot, you may read all the books that are in the
world, from East to West, swallow all the libraries, and become the
greatest of Pandits, but if you have Karma Kanda only, you are nothing;
there is no spirituality. Through renunciation alone this immortality is
to be reached. It is the power, the great power, that cares not even for
the universe; then it is that ब्रह्माण्डम् गोष्पदायते।

"The whole universe becomes like a hollow made by a cow's foot."

Renunciation, that is the flag, the banner of India, floating over the
world, the one undying thought which India sends again and again as a
warning to dying races, as a warning to all tyranny, as a warning to
wickedness in the world. Ay, Hindus, let not your hold of that banner
go. Hold it aloft. Even if you are weak and cannot renounce, do not
lower the ideal. Say, "I am weak and cannot renounce the world", but do
not try to be hypocrites, torturing texts, and making specious
arguments, and trying to throw dust in the eyes of people who are
ignorant. Do not do that, but own you are weak. For the idea is great,
that of renunciation. What matters it if millions fail in the attempt,
if ten soldiers or even two return victorious! Blessed be the millions
dead! Their blood has bought the victory. This renunciation is the one
ideal throughout the different Vedic sects except one, and that is the
Vallabhâchârya sect in Bombay Presidency, and most of you are aware what
comes where renunciation does not exist. We want orthodoxy — even the
hideously orthodox, even those who smother themselves with ashes, even
those who stand with their hands uplifted. Ay, we want them, unnatural
though they be, for standing for that idea of giving up, and acting as a
warning to the race against succumbing to the effeminate luxuries that
are creeping into India, eating into our very vitals, and tending to
make the whole race a race of hypocrites. We want to have a little of
asceticism. Renunciation conquered India in days of yore, it has still
to conquer India. Still it stands as the greatest and highest of Indian
ideals — this renunciation. The land of Buddha, the land of Ramanuja, of
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, the land of renunciation, the land where, from
the days of yore, Karma Kanda was preached against, and even today there
are hundreds who have given up everything, and become Jivanmuktas — ay,
will that land give up its ideals? Certainly not. There may be people
whose brains have become turned by the Western luxurious ideals; there
may be thousands and hundreds of thousands who have drunk deep of
enjoyment, this curse of the West — the senses — the curse of the world;
yet for all that, there will be other thousands in this motherland of
mine to whom religion will ever be a reality, and who will be ever ready
to give up without counting the cost, if need be.

Another ideal very common in all our sects, I want to place before you;
it is also a vast subject. This unique idea that religion is to be
realised is in India alone. नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्यो न मेधया न बहुना
श्रुतेन — "This Atman is not to be reached by too much talking, nor is
it to be reached by the power of intellect, nor by much study of the
scriptures." Nay, ours is the only scripture in the world that declares,
not even by the study of the scriptures can the Atman be realised — not
talks, not lecturing, none of that, but It is to be realised. It comes
from the teacher to the disciple. When this insight comes to the
disciple, everything is cleared up and realisation follows.

One more idea. There is a peculiar custom in Bengal, which they call
Kula-Guru, or hereditary Guruship. "My father was your Guru, now I shall
be your Guru. My father was the Guru of your father, so shall I be
yours." What is a Guru? Let us go back to the Shrutis — "He who knows
the secret of the Vedas", not bookworms, not grammarians, not Pandits in
general, but he who knows the meaning. यथा खरश्चन्दनभारवाही भारस्य
वेत्ता न तु चन्दनस्य।— "An ass laden with a load of sandalwood knows
only the weight of the wood, but not its precious qualities"; so are
these Pandits. We do not want such. What can they teach if they have no
realisation? When I was a boy here, in this city of Calcutta, I used to
go from place to place in search of religion, and everywhere I asked the
lecturer after hearing very big lectures, "Have you seen God?" The man
was taken aback at the idea of seeing God; and the only man who told me,
"I have", was Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, and not only so, but he said, "I
will put you in the way of seeing Him too". The Guru is not a man who
twists and tortures texts वाग्वैखरी शब्दझरी शास्त्रव्याख्यानकौशलं
वैदुष्यं विदुषां तद्वद्भुक्तये न तु मुक्तये। — "Different ways of
throwing out words, different ways of explaining texts of the
scriptures, these are for the enjoyment of the learned, not for
freedom." Shrotriya, he who knows the secret of the Shrutis, Avrijina,
the sinless, and Akâmahata, unpierced by desire — he who does not want
to make money by teaching you — he is the Shânta, the Sâdhu, who comes
as the spring which brings the leaves and blossoms to various plants but
does not ask anything from the plant, for its very nature is to do good.
It does good and there it is. Such is the Guru, तीर्णाः स्वयं
भीमभवार्णवं जनानहेतुनान्यानपि तारयन्तः — "Who has himself crossed this
terrible ocean of life, and without any idea of gain to himself, helps
others also to cross the ocean." This is the Guru, and mark that none
else can be a Guru, for

अविद्यायामन्तरे वर्तमानाः स्वयं धीराः पण्डितम्मन्यमानाः।  
दन्द्रम्यमाणाः परियन्ति मूढाः अन्धेनैव नीयमाना यथान्धाः॥

— "Themselves steeped in darkness, but in the pride of their hearts,
thinking they know everything, the fools want to help others, and they
go round and round in many crooked ways, staggering to and fro, and thus
like the blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch." Thus say
the Vedas. Compare that and your present custom. You are Vedantists, you
are very orthodox, are you not? You are great Hindus and very orthodox.
Ay, what I want to do is to make you more orthodox. The more orthodox
you are, the more sensible; and the more you think of modern orthodoxy,
the more foolish you are. Go back to your old orthodoxy, for in those
days every sound that came from these books, every pulsation, was out of
a strong, steady, and sincere heart; every note was true. After that
came degradation in art, in science, in religion, in everything,
national degradation. We have no time to discuss the causes, but all the
books written about that period breathe of the pestilence — the national
decay; instead of vigour, only wails and cries. Go back, go back to the
old days when there was strength and vitality. Be strong once more,
drink deep of this fountain of yore, and that is the only condition of
life in India.

According to the Advaitist, this individuality which we have today is a
delusion. This has been a hard nut to crack all over the world.
Forthwith you tell a man he is not an individual, he is so much afraid
that his individuality, whatever that may be, will be lost! But the
Advaitist says there never has been an individuality, you have been
changing every moment of your life. You were a child and thought in one
way, now you are a man and think another way, again you will be an old
man and think differently. Everybody is changing. If so, where is your
individuality? Certainly not in the body, or in the mind, or in thought.
And beyond that is your Atman, and, says the Advaitist, this Atman is
the Brahman Itself. There cannot be two infinites. There is only one
individual and it is infinite. In plain words, we are rational beings,
and we want to reason. And what is reason? More or less of
classification, until you cannot go on any further. And the finite can
only find its ultimate rest when it is classified into the infinite.
Take up a finite thing and go on analysing it, but you will find rest
nowhere until you reach the ultimate or infinite, and that infinite,
says the Advaitist, is what alone exists. Everything else is Maya,
nothing else has real existence; whatever is of existence in any
material thing is this Brahman; we are this Brahman, and the shape and
everything else is Maya. Take away the form and shape, and you and I are
all one. But we have to guard against the word, "I". Generally people
say, "If I am the Brahman, why cannot I do this and that?" But this is
using the word in a different sense. As soon as you think you are bound,
no more you are Brahman, the Self, who wants nothing, whose light is
inside. All His pleasures and bliss are inside; perfectly satisfied with
Himself, He wants nothing, expects nothing, perfectly fearless,
perfectly free. That is Brahman. In That we are all one.

Now this seems, therefore, to be the great point of difference between
the dualist and the Advaitist. You find even great commentators like
Shankaracharya making meanings of texts, which, to my mind, sometimes do
not seem to be justified. Sometimes you find Ramanuja dealing with texts
in a way that is not very clear. The idea has been even among our
Pandits that only one of these sects can be true and the rest must be
false, although they have the idea in the Shrutis, the most wonderful
idea that India has yet to give to the world: एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा
वदन्ति। — "That which exists is One; sages call It by various names."
That has been the theme, and the working out of the whole of this
life-problem of the nation is the working out of that theme — एकं
सद्विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति। Yea, except a very few learned men, I mean,
barring a very few spiritual men, in India, we always forget this. We
forget this great idea, and you will find that there are persons among
Pandits — I should think ninety-eight per cent — who are of opinion that
either the Advaitist will be true, or the Vishishtadvaitist will be
true, or the Dvaitist will be true; and if you go to Varanasi, and sit
for five minutes in one of the Ghats there, you will have demonstration
of what I say. You will see a regular bull-fight going on about these
various sects and things.

Thus it remains. Then came one whose life was the explanation, whose
life was the working out of the harmony that is the background of all
the different sects of India, I mean Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. It is his
life that explains that both of these are necessary, that they are like
the geocentric and the heliocentric theories in astronomy. When a child
is taught astronomy, he is taught the geocentric first, and works out
similar ideas of astronomy to the geocentric. But when he comes to finer
points of astronomy, the heliocentric will be necessary, and he will
understand it better. Dualism is the natural idea of the senses; as long
as we are bound by the senses we are bound to see a God who is only
Personal, and nothing but Personal, we are bound to see the world as it
is. Says Ramanuja, "So long as you think you are a body, and you think
you are a mind, and you think you are a Jiva, every act of perception
will give you the three — Soul, and nature, and something as causing
both." But yet, at the same time, even the idea of the body disappears
where the mind itself becomes finer and finer, till it has almost
disappeared, when all the different things that make us fear, make us
weak, and bind us down to this body-life have disappeared. Then and then
alone one finds out the truth of that grand old teaching. What is the
teaching?

इहैव तैर्जितः सर्गो येषां साम्ये स्थितं मनः।  
निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म तस्माद् ब्रह्मणि ते स्थिताः॥

"Even in this life they have conquered the round of birth and death
whose minds are firm-fixed on the sameness of everything, for God is
pure and the same to all, and therefore such are said to be living in
God."

समं पश्यन् हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम्।  
न हिनस्त्यात्मनात्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम्॥

"Thus seeing the Lord the same everywhere, he, the sage, does not hurt
the Self by the self, and so goes to the highest goal."

</div>
