---
title: BHAKTI

---
<div>

[←](vedic_teaching_in_theory_and_practice.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_common_bases_of_hinduism.htm)

  

## BHAKTI

(*Delivered at Sialkote, Punjab*)

In response to invitations from the Punjab and Kashmir, the Swami
Vivekananda travelled through those parts. He stayed in Kashmir for over
a month and his work there was very much appreciated by the Maharaja and
his brothers. He then spent a few days in visiting Murree, Rawalpindi,
and Jammu, and at each of these places he delivered lectures.
Subsequently he visited Sialkote and lectured twice, once in English and
once in Hindi. The subject of the Swamiji's Hindi lecture was Bhakti, a
summary of which, translated into English, is given below:

The various religions that exist in the world, although they differ in
the form of worship they take, are really one. In some places the people
build temples and worship in them, in some they worship fire, in others
they prostrate themselves before idols, while there are many who do not
believe at all in God. All are true, for, if you look to the real
spirit, the real religion, and the truths in each of them, they are all
alike. In some religions God is not worshipped, nay, His existence is
not believed in, but good and worthy men are worshipped as if they were
Gods. The example worthy of citation in this case is Buddhism. Bhakti is
everywhere, whether directed to God or to noble persons. Upâsâna in the
form of Bhakti is everywhere supreme, and Bhakti is more easily attained
than Jnâna. The latter requires favourable circumstances and strenuous
practice. Yoga cannot be properly practiced unless a man is physically
very healthy and free from all worldly attachments. But Bhakti can be
more easily practiced by persons in every condition of life. Shândilya
Rishi, who wrote about Bhakti, says that extreme love for God is Bhakti.
Prahlâda speaks to the same effect. If a man does not get food one day,
he is troubled; if his son dies, how agonising it is to him! The true
Bhakta feels the same pangs in his heart when he yearns after God. The
great quality of Bhakti is that it cleanses the mind, and the firmly
established Bhakti for the Supreme Lord is alone sufficient to purify
the mind. "O God, Thy names are innumerable, but in every name Thy power
is manifest, and every name is pregnant with deep and mighty
significance." We should think of God always and not consider time and
place for doing so.

The different names under which God is worshipped are apparently
different. One thinks that his method of worshipping God is the most
efficacious, and another thinks that his is the more potent process of
attaining salvation. But look at the true basis of all, and it is one.
The Shaivas call Shiva the most powerful; the Vaishnavas hold to their
all-powerful Vishnu; the worshippers of Devi will not yield to any in
their idea that their Devi is the most omnipotent power in the universe.
Leave inimical thoughts aside if you want to have permanent Bhakti.
Hatred is a thing which greatly impedes the course of Bhakti, and the
man who hates none reaches God. Even then the devotion for one's own
ideal is necessary. Hanumân says, "Vishnu and Râma, I know, are one and
the same, but after all, the lotus-eyed Rama is my best treasure." The
peculiar tendencies with which a person is born must remain with him.
That is the chief reason why the world cannot be of one religion — and
God forbid that there should be one religion only — for the world would
then be a chaos and not a cosmos. A man must follow the tendencies
peculiar to himself; and if he gets a teacher to help him to advance
along his own lines, he will progress. We should let a person go the way
he intends to go, but if we try to force him into another path, he will
lose what he has already attained and will become worthless. As the face
of one person does not resemble that of another, so the nature of one
differs from that of another, and why should he not be allowed to act
accordingly? A river flows in a certain direction; and if you direct the
course into a regular channel, the current becomes more rapid and the
force is increased, but try to divert it from its proper course, and you
will see the result; the volume as well as the force will be lessened.
This life is very important, and it, therefore, ought to be guided in
the way one's tendency prompts him. In India there was no enmity, and
every religion was left unmolested; so religion has lived. It ought to
be remembered that quarrels about religion arise from thinking that one
alone has the truth and whoever does not believe as one does is a fool;
while another thinks that the other is a hypocrite, for if he were not
one, he would follow him.

If God wished that people should follow one religion, why have so many
religions sprung up? Methods have been vainly tried to force one
religion upon everyone. Even when the sword was lifted to make all
people follow one religion, history tells us that ten religions sprang
up in its place. One religion cannot suit all. Man is the product of two
forces, action and reaction, which make him think. If such forces did
not exercise a man's mind, he would be incapable of thinking. Man is a
creature who thinks; Manushya (man) is a being with Manas (mind); and as
soon as his thinking power goes, he becomes no better than an animal.
Who would like such a man? God forbid that any such state should come
upon the people of India. Variety in unity is necessary to keep man as
man. Variety ought to be preserved in everything; for as long as there
is variety the world will exist. Of course variety does not merely mean
that one is small and the other is great; but if all play their parts
equally well in their respective position in life, the variety is still
preserved. In every religion there have been men good and able, thus
making the religion to which they belonged worthy of respect; and as
there are such people in every religion, there ought to be no hatred for
any sect whatsoever.

Then the question may be asked, should we respect that religion which
advocates vice? The answer will be certainly in the negative, and such a
religion ought to be expelled at once, because it is productive of harm.
All religion is to be based upon morality, and personal purity is to be
counted superior to Dharma. In this connection it ought to be known that
Âchâra means purity inside and outside. External purity can be attained
by cleansing the body with water and other things which are recommended
in the Shâstras. The internal man is to be purified by not speaking
falsehood, by not drinking, by not doing immoral acts, and by doing good
to others. If you do not commit any sin, if you do not tell lies, if you
do not drink, gamble, or commit theft, it is good. But that is only your
duty and you cannot be applauded for it. Some service to others is also
to be done. As you do good to yourself, so you must do good to others.

Here I shall say something about food regulations. All the old customs
have faded away, and nothing but a vague notion of not eating with this
man and not eating; with that man has been left among our countrymen.
Purity by touch is the only relic left of the good rules laid down
hundreds of years ago. Three kinds of food are forbidden in the
Shastras. First, the food that is by its very nature defective, as
garlic or onions. If a man eats too much of them it creates passion, and
he may be led to commit immoralities, hateful both to God and man.
Secondly, food contaminated by external impurities. We ought to select
some place quite neat and clean in which to keep our food. Thirdly, we
should avoid eating food touched by a wicked man, because contact with
such produces bad ideas in us. Even if one be a son of a Brahmin, but is
profligate and immoral in his habits, we should not eat food from his
hands.

But the spirit of these observances is gone. What is left is this, that
we cannot eat from the hands of any man who is not of the highest caste,
even though he be the most wise and holy person. The disregard of those
old rules is ever to be found in the confectioner's shop. If you look
there, you will find flies hovering all over the confectionery, and the
dust from the road blowing upon the sweet­meats, and the confectioner
himself in a dress that is not very clean and neat. Purchasers should
declare with one voice that they will not buy sweets unless they are
kept in glass-cases in the Halwai's shop. That would have the salutary
effect of preventing flies from conveying cholera and other plague germs
to the sweets. We ought to improve, but instead of improving we have
gone back. Manu says that we should not spit in water, but we throw all
sorts of filth into the rivers. Considering all these things we find
that the purification of one's outer self is very necessary. The
Shâstrakâras knew that very well. But now the real spirit of this
observance of purity about food is lost and the letter only remains.
Thieves, drunkards, and criminals can be our caste-fellows, but if a
good and noble man eats food with a person of a lower caste, who is
quite as respectable as himself, he will be outcasted and lost for ever.
This custom has been the bane of our country. It ought, therefore, to be
distinctly understood that sin is incurred by coming in contact with
sinners, and nobility in the company of good persons; and keeping aloof
from the wicked is the external purification.

The internal purification is a task much more severe. It consists in
speaking the truth, sensing the poor, helping the needy, etc. Do we
always speak the truth? What happens is often this. People go to the
house of a rich person for some business of their own and flatter him by
calling him benefactor of the poor and so forth, even though that man
may cut the throat of a poor man coming to his house. What is this?
Nothing but falsehood. And it is this that pollutes the mind. It is
therefore, truly said that whatever a man says who has purified his
inner self for twelve years without entertaining a single vicious idea
during that period is sure to come true. This is the power of truth, and
one who has cleansed both the inner and the outer self is alone capable
of Bhakti. But the beauty is that Bhakti itself cleanses the mind to a
great extent. Although the Jews, Mohammedans, and Christians do not set
so much importance upon the excessive external purification of the body
as the Hindus do, still they have it in some form or other; they find
that to a certain extent it is always required. Among the Jews,
idol-worship is condemned, but they had a temple in which was kept a
chest which they called an ark, in which the Tables of the Law were
preserved, and above the chest were two figures of angels with wings
outstretched, between which the Divine Presence was supposed to manifest
itself as a cloud. That temple has long since been destroyed, but the
new temples are made exactly after the old fashion, and in the chest
religious books are kept. The Roman Catholics and the Greek Christians
have idol-worship in certain forms. The image of Jesus and that of his
mother are worshipped. Among Protestants there is no idol-worship, yet
they worship God in a personal form, which may be called idol-worship in
another form. Among Parsees and Iranians fire-worship is carried on to a
great extent. Among Mohammedans the prophets and great and noble persons
are worshipped, and they turn their faces towards the Caaba when they
pray. These things show that men at the first stage of religious
development have to make use of something external, and when the inner
self becomes purified they turn to more abstract conceptions. "When the
Jiva is sought to be united with Brahman it is best, when meditation is
practiced it is mediocre, repetition of names is the lowest form, and
external worship is the lowest of the low." But it should be distinctly
understood that even in practicing the last there is no sin. Everybody
ought to do what he is able to do; and if he be dissuaded from that, he
will do it in some other way in order to attain his end. So we should
not speak ill of a man who worships idols. He is in that stage of
growth, and, therefore, must have them; wise men should try to help
forward such men and get them to do better. But there is no use in
quarrelling about these various sorts of worship.

Some persons worship God for the sake of obtaining wealth, others
because they want to have a son, and they think themselves Bhâgavatas
(devotees). This is no Bhakti, and they are not true Bhagavatas. When a
Sâdhu comes who professes that he can make gold, they run to him, and
they still consider themselves Bhagavatas. It is not Bhakti if we
worship God with the desire for a son; it is not Bhakti if we worship
with the desire to be rich; it is not Bhakti even if we have a desire
for heaven; it is not Bhakti if a man worships with the desire of being
saved from the tortures of hell. Bhakti is not the outcome of fear or
greediness. He is the true Bhagavata who says, "O God, I do not want a
beautiful wife, I do not want knowledge or salvation. Let me be born and
die hundreds of times. What I want is that I should be ever engaged in
Thy service." It is at this stage — and when a man sees God in
everything, and everything in God — that he attains perfect Bhakti. It
is then that he sees Vishnu incarnated in everything from the microbe to
Brahmâ, and it is then that he sees God manifesting Himself in
everything, it is then that he feels that there is nothing without God,
and it is then and then alone that thinking himself to be the most
insignificant of all beings he worships God with the true spirit of a
Bhakta. He then leaves Tirthas and external forms of worship far behind
him, he sees every man to be the most perfect temple.

Bhakti is described in several ways in the Shastras. We say that God is
our Father. In the same way we call Him Mother, and so on. These
relationships are conceived in order to strengthen Bhakti in us, and
they make us feel nearer and dearer to God. Hence these names are
justifiable in one way, and that is that the words are simply words of
endearment, the outcome of the fond love which a true Bhagavata feels
for God. Take the story of Râdhâ and Krishna in Râsalilâ. The story
simply exemplifies the true spirit of a Bhakta, because no love in the
world exceeds that existing between a man and a woman. When there is
such intense love, there is no fear, no other attachment save that one
which binds that pair in an inseparable and all-absorbing bond. But with
regard to parents, love is accompanied with fear due to the reverence we
have for them. Why should we care whether God created anything or not,
what have we to do with the fact that He is our preserver? He is only
our Beloved, and we should adore Him devoid all thoughts of fear. A man
loves God only when he has no other desire, when he thinks of nothing
else and when he is mad after Him. That love which a man has for his
beloved can illustrate the love we ought to have for God. Krishna is the
God and Radha loves Him; read those books which describe that story, and
then you can imagine the way you should love God. But how many
understand this? How can people who are vicious to their very core and
have no idea of what morality is understand all this? When people drive
all sorts of worldly thoughts from their minds and live in a clear moral
and spiritual atmosphere, it is then that they understand the abstrusest
of thoughts even if they be uneducated. But how few are there of that
nature! There is not a single religion which cannot be perverted by man.
For example, he may think that the Âtman is quite separate from the
body, and so, when committing sins with the body his Atman is
unaffected. If religions were truly followed, there would not have been
a single man, whether Hindu, Mohammedan, or Christian, who would not
have been all purity. But men are guided by their own nature, whether
good or bad; there is no gainsaying that. But in the world, there are
always some who get intoxicated when they hear of God, and shed tears of
joy when they read of God. Such men are true Bhaktas.

At the initial stage of religious development a man thinks of God as his
Master and himself as His servant. He feels indebted to Him for
providing for his daily wants, and so forth. Put such thoughts aside.
There is but one attractive power, and that is God; and it is in
obedience to that attractive power that the sun and the moon and
everything else move. Everything in this world, whether good or bad,
belongs to God. Whatever occurs in our life, whether good or bad, is
bringing us to Him. One man kills another because of some selfish
purpose. But the motive behind is love, whether for himself or for any
one else. Whether we do good or evil, the propeller is love. When a
tiger kills a buffalo, it is because he or his cubs are hungry.

God is love personified. He is apparent in everything. Everybody is
being drawn to Him whether he knows it or not. When a woman loves her
husband, she does not understand that it is the divine in her husband
that is the great attractive power. The God of Love is the one thing to
be worshipped. So long as we think of Him only as the Creator and
Preserver, we can offer Him external worship, but when we get beyond all
that and think Him to be Love Incarnate, seeing Him in all things and
all things in Him, it is then that supreme Bhakti is attained.

</div>
