---
title: THE COMMON BASES OF HINDUISM

---
<div>

[←](bhakti_1.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](bhakti_2.htm)

  

## THE COMMON BASES OF HINDUISM

On his arrival at Lahore the Swamiji was accorded a grand reception by
the leaders, both of the Ârya Samâj and of the Sanâtana Dharma Sabhâ.
During his brief stay in Lahore, Swamiji delivered three lectures. The
first of these was on "The Common Bases of Hinduism", the second on
["Bhakti"](bhakti_2.htm) , and the third one was the famous lecture on
["The Vedanta"](the_vedanta.htm) . On the first occasion he spoke as
follows:

This is the land which is held to be the holiest even in holy Âryâvarta;
this is the Brahmâvarta of which our great Manu speaks. This is the land
from whence arose that mighty aspiration after the Spirit, ay, which in
times to come, as history shows, is to deluge the world. This is the
land where, like its mighty rivers, spiritual aspirations have arisen
and joined their strength, till they travelled over the length and
breadth of the world and declared themselves with a voice of thunder.
This is the land which had first to bear the brunt of all inroads and
invasions into India; this heroic land had first to bare its bosom to
every onslaught of the outer barbarians into Aryavarta. This is the land
which, after all its sufferings, has not yet entirely lost its glory and
its strength. Here it was that in later times the gentle Nânak preached
his marvellous love for the world. Here it was that his broad heart was
opened and his arms outstretched to embrace the whole world, not only of
Hindus, but of Mohammedans too. Here it was that one of the last and one
of the most glorious heroes of our race, Guru Govinda Singh, after
shedding his blood and that of his dearest and nearest for the cause of
religion, even when deserted by those for whom this blood was shed,
retired into the South to die like a wounded lion struck to the heart,
without a word against his country, without a single word of murmur.

Here, in this ancient land of ours, children of the land of five rivers,
I stand before you, not as a teacher, for I know very little to teach,
but as one who has come from the east to exchange words of greeting with
the brothers of the west, to compare notes. Here am I, not to find out
differences that exist among us, but to find where we agree. Here am I
trying to understand on what ground we may always remain brothers, upon
what foundations the voice that has spoken from eternity may become
stronger and stronger as it grows. Here am I trying to propose to you
something of constructive work and not destructive. For criticism the
days are past, and we are waiting for constructive work. The world
needs, at times, criticisms even fierce ones; but that is only for a
time, and the work for eternity is progress and construction, and not
criticism and destruction. For the last hundred years or so, there has
been a flood of criticism all over this land of ours, where the full
play of Western science has been let loose upon all the dark spots, and
as a result the corners and the holes have become much more prominent
than anything else. Naturally enough there arose mighty intellects all
over the land, great and glorious, with the love of truth and justice in
their hearts, with the love of their country, and above all, an intense
love for their religion and their God; and because these mighty souls
felt so deeply, because they loved so deeply, they criticised everything
they thought was wrong. Glory unto these mighty spirits of the past!
They have done so much good; but the voice of the present day is coming
to us, telling, "Enough!" There has been enough of criticism, there has
been enough of fault-finding, the time has come for the rebuilding, the
reconstructing; the time has come for us to gather all our scattered
forces, to concentrate them into one focus, and through that, to lead
the nation on its onward march, which for centuries almost has been
stopped. The house has been cleansed; let it be inhabited anew. The road
has been cleared. March children of the Aryans!

Gentlemen, this is the motive that brings me before you, and at the
start I may declare to you that I belong to no party and no sect. They
are all great and glorious to me, I love them all, and all my life I
have been attempting to find what is good and true in them. Therefore,
it is my proposal tonight to bring before you points where we are
agreed, to find out, if we can, a ground of agreement; and if through
the grace of the Lord such a state of things be possible, let us take it
up, and from theory carry it out into practice. We are Hindus. I do not
use the word Hindu in any bad sense at all, nor do I agree with those
that think there is any bad meaning in it. In old times, it simply meant
people who lived on the other side of the Indus; today a good many among
those who hate us may have put a bad interpretation upon it, but names
are nothing. Upon us depends whether the name Hindu will stand for
everything that is glorious, everything that is spiritual, or whether it
will remain a name of opprobrium, one designating the downtrodden, the
worthless, the heathen. If at present the word Hindu means anything bad,
never mind; by our action let us be ready to show that this is the
highest word that any language can invent. It has been one of the
principles of my life not to be ashamed of my own ancestors. I am one of
the proudest men ever born, but let me tell you frankly, it is not for
myself, but on account of my ancestry. The more I have studied the past,
the more I have looked back, more and more has this pride come to me,
and it has given me the strength and courage of conviction, raised me up
from the dust of the earth, and set me working out that great plan laid
out by those great ancestors of ours. Children of those ancient Aryans,
through the grace of the Lord may you have the same pride, may that
faith in your ancestors come into your blood, may it become a part and
parcel of your lives, may it work towards the salvation of the world!

Before trying to find out the precise point where we are all agreed, the
common ground of our national life, one thing we must remember. Just as
there is an individuality in every man, so there is a national
individuality. As one man differs from another in certain particulars,
in certain characteristics of his own, so one race differs from another
in certain peculiar characteristics; and just as it is the mission of
every man to fulfil a certain purpose in the economy of nature, just as
there is a particular line set out for him by his own past Karma, so it
is with nations — each nation has a destiny to fulfil, each nation has a
message to deliver, each nation has a mission to accomplish. Therefore,
from the very start, we must have to understand the mission of our own
race, the destiny it has to fulfil, the place it has to occupy in the
march of nations, the note which it has to contribute to the harmony of
races. In our country, when children, we hear stories how some serpents
have jewels in their heads, and whatever one may do with the serpent, so
long as the jewel is there, the serpent cannot be killed. We hear
stories of giants and ogres who had souls living in certain little
birds, and so long as the bird was safe, there was no power on earth to
kill these giants; you might hack them to pieces, or do what you liked
to them, the giants could not die. So with nations, there is a certain
point where the life of a nation centres, where lies the nationality of
the nation, and until that is touched, the nation cannot die. In the
light of this we can understand the most marvellous phenomenon that the
history of the world has ever known. Wave after wave of Barbarian
conquest has rolled over this devoted land of ours. "Allah Ho Akbar!"
has rent the skies for hundreds of years, and no Hindu knew what moment
would be his last. This is the most suffering and the most subjugated of
all the historic lands of the world. Yet we still stand practically the
same race, ready to face difficulties again and again if necessary; and
not only so, of late there have been signs that we are not only strong,
but ready to go out, for the sign of life is expansion.

We find today that our ideas and thoughts are no more cooped up within
the bounds of India, but whether we will it or not, they are marching
outside, filtering into the literature of nations, taking their place
among nations, and in some, even getting a commanding dictatorial
position. Behind this we find the explanation that the great
contribution to the sum total of the world's progress from India is the
greatest, the noblest, the sublimest theme that can occupy the mind of
man — it is philosophy and spirituality. Our ancestors tried many other
things; they, like other nations, first went to bring out the secrets of
external nature as we all know, and with their gigantic brains that
marvellous race could have done miracles in that line of which the world
could have been proud for ever. But they gave it up for something
higher; something better rings out from the pages of the Vedas: "That
science is the greatest which makes us know Him who never changes!" The
science of nature, changeful, evanescent, the world of death, of woe, of
misery, may be great, great indeed; but the science of Him who changes
not, the Blissful One, where alone is peace, where alone is life
eternal, where alone is perfection, where alone all misery ceases —
that, according to our ancestors, was the sublimest science of all.
After all, sciences that can give us only bread and clothes and power
over our fellowmen, sciences that can teach us only how to conquer our
fellow-beings, to rule over them, which teach the strong to domineer
over the weak — those they could have discovered if they willed. But
praise be unto the Lord, they caught at once the other side, which was
grander, infinitely higher, infinitely more blissful, till it has become
the national characteristic, till it has come down to us, inherited from
father to son for thousands of years, till it has become a part and
parcel of us, till it tingles in every drop of blood that runs through
our veins, till it has become our second nature, till the name of
religion and Hindu have become one. This is the national characteristic,
and this cannot be touched. Barbarians with sword and fire, barbarians
bringing barbarous religions, not one of them could touch the core, not
one could touch the "jewel", not one had the power to kill the "bird"
which the soul of the race inhabited. This, therefore, is the vitality
of I the race, and so long as that remains, there is no power under the
sun that can kill the race. All the tortures and miseries of the world
will pass over without hurting us, and we shall come out of the flames
like Prahlâda, so long as we hold on to this grandest of all our
inheritances, spirituality. If a Hindu is not spiritual I do not call
him a Hindu. In other countries a man may be political first, and then
he may have a little religion, but here in India the first and the
foremost duty of our lives is to be spiritual first, and then, if there
is time, let other things come. Bearing this in mind we shall be in a
better position to understand why, for our national welfare, we must
first seek out at the present day all the spiritual forces of the race,
as was done in days of yore and will be done in all times to come.
National union in India must be a gathering up of its scattered
spiritual forces. A nation in India must be a union of those whose
hearts beat to the same spiritual tune.

There have been sects enough in this country. There are sects enough,
and there will be enough in the future, because this has been the
peculiarity of our religion that in abstract principles so much latitude
has been given that, although afterwards so much detail has been worked
out, all these details are the working out of principles, broad as the
skies above our heads, eternal as nature herself. Sects, therefore, as a
matter of course, must exist here, but what need not exist is sectarian
quarrel. Sects must be but sectarianism need not. The world would not be
the better for sectarianism, but the world cannot move on without having
sects. One set of men cannot do everything. The almost infinite mass of
energy in the world cannot tie managed by a small number of people.
Here, at once we see the necessity that forced this division of labour
upon us — the division into sects. For the use of spiritual forces let
there be sects; but is there any need that we should quarrel when our
most ancient books declare that this differentiation is only apparent,
that in spite of all these differences there is a thread of harmony,
that beautified unity, running through them all? Our most ancient books
have declared: एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति। — "That which exists is One;
sages call Him by various names." Therefore, if there are these
sectarian struggles, if there are these fights among the different
sects, if there is jealousy and hatred between the different sects in
India, the land where all sects have always been honoured, it is a shame
on us who dare to call ourselves the descendants of those fathers.

There are certain great principles in which, I think, we — whether
Vaishnavas, Shaivas, Shâktas, or Gânapatyas, whether belonging to the
ancient Vedantists or the modern ones, whether belonging to the old
rigid sects or the modern reformed ones — are all one, and whoever calls
himself a Hindu, believes in these principles. Of course there is a
difference in the interpretation, in the explanation of these
principles, and that difference should be there, and it should be
allowed, for our standard is not to bind every man down to our position.
It would be a sin to force every man to work out our own interpretation
of things, and to live by our own methods. Perhaps all who are here will
agree on the first point that we believe the Vedas to be the eternal
teachings of the secrets of religion. We all believe that this holy
literature is without beginning and without end, coeval with nature,
which is without beginning and without end; and that all our religious
differences, all our religious struggles must end when we stand in the
presence of that holy book; we are all agreed that this is the last
court of appeal in all our spiritual differences. We may take different
points of view as to what the Vedas are. There may be one sect which
regards one portion as more sacred than another, but that matters little
so long as we say that we are all brothers in the Vedas, that out of
these venerable, eternal, marvellous books has come everything that we
possess today, good, holy, and pure. Well, therefore, if we believe in
all this, let this principle first of all be preached broadcast
throughout the length and breadth of the land. If this be true, let the
Vedas have that prominence which they always deserve, and which we all
believe in. First, then, the Vedas. The second point we all believe in
is God, the creating, the preserving power of the whole universe, and
unto whom it periodically returns to come out at other periods and
manifest this wonderful phenomenon, called the universe. We may differ
as to our conception of God. One may believe in a God who is entirely
personal, another may believe in a God who is personal and yet not
human, and yet another may believe in a God who is entirely impersonal,
and all may get their support from the Vedas. Still we are all believers
in God; that is to say, that man who does not believe in a most
marvellous Infinite Power from which everything has come, in which
everything lives, and to which everything must in the end return, cannot
be called a Hindu. If that be so, let us try to preach that idea all
over the land. Preach whatever conception you have to give, there is no
difference, we are not going to fight over it, but preach God; that is
all we want. One idea may be better than another, but, mind you, not one
of them is bad. One is good, another is better, and again another may be
the best, but the word bad does not enter the category of our religion.
Therefore, may the Lord bless them all who preach the name of God in
what ever form they like! The more He is preached, the better for this
race. Let our children be brought up in this idea, let this idea enter
the homes of the poorest and the lowest, as well as of the richest and
the highest — the idea of the name of God.

The third idea that I will present before you is that, unlike all other
races of the world, we do not believe that this world was created only
so many thousand years ago, and is going to be destroyed eternally on a
certain day. Nor do we believe that the human soul has been created
along with this universe just out of nothing. Here is another point I
think we are all able to agree upon. We believe in nature being without
beginning and without end; only at psychological periods this gross
material of the outer universe goes back to its finer state, thus to
remain for a certain period, again to be projected outside to manifest
all this infinite panorama we call nature. This wavelike motion was
going on even before time began, through eternity, and will remain for
an infinite period of time.

Next, all Hindus believe that man is not only a gross material body; not
only that within this there is the finer body, the mind, but there is
something yet greater — for the body changes and so does the mind —
something beyond, the Âtman — I cannot translate the word to you for any
translation will be wrong — that there is something beyond even this
fine body, which is the Atman of man, which has neither beginning nor
end, which knows not what death is. And then this peculiar idea,
different from that of all other races of men, that this Atman inhabits
body after body until there is no more interest for it to continue to do
so, and it becomes free, not to be born again, I refer to the theory of
Samsâra and the theory of eternal souls taught by our Shâstras. This is
another point where we all agree, whatever sect we may belong to. There
may be differences as to the relation between the soul and God.
According to one sect the soul may be eternally different from God,
according to another it may be a spark of that infinite fire, yet again
according to others it may be one with that Infinite. It does not matter
what our interpretation is, so long as we hold on to the one basic
belief that the soul is infinite, that this soul was never created, and
therefore will never die, that it had to pass and evolve into various
bodies, till it attained perfection in the human one — in that we are
all agreed. And then comes the most differentiating, the grandest, and
the most wonderful discovery in the realms of spirituality that has ever
been made. Some of you, perhaps, who have been studying Western thought,
may have observed already that there is another radical difference
severing at one stroke all that is Western from all that is Eastern. It
is this that we hold, whether we are Shâktas, Sauras, or Vaishnavas,
even whether we are Bauddhas or Jainas, we all hold in India that the
soul is by its nature pure and perfect, infinite in power and blessed.
Only, according to the dualist, this natural blissfulness of the soul
has become contracted by past bad work, and through the grace of God it
is again going to open out and show its perfection; while according to
the monist, even this idea of contraction is a partial mistake, it is
the veil of Maya that causes us to think the, soul has lost its powers,
but the powers are there fully manifest. Whatever the difference may be,
we come to the central core, and there is at once an irreconcilable
difference between all that is Western and Eastern. The Eastern is
looking inward for all that is great and good. When we worship, we close
our eyes and try to find God within. The Western is looking up outside
for his God. To the Western their religious books have been inspired,
while with us our books have been expired; breath-like they came, the
breath of God, out of the hearts of sages they sprang, the
Mantra-drashtâs.

This is one great point to understand, and, my friends, my brethren, let
me tell you, this is the one point we shall have to insist upon in the
future. For I am firmly convinced, and I beg you to understand this one
fact - no good comes out of the man who day and night thinks he is
nobody. If a man, day and night, thinks he is miserable, low, and
nothing, nothing he becomes. If you say yea, yea, "I am, I am", so shall
you be; and if you say "I am not", think that you are not, and day and
night meditate upon the fact that you are nothing, ay, nothing shall you
be. That is the great fact which you ought to remember. We are the
children of the Almighty, we are sparks of the infinite, divine fire.
How can we be nothings? We are everything, ready to do everything, we
can do everything, and man must do everything. This faith in themselves
was in the hearts of our ancestors, this faith in themselves was the
motive power that pushed them forward and forward in the march of
civilisation; and if there has been degeneration, if there has been
defect, mark my words, you will find that degradation to have started on
the day our people lost this faith in themselves. Losing faith in one's
self means losing faith in God. Do you believe in that infinite, good
Providence working in and through you? If you believe that this
Omnipresent One, the Antaryâmin, is present in every atom, is through
and through, Ota-prota, as the Sanskrit word goes, penetrating your
body, mind and soul, how can you lose, heart? I may be a little bubble
of water, and you may be a mountain-high wave. Never mind! The infinite
ocean is the background of me as well as of you. Mine also is that
infinite ocean of life, of power, of spirituality, as well as yours. I
am already joined — from my very birth, from the very fact of my life —
I am in Yoga with that infinite life and infinite goodness and infinite
power, as you are, mountain-high though you may be. Therefore, my
brethren, teach this life-saving, great, ennobling, grand doctrine to
your children, even from their very birth. You need not teach them
Advaitism; teach them Dvaitism, or any "ism" you please, but we have
seen that this is the common "ism" all through India; this marvellous
doctrine of the soul, the perfection of the soul, is commonly believed
in by all sects. As says our great philosopher Kapila, if purity has not
been the nature of the soul, it can never attain purity afterwards, for
anything that was not perfect by nature, even if it attained to
perfection, that perfection would go away again. If impurity is the
nature of man, then man will have to remain impure, even though he may
be pure for five minutes. The time will come when this purity will wash
out, pass away, and the old natural impurity will have its sway once
more. Therefore, say all our philosophers, good is our nature,
perfection is our nature, not imperfection, not impurity — and we should
remember that. Remember the beautiful example of the great sage who,
when he was dying, asked his mind to remember all his mighty deeds and
all his mighty thoughts. There you do not find that he was teaching his
mind to remember all his weaknesses and all his follies. Follies there
are, weakness there must be, but remember your real nature always — that
is the only way to cure the weakness, that is the only way to cure the
follies.

It seems that these few points are common among all the various
religious sects in India, and perhaps in future upon this common
platform, conservative and liberal religionists, old type and new type,
may shake bands. Above all, there is another thing to remember, which I
am sorry we forget from time to time, that religion, in India, means
realisation and nothing short of that. "Believe in the doctrine, and you
are safe", can never be taught to us, for we do not believe in that. You
are what you make yourselves. You are, by the grace of God and your own
exertions, what you are. Mere believing in certain theories and
doctrines will not help you much. The mighty word that came out from the
sky of spirituality in India was Anubhuti, realisation, and ours are the
only books which declare again and again: "The Lord is to be *seen*".
Bold, brave words indeed, but true to their very core; every sound,
every vibration is true. Religion is to be realised, not only heard; it
is not in learning some doctrine like a parrot. Neither is it mere
intellectual assent — that is nothing; but it must come into us. Ay, and
therefore the greatest proof that we have of the existence of a God is
not because our reason says so, but because God has been seen by the
ancients as well as by the moderns. We believe in the soul not only
because there are good reasons to prove its existence, but, above all,
because there have been in the past thousands in India, there are still
many who have realised, and there will be thousands in the future who
will realise and see their own souls. And there is no salvation for man
until he sees God, realises his own soul. Therefore, above all, let us
understand this, and the more we understand it the less we shall have of
sectarianism in India, for it is only that man who has realised God and
seen Him, who is religious. In him the knots have been cut asunder, in
him alone the doubts have subsided; he alone has become free from the
fruits of action who has seen Him who is nearest of the near and
farthest of the far. Ay, we often mistake mere prattle for religious
truth, mere intellectual perorations for great spiritual realisation,
and then comes sectarianism, then comes fight. If we once understand
that this realisation is the only religion, we shall look into our own
hearts and find how far we are towards realising the truths of religion.
Then we shall understand that we ourselves are groping in darkness, and
are leading others to grope in the same darkness, then we shall cease
from sectarianism, quarrel, arid fight. Ask a man who wants to start a
sectarian fight, "Have you seen God? Have you seen the Atman? If you
have not, what right have you to preach His name — you walking in
darkness trying to lead me into the same darkness — the blind leading
the blind, and both falling into the ditch?"

Therefore, take more thought before you go and find fault with others.
Let them follow their own path to realisation so long as they struggle
to see truth in their own hearts; and when the broad, naked truth will
be seen, then they will find that wonderful blissfulness which
marvellously enough has been testified to by every seer in India, by
every one who has realised the truth. Then words of love alone will come
out of that heart, for it has already been touched by Him who is the
essence of Love Himself. Then and then alone, all sectarian quarrels
will cease, and we shall be in a position to understand, to bring to our
hearts, to embrace, to intensely love the very word Hindu and every one
who bears that name. Mark me, then and then alone you are a Hindu when
the very name sends through you a galvanic shock of strength. Then and
then alone you are a Hindu when every man who bears the name, from any
country, speaking our language or any other language, becomes at once
the nearest and the dearest to you. Then and then alone you are a Hindu
when the distress of anyone bearing that name comes to your heart and
makes you feel as if your own son were in distress. Then and then alone
you are a Hindu when you will be ready to bear everything for them, like
the great example I have quoted at the beginning of this lecture, of
your great Guru Govind Singh. Driven out from this country, fighting
against its oppressors, after having shed his own blood for the defence
of the Hindu religion, after having seen his children killed on the
battlefield — ay, this example of the great Guru, left even by those for
whose sake he was shedding his blood and the blood of his own nearest
and dearest — he, the wounded lion, retired from the field calmly to die
in the South, but not a word of curse escaped his lips against those who
had ungratefully forsaken him! Mark me, every one of you will have to be
a Govind Singh, if you want to do good to your country. You may see
thousands of defects in your countrymen, but mark their Hindu blood.
They are the first Gods you will have to worship even if they do
everything to hurt you, even if everyone of them send out a curse to
you, you send out to them words of love. If they drive you out, retire
to die in silence like that mighty lion, Govind Singh. Such a man is
worthy of the name of Hindu; such an ideal ought to be before us always.
All our hatchets let us bury; send out this grand current of love all
round.

Let them talk of India's regeneration as they like. Let me tell you as
one who has been working — at least trying to work — all his life, that
there is no regeneration for India until you be spiritual. Not only so,
but upon it depends the welfare of the whole world. For I must tell you
frankly that the very foundations of Western civilisation have been
shaken to their base. The mightiest buildings, if built upon the loose
sand foundations of materialism, must come to grief one day, must totter
to their destruction some day. The history of the world is our witness.
Nation after nation has arisen and based its greatness upon materialism,
declaring man was all matter. Ay, in Western language, a man gives up
the ghost, but in our language a man gives up his body. The Western man
is a body first, and then he has a soul; with us a man is a soul and
spirit, and he has a body. Therein lies a world of difference. All such
civilisations, therefore, as have been based upon such sand foundations
as material comfort and all that, have disappeared one after another,
after short lives, from the face of the world; but the civilisation of
India and the other nations that have stood at India's feet to listen
and learn, namely, Japan and China, live even to the present day, and
there are signs even of revival among them. Their lives are like that of
the Phoenix, a thousand times destroyed, but ready to spring up again
more glorious. But a materialistic civilisation once dashed down, never
can come up again; that building once thrown down is broken into pieces
once for all. Therefore have patience and wait, the future is in store
for us.

Do not be in a hurry, do not go out to imitate anybody else. This is
another great lesson we have to remember; imitation is not civilisation.
I may deck myself out in a Raja's dress, but will that make me a Raja?
An ass in a lion's skin never makes a lion. Imitation, cowardly
imitation, never makes for progress. It is verily the sign of awful
degradation in a man. Ay, when a man has begun to hate himself, then the
last blow has come. When a man has begun to be ashamed of his ancestors,
the end has come. Here am I, one of the least of the Hindu race, yet
proud of my race, proud of my ancestors. I am proud to call myself a
Hindu, I am proud that I am one of your unworthy servants. I am proud
that I am a countryman of yours, you the descendants of the sages, you
the descendants of the most glorious Rishis the world ever saw.
Therefore have faith in yourselves, be proud of your ancestors, instead
of being ashamed of them. And do not imitate, do not imitate! Whenever
you are under the thumb of others, you lose your own independence. If
you are working, even in spiritual things, at the dictation of others,
slowly you lose all faculty, even of thought. Bring out through your own
exertions what you have, but do not imitate, yet take what is good from
others. We have to learn from others. You put the seed in the ground,
and give it plenty of earth, and air, and water to feed upon; when the
seed grows into the plant and into a gigantic tree, does it become the
earth, does it become the air, or does it become the water? It becomes
the mighty plant, the mighty tree, after its own nature, having absorbed
everything that was given to it. Let that be your position. We have
indeed many things to learn from others, yea, that man who refuses to
learn is already dead. Declares our Manu: आददीत परां विद्यां
प्रयत्नादवरादपि। अन्त्यादपि परं धर्म स्त्रीरत्नं दुष्कुलादपि। — "Take
the jewel of a woman for your wife, though she be of inferior descent.
Learn supreme knowledge with service even from the man of low birth; and
even from the Chandâla, learn by serving him the way to salvation."
Learn everything that is good from others, but bring it in, and in your
own way absorb it; do not become others. Do not be dragged away out of
this Indian life; do not for a moment think that it would be better for
India if all the Indians dressed, ate, and behaved like another race.
You know the difficulty of giving up a habit of a few years. The Lord
knows how many thousands of years are in your blood; this national
specialised life has been flowing in one way, the Lord knows for how
many thousands of years; and do you mean to say that that mighty stream,
which has nearly reached its ocean, can go back to the snows of its
Himalayas again? That is impossible! The struggle to do so would only
break it. Therefore, make way for the life-current of the nation. Take
away the blocks that bar the way to the progress of this mighty river,
cleanse its path, dear the channel, and out it will rush by its own
natural impulse, and the nation will go on careering and progressing.

These are the lines which I beg to suggest to you for spiritual work in
India. There are many other great problems which, for want of time, I
cannot bring before you this night. For instance, there is the wonderful
question of caste. I have been studying this question, its pros and
cons, all my life; I have studied it in nearly every province in India.
I have mixed with people of all castes in nearly every part of the
country, and I am too bewildered in my own mind to grasp even the very
significance of it. The more I try to study it, the more I get
bewildered. Still at last I find that a little glimmer of light is
before me, I begin to feel its significance just now. Then there is the
other great problem about eating and drinking. That is a great problem
indeed. It is not so useless a thing as we generally think. I have come
to the conclusion that the insistence which we make now about eating and
drinking is most curious and is just going against what the Shastras
required, that is to say, we come to grief by neglecting the proper
purity of the food we eat and drink; we have lost the true spirit of it.

There are several other questions which I want to bring before you and
show how these problems can be solved, how to work out the ideas; but
unfortunately the meeting could not come to order until very late, and I
do not wish to detain you any longer now. I will, therefore, keep my
ideas about caste and other things for a future occasion.

Now, one word more and I will finish about these spiritual ideas.
Religion for a long time has come to be static in India. What we want is
to make it dynamic. I want it to be brought into the life of everybody.
Religion, as it always has been in the past, must enter the palaces of
kings as well as the homes of the poorest peasants in the land.
Religion, the common inheritance, the universal birthright of the race,
must be brought free to the door of everybody. Religion in India must be
made as free and as easy of access as is God's air. And this is the kind
of work we have to bring about in India, but not by getting up little
sects and fighting on points of difference. Let us preach where we all
agree and leave the differences to remedy themselves. As I have said to
the Indian people again and again, if there is the darkness of centuries
in a room and we go into the room and begin to cry, "Oh, it is dark, it
is dark!", will the darkness go? Bring in the light and the darkness
will vanish at once. This is the secret of reforming men. Suggest to
them higher things; believe in man first. Why start with the belief that
man is degraded and degenerated? I have never failed in my faith in man
in any case, even taking him at his worst. Wherever I had faith in man,
though at first the prospect was not always bright, yet it triumphed in
the long run. Have faith in man, whether he appears to you to be a very
learned one or a most ignorant one. Have faith in man, whether he
appears to be an angel or the very devil himself. Have faith in man
first, and then having faith in him, believe that if there are defects
in him, if he makes mistakes, if he embraces the crudest and the vilest
doctrines, believe that it is not from his real nature that they come,
but from the want of higher ideals. If a man goes towards what is false,
it is because he cannot get what is true. Therefore the only method of
correcting what is false is by supplying him with what is true. Do this,
and let him compare. You give him the truth, and there your work is
done. Let him compare it in his own mind with what he has already in
him; and, mark my words, if you have really given him the truth, the
false must vanish, light must dispel darkness, and truth will bring the
good out. This is the way if you want to reform the country spiritually;
this is the way, and not fighting, not even telling people that what
they are doing is bad. Put the good before them, see how eagerly they
take it, see how the divine that never dies, that is always living in
the human, comes up awakened and stretches out its hand for all that is
good, and all that is glorious.

May He who is the Creator, the Preserver, and the Protector of our race,
the God of our forefathers, whether called by the name of Vishnu, or
Shiva, or Shakti, or Ganapati, whether He is worshipped as Saguna or as
Nirguna, whether He is worshipped as personal or as impersonal, may He
whom our forefathers knew and addressed by the words, एकं सद्विप्रा
बहुधा वदन्ति। — "That which exists is One; sages call Him by various
names" — may He enter into us with His mighty love; may He shower His
blessings on us, may He make us understand each other, may He make us
work for each other with real love, with intense love for truth, and may
not the least desire for our own personal fame, our own personal
prestige, our own personal advantage, enter into this great work of me
spiritual regeneration of India!

</div>
