---
title: BHAKTI

---
<div>

[←](the_common_bases_of_hinduism.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_vedanta.htm)

  

## BHAKTI

(*Delivered at Lahore on the 9th November, 1897*)

There is a sound which comes to us like a distant echo in the midst of
the roaring torrents of the Upanishads, at times rising in proportion
and volume, and yet, throughout the literature of the Vedanta, its
voice, though clear, is not very strong. The main duty of the Upanishads
seems to be to present before us the spirit and the aspect of the
sublime, and yet behind this wonderful sublimity there come to us here
and there glimpses of poetry as we read; न तत्र सुर्यो भाति न
चंन्द्रतारकं नेमा विद्युतो भान्ति कुतोऽयमग्निः — "There the sun shines
not, nor the moon, nor the stars, what to speak of this fire?" As we
listen to the heart-stirring poetry of these marvellous lines, we are
taken, as it were, off from the world of the senses, off even from the
world of intellect, and brought to that world which can never be
comprehended, and yet which is always with us. There is behind even this
sublimity another ideal following as its shadow, one more acceptable to
mankind, one more of daily use, one that has to enter into every part of
human life, which assumes proportion and volume later on, and is stated
in full and determined language in the Purâna, and that is the ideal of
Bhakti. The germs of Bhakti are there already; the germs are even in the
Samhitâ; the germs a little more developed are in the Upanishads; but
they are worked out in their details in the Puranas.

To understand Bhakti, therefore, we have got to understand these Puranas
of ours. There have been great discussions of late as to their
authenticity. Many a passage of uncertain meaning has been taken up and
criticised. In many places it has been pointed out that the passages
cannot stand the light of modern science and so forth. But, apart from
all these discussions, apart from the scientific validity of the
statements of the Puranas, apart from their valid or invalid geography,
apart from their valid or invalid astronomy, and so forth, what we find
for a certainty, traced out bit by bit almost in every one of these
volumes, is this doctrine of Bhakti, illustrated, reillustrated, stated
and restated, in the lives of saints and in the lives of kings. It seems
to have been the duty of the Puranas to stand as illustrations for that
great ideal of the beautiful, the ideal of Bhakti, and this, as I have
stated, is so much nearer to the ordinary man. Very few indeed are there
who can understand and appreciate, far less live and move, in the
grandeur of the full blaze of the light of Vedanta, because the first
step for the pure Vedantist is to be Abhih, fearless. Weakness has got
to go before a man dares to become a Vedantist, and we know how
difficult that is. Even those who have given up all connection with the
world, and have very few bandages to make them cowards, feel in the
heart of their hearts how weak they are at moments, at times how soft
they become, how cowed down; much more so is it with men who have so
many bandages, and have to remain as slaves to so many hundred and
thousand things, inside of themselves and outside of themselves, men
every moment of whose life is dragging-down slavery. To them the Puranas
come with the most beautiful message of Bhakti.

For them the softness and the poetry are spread out, for them are told
these wonderful and marvellous stories of a Dhruva and a Prahlâda, and
of a thousand saints, and these illustrations are to make it practical.
Whether you believe in the scientific accuracy of the Puranas or not,
there is not one among you whose life has not been influenced by the
story of Prahlada, or that of Dhruva, or of any one of these great
Paurânika saints. We have not only to acknowledge the power of the
Puranas in our own day, but we ought to be grateful to them as they gave
us in the past a more comprehensive and a better popular religion than
what the degraded later-day Buddhism was leading us to. This easy and
smooth idea of Bhakti has been written and worked upon, and we have to
embrace it in our everyday practical life, for we shall see as we go on
how the idea has been worked out until Bhakti becomes the essence of
love. So long as there shall be such a thing as personal and material
love, one cannot go behind the teachings of the Puranas. So long as
there shall be the human weakness of leaning upon somebody for support,
these Puranas, in some form or other, must always exist. You can change
their names; you can condemn those that are already existing, but
immediately you will be compelled to write another Purana. If there
arises amongst us a sage who will not want these old Puranas, we shall
find that his disciples, within twenty years of his death, will make of
his life another Purana. That will be all the difference.

This is a necessity of the nature of man; for them only are there no
Puranas who have gone beyond all human weakness and have become what is
really wanted of a Paramahamsa, brave and bold souls, who have gone
beyond the bandages of Mâyâ, the necessities even of nature — the
triumphant, the conquerors, the gods of the world. The ordinary man
cannot do without a personal God to worship; if he does not worship a
God in nature, he has to worship either a God in the shape of a wife, or
a child, or a father, or a friend, or a teacher, or somebody else; and
the necessity is still more upon women than men. The vibration of light
may be everywhere; it may be in dark places, since cats and other
animals perceive it, but for us the vibration must be in our plane to
become visible. We may talk, therefore, of an Impersonal Being and so
forth, but so long as we are ordinary mortals, God can be seen in man
alone. Our conception of God and our worship of God are naturally,
therefore, human. "This body, indeed, is the greatest temple of God." So
we find that men have been worshipped throughout the ages, and although
we may condemn or criticise some of the extravagances which naturally
follow, we find at once that the heart is sound, that in spite of these
extravagances, in spite of this going into extremes, there is an
essence, there is a true, firm core, a backbone, to the doctrine that is
preached. I am not asking you to swallow without consideration any old
stories, or any unscientific jargon. I am not calling upon you to
believe in all sorts of Vâmâchâri explanations that, unfortunately, have
crept into some of the Puranas, but what I mean is this, that there is
an essence which ought not to be lost, a reason for the existence of the
Puranas, and that is the teaching of Bhakti to make religion practical,
to bring religion from its high philosophical flights into the everyday
lives of our common human beings.

\[The lecturer defended the use of material helps in Bhakti. Would to
God man did not stand where he is, but it is useless to fight against
existing facts; man is a material being now, however he may talk about
spirituality and all that. Therefore the material man has to be taken in
hand and slowly raised, until he becomes spiritual. In these days it is
hard for 99 per cent of us to understand spirituality, much more so to
talk about it. The motive powers that are pushing us forward, and the
efforts we are seeking to attain, are all material. We can only work, in
the language of Herbert Spencer, in the line of least resistance, and
the Puranas have the good and common sense to work in the line of least
resistance; and the successes that have been attained by the Puranas
have been marvellous and unique. The ideal of Bhakti is of course
spiritual, but the way lies through matter and we cannot help it.
Everything that is conducive to the attainment of this spirituality in
the material world, therefore, is to be taken hold of and brought to the
use of man to evolve the spiritual being. Having pointed out that the
Shâstras start by giving the right to study the Vedas to everybody,
without distinction of sex, caste, or creed, he claimed that if making a
material temple helps a man more to love God, welcome; if making an
image of God helps a man in attaining to this ideal of love, Lord bless
him and give him twenty such images if he pleases. If anything helps him
to attain to that ideal of spirituality welcome, so long as it is moral,
because anything immoral will not help, but will only retard. He traced
the opposition to the use of images in worship in India partly at least
to Kabir, but on the other hand showed that India Has had great
philosophers and founders of religions who did not even believe in the
existence of a Personal God and boldly preached that to the people, but
yet did not condemn the use of images. At best they only said it was not
a very high form of worship, and there was not one of the Puranas in
which it was said that it was a very high form. Having referred
historically to the use of image-worship by the Jews, in their belief
that Jehovah resided in a chest, he condemned the practice of abusing
idol-worship merely because others said it was bad. Though an image or
any other material form could be used if it helped to make a man
spiritual, yet there was no one book in our religion which did not very
clearly state that it was the lowest form of worship, because it was
worship through matter. The attempt that was made all over India to
force this image-worship on everybody, he had no language to condemn;
what business had anybody to direct and dictate to anyone what he should
worship and through what? How could any other man know through what he
would grow, whether his spiritual growth would be by worshipping an
image, by worshipping fire, or by worshipping even a pillar? That was to
be guided and directed by our own Gurus, and by the relation between the
Guru and the Shishya. That explained the rule which Bhakti books laid
down for what was called the Ishta, that was to say, that each man had
to take up his own peculiar form of worship, his own way of going
towards God, and that chosen ideal was his Ishta Devatâ. He was to
regard other forms of worship with sympathy, but at the same time to
practice his own form till he reached the goal and came to the centre
where no more material helps were necessary for him. In this connection
a word of warning was necessary against a system prevalent in some parts
of India, what was called the Kula-Guru system, a sort of hereditary
Guruism. We read in the books that "He who knows the essence of the
Vedas, is sinless, and does not teach another for love of gold or love
of anything else, whose mercy is without any cause, who gives as the
spring which does not ask anything from the plants and trees, for it is
its nature to do good, and brings them out once more into life, and
buds, flowers, and leaves come out, who wants nothing, but whose whole
life is only to do good" — such a man could be a Guru and none else.
There was another danger, for a Guru was not a teacher alone; that was a
very small part of it. The Guru, as the Hindus believed, transmitted
spirituality to his disciples. To take a common material example,
therefore, if a man were not inoculated with good virus, he ran the risk
of being inoculated with what was bad and vile, so that by being taught
by a bad Guru there was the risk of learning something evil. Therefore
it was absolutely necessary that this idea of Kula-Guru should vanish
from India. Guruism must not be a trade; that must stop, it was against
the Shastras. No man ought to call himself a Guru and at the same time
help the present state of things under the Kula-Guru system.

Speaking of the question of food, the Swami pointed out that the
present-day insistence upon the strict regulations as to eating was to a
great extent superficial, and missed the mark they were originally
intended to cover. He particularly instanced the idea that care should
be exercised as to who was allowed to touch food, and pointed out that
there was a deep psychological significance in this, but that in the
everyday life of ordinary men it was a care difficult or impossible to
exercise. Here again the mistake was made of insisting upon a general
observance of an idea which was only possible to one class, those who
have entirely devoted their lives to spirituality, whereas the vast
majority of men were still un­satiated with material pleasures, and
until they were satiated to some extent it was useless to think of
forcing spirituality on them.

The highest form of worship that had been laid down by the Bhakta was
the worship of man. Really, if there were to be any sort of worship, he
would suggest getting a poor man, or six, or twelve, as their
circumstances would permit, every day to their homes, and serving them,
thinking that they were Nârâyanas. He had seen charity in many countries
and the reason it did not succeed was that it was not done with a good
spirit. "Here, take this, and go away" — that was not charity, but the
expression of the pride of the heart, to gain the applause of the world,
that the world might know they were becoming charitable. Hindus must
know that, according to the Smritis, the giver was lower than the
receiver, for the receiver was for the time being God Himself. Therefore
he would suggest such a form of worship as getting some of these poor
Narayanas, or blind Narayanas, and hungry Narayanas into every house
every day, and giving them the worship they would give to an image,
feeding them and clothing them, and the next day doing the same to
others. He did not condemn any form of worship, but what he went to say
was that the highest form and the most necessary at present in India was
this form of Narayana worship.

In conclusion, he likened Bhakti to a triangle. The first angle was that
love knew no want, the second that love knew fear. Love for reward or
service of any kind was the beggar's religion, the shopkeeper's
religion, with very little of real religion in it. Let them not become
beggars, because, in the first place, beggary was the sign of atheism.
"Foolish indeed is the man who living on the banks of the Ganga digs a
little well to drink water." So is the man who begs of God material
objects. The Bhakta should be ready to stand up and say, "I do not want
anything from you, Lord, but if you need anything from me I am ready to
give." Love knew no fear. Had they not seen a weak frail, little woman
passing through a street, and if a dog barked, she flew off into the
next house? The next day she was in the street, perhaps, with her child
at her breast. And a lion attacked her. Where was she then? In the mouth
of the lion to save her child. Lastly, love was unto love itself. The
Bhakta at last comes to this, that love itself is God and nothing else.
Where should man go to prove the existence of God? Love was the most
visible of all visible things. It was the force that was moving the sun,
the moon, and the stars, manifesting itself in men, women, and in
animals, everywhere and in everything. It was expressed in material
forces as gravitation and so on. It was everywhere, in every atom,
manifesting everywhere. It was that infinite love, the only motive power
of this universe, visible everywhere, and this was God Himself.\]

</div>
