---
title: THE RELIGION WE ARE BORN IN

---
<div>

[←](what_have_i_learnt.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](../reports_in_american_newspapers/india_her_religion_and_customs.htm)

  

## THE RELIGION WE ARE BORN IN

At an open-air meeting convened at Dacca, on the 31st March, 1901, the
Swamiji spoke in English for two hours on the above subject before a
vast audience. The following is a translation of the lecture from a
Bengali report of a disciple:

In the remote past, our country made gigantic advances in spiritual
ideas. Let us, today, bring before our mind's eye that ancient history.
But the one great danger in meditating over long-past greatness is that
we cease to exert ourselves for new things, and content ourselves with
vegetating upon that by-gone ancestral glory and priding ourselves upon
it. We should guard against that. In ancient times there were, no doubt,
many Rishis and Maharshis who came face to face with Truth. But if this
recalling of our ancient greatness is to be of real benefit, we too must
become Rishis like them. Ay, not only that, but it is my firm conviction
that we shall be even greater Rishis than any that our history presents
to us. In the past, signal were our attainments — I glory in them, and I
feel proud in thinking of them. I am not even in despair at seeing the
present degradation, and I am full of hope in picturing to my mind what
is to come in the future. Why? Because I know the seed undergoes a
complete transformation, ay, the seed as seed is seemingly destroyed
before it develops into a tree. In the same way, in the midst of our
present degradation lies, only dormant for a time, the potentiality of
the future greatness of our religion, ready to spring up again, perhaps
more mighty and glorious than ever before.

Now let us consider what are the common grounds of agreement in the
religion we are born in. At first sight we undeniably find various
differences among our sects. Some are Advaitists, some are
Vishishtâdvaitists, and others are Dvaitists. Some believe in
Incarnations of God, some in image-worship, while others are upholders
of the doctrine of the Formless. Then as to customs also, various
differences are known to exist. The Jâts are not outcasted even if they
marry among the Mohammedans and Christians. They can enter into any
Hindu temple without hindrance. In many villages in the Punjab, one who
does not eat swine will hardly be considered a Hindu. In Nepal, a
Brâhmin can marry in the four Varnas; while in Bengal, a Brahmin cannot
marry even among the subdivisions of his own caste. So on and so forth.
But in the midst of all these differences we note one point of unity
among all Hindus, and it is this, that no Hindu eats beef. In the same
way, there is a great common ground of unity underlying the various
forms and sects of our religion.

First, in discussing the scriptures, one fact stands out prominently —
that only those religions which had one or many scriptures of their own
as their basis advanced by leaps and bounds and survive to the present
day notwithstanding all the persecution and repression hurled against
them. The Greek religion, with all its beauty, died out in the absence
of any scripture to support it; but the religion of the Jews stands
undiminished in its power, being based upon the authority of the Old
Testament. The same is the case with the Hindu religion, with its
scripture, the Vedas, the oldest in the world. The Vedas are divided
into the Karma Kânda and the Jnâna Kânda. Whether for good or for evil,
the Karma Kanda has fallen into disuse in India, though there are some
Brahmins in the Deccan who still perform Yajnas now and then with the
sacrifice of goats; and also we find here and there, traces of the Vedic
Kriyâ Kânda in the Mantras used in connection with our marriage and
Shrâddha ceremonies etc. But there is no chance of its being
rehabilitated on its original footing. Kumârila Bhatta once tried to do
so, but he was not successful in his attempt.

The Jnana Kanda of the Vedas comprises the Upanishads and is known by
the name of Vedanta, the pinnacle of the Shrutis, as it is called.
Wherever you find the Âchâryas quoting a passage from the Shrutis, it is
invariably from the Upanishads. The Vedanta is now the religion of the
Hindus. If any sect in India wants to have its ideas established with a
firm hold on the people it must base them on the authority of the
Vedanta. They all have to do it, whether they are Dvaitists or
Advaitists. Even the Vaishnavas have to go to Gopâlatâpini Upanishad to
prove the truth of their own theories. If a new sect does not find
anything in the Shrutis in confirmation of its ideas, it will go even to
the length of manufacturing a new Upanishad, and making it pass current
as one of the old original productions. There have been many such in the
past.

Now as to the Vedas, the Hindus believe that they are not mere books
composed by men in some remote age. They hold them to be an accumulated
mass of endless divine wisdom, which is sometimes manifested and at
other times remains unmanifested. Commentator Sâyanâchârya says
somewhere in his works यो वेदेभ्योऽखिलं जगत् निर्ममे — "Who created the
whole universe out of the knowledge of the Vedas". No one has ever seen
the composer of the Vedas, and it is impossible to imagine one. The
Rishis were only the discoverers of the Mantras or Eternal Laws; they
merely came face to face with the Vedas, the infinite mine of knowledge,
which has been there from time without beginning.

Who are these Rishis? Vâtsyâyana says, "He who has attained through
proper means the direct realisation of Dharma, he alone can be a Rishi
even if he is a Mlechchha by birth." Thus it is that in ancient times,
Vasishtha, born of an illegitimate union, Vyâsa, the son of a
fisherwoman, Narada, the son of a maidservant with uncertain parentage,
and many others of like nature attained to Rishihood. Truly speaking, it
comes to this then, that no distinction should be made with one who has
realised the Truth. If the persons just named all became Rishis, then, O
ye Kulin Brahmins of the present day, how much greater Rishis you can
become! Strive after that Rishihood, stop not till you have attained the
goal, and the whole world will of itself bow at your feet! Be a Rishi —
that is the secret of power.

This Veda is our only authority, and everyone has the right to it.

यथेमां वाचं कल्याणीमावदानि जनेभ्यः।  
ब्रह्मराजन्याभ्यां शूद्राय चार्याय च स्वाय चारणाय॥

— Thus says the Shukla Yajur Veda (XXVI. 2). Can you show any authority
from this Veda of ours that everyone has not the right to it? The
Purânas, no doubt, say that a certain caste has the right to such and
such a recension of the Vedas, or a certain caste has no right to study
them, or that this portion of the Vedas is for the Satya Yuga and that
portion is for the Kali Yuga. But, mark you, the Veda does not say so;
it is only your Puranas that do so. But can the servant dictate to the
master? The Smritis, Puranas, Tantras — all these are acceptable only so
far as they agree with the Vedas; and wherever they are contradictory,
they are to be rejected as unreliable. But nowadays we have put the
Puranas on even a higher pedestal than the Vedas! The study of the Vedas
has almost disappeared from Bengal. How I wish that day will soon come
when in every home the Veda will be worshipped together with Shâlagrâma,
the household Deity, when the young, the old, and the women will
inaugurate the worship of the Veda!

I have no faith in the theories advanced by Western savants with regard
to the Vedas. They are today fixing the antiquity of the Vedas at a
certain period, and again tomorrow upsetting it and bringing it one
thousand years forward, and so on. However, about the Puranas, I have
told you that they are authoritative only in so far as they agree with
the Vedas, otherwise not. In the Puranas we find many things which do
not agree with the Vedas. As for instance, it is written in the Puranas
that some one lived ten thousand years, another twenty thousand years,
but in the Vedas we find: शतायुर्वै पुरुषः — "Man lives indeed a hundred
years." Which are we to accept in this case? Certainly the Vedas.
Notwithstanding statements like these, I do not depreciate the Puranas.
They contain many beautiful and illuminating teachings and words of
wisdom on Yoga, Bhakti, Jnâna, and Karma; those, of course, we should
accept. Then there are the Tantras. The real meaning of the word Tantra
is Shâstra, as for example, Kâpila Tantra. But the word Tantra is
generally used in a limited sense. Under the sway of kings who took up
Buddhism and preached broadcast the doctrine of Ahimsâ, the performances
of the Vedic Yâga-Yajnas became a thing of the past, and no one could
kill any animal in sacrifice for fear of the king. But subsequently
amongst the Buddhists themselves — who were converts from Hinduism — the
best parts of these Yaga-Yajnas were taken up, and practiced in secret.
From these sprang up the Tantras. Barring some of the abominable things
in the Tantras, such as the Vâmâchâra etc., the Tantras are not so bad
as people are inclined to think. There are many high and sublime
Vedantic thoughts in them. In fact, the Brâhmana portions of the Vedas
were modified a little and incorporated into the body of the Tantras.
All the forms of our worship and the ceremonials of the present day,
comprising the Karma Kanda, are observed in accordance with the Tantras.

Now let us discuss the principles of our religion a little.
Notwithstanding the differences and controversies existing among our
various sects, there are in them, too, several grounds of unity. First,
almost all of them admit the existence of three things — three entities
— Ishvara, Atman, and the Jagat. Ishvara is He who is eternally
creating, preserving and destroying the whole universe. Excepting the
Sânkhyas, all the others believe in this. Then the doctrine of the Atman
and the reincarnation of the soul; it maintains that innumerable
individual souls, having taken body after body again and again, go round
and round in the wheel of birth and death according to their respective
Karmas; this is Samsâravâda, or as it is commonly called the doctrine of
rebirth. Then there is the Jagat or universe without beginning and
without end. Though some hold these three as different phases of one
only, and some others as three distinctly different entities, and others
again in various other ways, yet they are all unanimous in believing in
these three.

Here I should ask you to remember that Hindus, from time immemorial,
knew the Atman as separate from Manas, mind. But the Occidentals could
never soar beyond the mind. The West knows the universe to be full of
happiness, and as such, it is to them a place where they can enjoy the
most; but the East is born with the conviction that this Samsara, this
ever-changing existence, is full of misery, and as such, it is nothing,
nothing but unreal, not worth bartering the soul for its ephemeral joys
and possessions. For this very reason, the West is ever especially
adroit in organised action, and so also the East is ever bold in search
of the mysteries of the internal world.

Let us, however, turn now to one or two other aspects of Hinduism. There
is the doctrine of the Incarnations of God. In the Vedas we find mention
of Matsya Avatâra, the Fish Incarnation only. Whether all believe in
this doctrine or not is not the point; the real meaning, however, of
this Avatâravâda is the worship of Man — to see God in man is the real
God-vision. The Hindu does not go through nature to nature's God — he
goes to the God of man through Man.

Then there is image-worship. Except the five Devatâs who are to be
worshipped in every auspicious Karma as enjoined in our Shastras, all
the other Devatas are merely the names of certain states held by them.
But again, these five Devatas are nothing but the different names of the
one God Only. This external worship of images has, however, been
described in all our Shastras as the lowest of all the low forms of
worship. But that does not mean that it is a wrong thing to do. Despite
the many iniquities that have found entrance into the practices of
image-worship as it is in vogue now, I do not condemn it. Ay, where
would I have been if I had not been blessed with the dust of the holy
feet of that orthodox, image-worshipping Brahmin!

Those reformers who preach against image-worship, or what they denounce
as idolatry — to them I say "Brothers, if you are fit to worship
God-without-form discarding all external help, do so, but why do you
condemn others who cannot do the same? A beautiful, large edifice, the
glorious relic of a hoary antiquity has, out of neglect or disuse,
fallen into a dilapidated condition; accumulations of dirt and dust may
be lying everywhere within it, maybe, some portions are tumbling down to
the ground. What will you do to it? Will you take in hand the necessary
cleansing and repairs and thus restore the old, or will you pull the
whole edifice down to the ground and seek to build another in its place,
after a sordid modern plan whose permanence has yet to be established?
We have to reform it, which truly means to make ready or perfect by
necessary cleansing and repairs, not by demolishing the whole thing.
There the function of reform ends. When the work of renovating the old
is finished, what further necessity does it serve? Do that if you can,
if not, hands off!" The band of reformers in our country want, on the
contrary, to build up a separate sect of their own. They have, however,
done good work; may the blessings of God be showered on their heads! But
why should you, Hindus, want to separate yourselves from the great
common fold? Why should you feel ashamed to take the name of Hindu,
which is your greatest and most glorious possession? This national ship
of ours, ye children of the Immortals, my countrymen, has been plying
for ages, carrying civilisation and enriching the whole world with its
inestimable treasures. For scores of shining centuries this national
ship of ours has been ferrying across the ocean of life, and has taken
millions of souls to the other shore, beyond all misery. But today it
may have sprung a leak and got damaged, through your own fault or
whatever cause it matters not. What would you, who have placed
yourselves in it, do now? Would you go about cursing it and quarrelling
among yourselves! Would you not all unite together and put your best
efforts to stop the holes? Let us all gladly give our hearts' blood to
do this; and if we fail in the attempt, let us all sink and die
together, with blessings and not curses on our lips.

And to the Brahmins I say, "Vain is your pride of birth and ancestry.
Shake it off. Brahminhood, according to your Shastras, you have no more
now, because you have for so long lived under Mlechchha kings. If you at
all believe in the words of your own ancestors, then go this very moment
and make expiation by entering into the slow fire kindled by Tusha
(husks), like that old Kumarila Bhatta, who with the purpose of ousting
the Buddhists first became a disciple of the Buddhists and then
defeating them in argument became the cause of death to many, and
subsequently entered the Tushânala to expiate his sins. If you are not
bold enough to do that, then admit your weakness and stretch forth a
helping hand, and open the gates of knowledge to one and all, and give
the downtrodden masses once more their just and legitimate rights and
privileges."

</div>
