---
title: III

---
<div>

[←](02_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](04_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/016_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/017_sir.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/015_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/001_sir.htm)

## III

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6025e7003.pdf)* )

GHAZIPUR,  
*30th January, 1890*.

REVERED SIR (Shri Balaram Bose),

I am now stopping with Satish Babu at Ghazipur. Of the few places I have
recently visited, this is the healthiest. The water of Baidyanath is
very bad — it leads to indigestion. Allahabad is very congested. The few
days I passed at Varanasi, I suffered from fever day and night — the
place is so malarious! Ghazipur has a very salubrious climate —
specially the quarter I am living in. I have visited Pavhari Baba's
house — there are high walls all round, and it is fashioned like an
English bungalow. There is a garden inside and big rooms and chimneys,
etc. He allows nobody to enter. If he is so inclined, he comes up to the
door and speaks from inside — that is all. One day I went and waited and
waited in the cold and had to return. I shall go to Varanasi on Sunday
next. If the meeting with the Babaji takes place in the meantime, all
right, otherwise I bid him good-bye. About Pramada Babu's place I shall
write definitely from Varanasi. If Kali Bhattacharya is determined to
come, let him do so after I leave for Varanasi on Sunday, but he should
rather not. After a few days' stay at Varanasi, I shall start for
Hrishikesh. Pramada Babu may accompany me. Please accept all of you my
cordial greetings — and blessing to Fakir, Ram, Krishnamayi, etc.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. In my opinion, it will do you much good if you come and stay for
some time at Ghazipur. Here Satish will be able to secure a bungalow for
you, and there is a gentleman, Gagan Chandra Ray by name, who is the
head of the Opium Office and is exceedingly courteous, philanthropic,
and social — they will arrange for everything. The house-rent is fifteen
to twenty rupees; rice is dear, and milk sells at sixteen to twenty
seers a rupee; all other things are very cheap. Besides, under the care
of these gentlemen, there is no chance of any difficulty. But it is
slightly expensive — it will cost over forty to fifty rupees. Varanasi
is horribly malarious. I have never lived in Pramada Babu's garden. He
likes to have me always in his company. The garden is indeed very
beautiful, richly laid out, spacious, and open. This time when I go, I
shall live there and report to you.

</div>
