---
title: XII

---
<div>

[←](11_mrs_tannatt_woods.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](13_mrs_woods.htm)

  

[«](11_mrs_tannatt_woods.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/005_alasinga.htm)  
[«](10_adhyapakji.htm) Addressee [»](16_professor.htm)

## XII

C/O J. LYON,  
262 MICHIGAN AVENUE, CHICAGO,  
*26th October, 1893*.

DEAR ADHYAPAKJI (Prof. John Henry Wright),

You would be glad to know that I am doing well here and that almost
everybody has been very kind to me, except of course the very orthodox.
Many of the men brought together here from far-off lands have got
projects and ideas and missions to carry out, and America is the only
place where there is a chance of success for everything. But I thought
better and have given up speaking about my project entirely — because I
am sure now — the heathen draws more than his project. So I want to go
to work earnestly for my own project only keeping the project in the
background and working like any other lecturer.

He who has brought me hither and has not left me yet will not leave me
ever I am here. You will be glad to know that I am doing well and expect
to do very well in the way of getting money. Of course I am too green in
the business but would soon learn my trade. I am very popular in
Chicago. So I want to stay here a little more and get money.

Tomorrow I am going to lecture on Buddhism at the ladies' fortnightly
club — which is the most influential in this city. How to thank you my
kind friend or Him who brought you to me; for now I think the success of
my project probable, and it is you who have made it so.

May blessings and happiness attend every step of your progress in this
world.

My love and blessings to your children.

Yours affectionately ever,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
