---
title: XIV

---
<div>

[←](13_mrs_woods.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](15_brother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/013_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/018_sister_mary.htm)

## XIV

DETROIT,  
*17th March, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER (Miss Harriet McKindley of Chicago.),

 

Got your package yesterday. Sorry that you send those stockings — I
could have got some myself here. Glad that it shows your love. After
all, the satchel has become more than a thoroughly stuffed sausage. I do
not know how to carry it along.

I have returned today to Mrs. Bagley's as she was sorry that I would
remain so long with Mr. Palmer. Of course in Palmer's house there was
real "good time". He is a real jovial heartwhole fellow, and likes "good
time" a little too much and his "hot Scotch". But he is right along
innocent and childlike in his simplicity.

He was very sorry that I came away, but I could not help. Here is a
beautiful young girl. I saw her twice, I do not remember her name. So
brainy, so beautiful, so spiritual, so unworldly! Lord bless her! She
came this morning with Mrs. M'cDuvel and talked so beautifully and deep
and spiritually — that I was quite astounded. She knows everything about
the Yogis and is herself much advanced in practice!!

"Thy ways are beyond searching out." Lord bless her — so innocent, holy,
and pure! This is the grandest recompense in my terribly toilsome,
miserable life — the finding of holy happy faces like you from time to
time. The great Buddhist prayer is, "I bow down to all holy men on
earth". I feel the real meaning of this prayer whenever I see a face
upon which the finger of the Lord has written in unmistakable letters
"mine". May you all be happy, blessed, good and pure as you are for ever
and ever. May your feet never touch the mud and dirt of this terrible
world. May you live and pass away like flowers as you are born — is the
constant prayer of your brother.

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
