---
title: XVII

---
<div>

[←](16_professor.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](18_sister.htm)

  

[«](16_professor.htm) Chronology [»](18_sister.htm)  
Addressee [»](18_sister.htm)

## XVII

NEW YORK,  
*26th April, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER (Miss Isabelle McKindley.),

Your letter reached me yesterday. You were perfectly right — I enjoyed
the fun of the lunatic Interior, (*Chicago Interior*, a Presbyterian
newspaper which opposed Swamiji. — Ed.) but the mail you sent yesterday
from India was really, as Mother Church says in her letter, a good news
after a long interval. There is a beautiful letter from Dewanji. The old
man — Lord bless him — offers as usual to help me. Then there was a
little pamphlet published in Calcutta about me — revealing that once at
least in my life the prophet has been honoured in his own country. There
are extracts from American and Indian papers and magazines about me. The
extracts printed from Calcutta papers were especially gratifying,
although the strain is so fulsome that I refuse to send the pamphlet
over to you. They call me illustrious, wonderful, and all sorts of
nonsense, but they forward me the gratitude of the whole nation. Now I
do not care what they even of my own people say about me — except for
one thing. I have an old mother. She has suffered much all her life and
in the midst of all she could bear to give me up for the service of God
and man; but to have given up the most beloved of her children — her
hope — to live a beastly immoral life in a far distant country, as
Mazoomdar was telling in Calcutta, would have simply killed her. But the
Lord is great, none can injure His children.

The cat is out of the bag — without my seeking at all. And who do you
think is the editor of one of our leading papers which praise me so much
and thank God that I came to America to represent Hinduism? Mazoomdar's
cousin!! — Poor Mazoomdar — he has injured his cause by telling lies
through jealousy. Lord knows I never attempted any defence.

I read the article of Mr. Gandhi in the *Forum* before this.

If you have got the *Review of Reviews* of last month — read to mother
the testimony about the Hindus in connection with the opium question in
India by one of the highest officials of the English in India. He
compares the English with the Hindus and lauds the Hindu to the skies.
Sir Lepel Griffin was one of the bitterest enemies of our race. What
made this change of front?

I had a very good time in Boston at Mrs. Breed's — and saw Prof. Wright.
I am going to Boston again. The tailor is making my new gown. I am going
to speak at Cambridge University \[Harvard\] and would be the guest of
Prof. Wright there. They write grand welcomes to me in the Boston
papers.

I am tired of all this nonsense. Towards the latter part of May I will
come back to Chicago, and after a few day's stay would come back to the
East again.

I spoke last night at the Waldorf hotel. Mrs. Smith sold tickets at $2
each. I had a full hall which by the way was a small one. I have not
seen anything of the money yet. Hope to see in the course of the day.

I made a hundred dollars at Lynn which I do not send because I have to
make my new gown and other nonsense.

Do not expect to make any money at Boston. Still I must touch the brain
of America and stir it up if I can. 

Your loving brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
