---
title: XXI

---
<div>

[←](20_adhyapakji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](22_adhyapakji.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/009_sharat.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/010_alasinga.htm)  
[«](20_adhyapakji.htm) Addressee [»](22_adhyapakji.htm)

## XXI

541 DEARBORN AVE.,  
CHICAGO,  
*24th May, 1894*.

DEAR ADHYAPAKJI (Prof. John Henry Wright),

Herewith I forward to you a letter from one of our ruling princes of
Rajputana, His Highness the Maharaja of Khetri, and another from the
opium commissioner, late minister of Junagad, one of the largest states
in India, and a man who is called the Gladstone of India. These I hope
would convince you of my being no fraud.

One thing I forgot to tell you. I never identified myself anyway with
Mr. Mazoomdar's party chief. (Evidently, Keshab Chandra Sen.) If he says
so, he does not speak the truth.

I hope, after your perusal, you will kindly send the letters over to me,
except the pamphlet which I do not care for.

I am bound, my dear friend, to give you every satisfaction of my being a
genuine Sannyasin, but to you alone. I do not care what the rabbles say
or think about me.

"Some would call you a saint, some a *chandala*; some a lunatic, others
a demon. Go on then straight to thy work without heeding either" — thus
saith one of our great Sannyasins, an old emperor of India, King
Bhartrihari, who joined the order in old times.

May the Lord bless you for ever and ever. My love to all your children
and my respects to your noble wife.

I remain ever your friend,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. — I had connection with Pundit Shiva Nath Shastri's party — but only
on points of social reform. Mazoomdar and Chandra Sen — I always
considered as not sincere, and I have no reason to change my opinion
even now. Of course in religious matters even with my friend Punditji I
differed much, the chief being, I thinking Sannyasa or (giving up the
world) the highest ideal, and he, a sin. So the Brahmo Samajists
consider becoming a monk a sin!!

Yours,

V.

  
The Brahmo Samaj, like Christian Science in your country, spread in
Calcutta for a certain time and then died out. I am not sorry, neither
glad that it died. It has done its work — viz social reform. Its
religion was not worth a cent, and so it must die out. If Mazoomdar
thinks I was one of the causes of its death, he errs. I am even now a
great sympathiser of its reforms; but the "booby" religion could not
hold its own against the old "Vedanta". What shall I do? Is that my
fault? Mazoomdar has become childish in his old age and takes to tactics
not a whit better than some of your Christian missionaries. Lord bless
him and show him better ways. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
When are you going to Annisquam? My love to Austin and Bime. My respects
to your wife; and for you my love and gratitude is too deep for
expression.

Yours ever affectionately, 

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
