---
title: XXIII

---
<div>

[←](22_adhyapakji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](24_kali.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/031_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/032_mother.htm)

## XXIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6111ae7023.pdf)* )

U.S.A.  
*5th September, 1894*.

DEAR MR. BHATTACHARYA (Mr. Manmatha Nath Bhattacharya),

I was much pleased to read your affectionate letter. I shall make
inquiries about the weaving machine as soon as I can, and let you know.
Now I am resting at Annisquam, a village on the seacoast; soon I shall
go to the city and attend to the matter of the machine. These seaside
places are filled with people during the summer; some come to bathe in
the sea, some to take rest, and some to catch husbands.

There is a strong sense of decorum in this country.

You have to keep yourself always covered from neck to foot in the
presence of women. You cannot so much as mention the normal functions of
the body: nobody knows when anyone goes to the toilet — one has to live
so circumspectly. In this country, you can blow your nose a thousand
times into your handkerchief — there is no harm in that; but it is
highly uncivilised to belch. Women sometimes are not embarrassed to
expose their bodies above the waist — you must have seen the kind of
low-cut gown they wear — but they say that to go bare-foot is as bad as
being naked. Just as we always dwell on the soul, so they take care of
the body, and there is no end to the cleaning and embellishing of it.
One who fails to do this has no place in society.

Our method of cooking with cow-dung fuel and eating on the floor they
consider eating like pigs: they say that the Hindus have no sense of
disgust and that, like pigs, they eat cow-dung. The word "cow-dung" is
taboo in English. On the other hand, numbers of people will drink water
with the same glass without thinking of washing it, and they rarely
observe the rule that things must be washed before cooking. But should
the clothes of the cook be a little soiled, they will throw her out. The
table-ware is all spick and span. They are the richest people on earth;
their enjoyments and luxuries beggar description.

In Rajputana they imitate the Mohammedans in their mode of dining, which
is, on the whole, good. They sit on a low seat and place their plate of
rice on a low table. This is much better than spreading a banana leaf on
the earthen floor plastered with cow-dung and filth. And how disastrous
if the leaf gets torn! The Hindus did not know much about clothes or
food. Moreover, whatever Hindu civilisation there was existed in the
Punjab and the north-west provinces. . . .

Our women lose caste if they put on shoes, but the Rajput women lose
their caste if they don't put on shoes! Says Manu: "One shall always
wear shoes". There is no denying that people should have a decent enough
standard of living. I say they should be neat and clean even though not
luxurious. . . . I say, why do we have to be Englishmen? It is enough
for the present if we imitate our brothers of the western provinces. If
group after group of Indians travel all over the world and back for some
years, the face of India will be changed within twenty years by that
alone; nothing else need be done. But how will anything happen if the
people of one village do not visit the next? However, everything will
take place by and by. By and by, the stubborn Bengali boys will awaken
the country. But Manmatha Babu, you will have to stop this shameful
business of marrying off nine-year-old girls. That is the root of all
sins. It is a very great sin, my boy. Consider further what a terrible
thing it was that when the government wanted to pass a law stopping
early marriage, our worthless people raised a tremendous howl! If we
don't stop it ourselves, the government will naturally intervene, and
that is just what it wants to do. All the world cries fie upon us. You
remain shut up in your homes, but the people outside spit upon you. How
far can I quarrel with them? What a horror — even a father and mother
allow their ten-year-old daughter to be given in marriage to a
full-grown fat husband! O Lord, is there any punishment unless there has
been a sin? It is all the fruit of Karma. If ours were not a terribly
sinful nation, then why should it have been booted and beaten for seven
hundred years?

Now, just as in our country the parents suffer a lot to have their
daughter married, here in the same way the girls suffer — the parents
only a little — it is the job of the girls to capture husbands. I am now
closely associated with them in all their affairs; I am, as it were, a
woman amongst women. Therefore, I have seen, and am seeing, all their
play. To give dinners, to dance, to go to musical parties, go to the
watering places — all that is all right. But all the while the young
women are scheming within themselves how to capture husbands. They hang
round the boys. The boys, on the other hand, are so cautious that,
though they mingle with the girls and flirt with them all the time, when
it is time to surrender they run away. The boys place the girls above
themselves; they show them respect and slave for them; but the moment
the girls stretch their hands to catch them, they run away beyond their
reach. After many efforts of this kind, a girl succeeds in capturing a
boy. If the girl has money, then many a boy dances attendance upon her,
but the poor have great difficulty. If a poor girl is exceedingly
beautiful, she can marry quickly; otherwise, she has to wait all her
life. Just as in our country, so here, one marriage in a thousand takes
place through love and courtship; the rest are based on money. After
that, quarrel, and then, 'Get out!' — divorce. We do not have this; the
only way out is to hang oneself. It is the same in all countries. Only,
here the girls take matters into their own hands; and in our country, we
get the help of the parents to give their married life a decent
appearance. The result is the same in either case.

Nowadays, however, American girls don't want to marry. During the Civil
War a large number of men were killed and women began to do all kinds of
work. Since then, they have not wanted to give up the rights they have
acquired. They earn their own living, and therefore they say, "There is
no use in marrying. If we truly fall in love, then we shall marry;
otherwise, we shall earn and meet our own expenses". Even if the father
is a millionaire, the son has to earn enough before he marries. One may
not marry depending on an allowance from the father. The girls also want
the same thing now. When a son marries he becomes like a stranger to his
own family, but when a girl marries she brings her husband, as it were,
into her parents' home. Men will visit their wives' parents ten times,
but rarely go to their own parents. Yet they are very much afraid of
having their mothers-in-law on their neck.

In this country, there are rivers of wealth and waves of beauty, and an
abundance of knowledge everywhere. The country is very healthy; they
know how to enjoy this earth. . . . When princes of Europe become poor
they come to marry here. The average American doesn't like this; but
some rich, beautiful women fall for the titles. Yet it is very difficult
for American women to live in Europe. The husbands of this country are
slaves of their wives; but the European wives are slaves to their
husbands — this the American women don't like. In everything, the men
here have to say, 'Yes dear'; otherwise the wives lose face before
people.

The women in America are very sentimental and have a mania for romance.
I am, however, a strange sort of animal who hasn't any romantic feeling,
and therefore they could not sustain any such feeling toward me and they
show me great respect. I make all of them call me "father" or "brother".
I don't allow them to come near me with any other feeling, and gradually
they have all been straightened out. . . .

The ministers in this country . . . are eager to throw sinners into
hell. A few of them are very good, however. . . . I have a great
reputation among the women in this country. I have not as yet seen a
single unchaste girl among the unmarried. It is either a widow or a
married woman who turn unchaste. The unmarried girls are exceedingly
good, because their future is bright. . . .

Those emaciated Western women, looking like old dried-up fruit, whom you
see in India, are English, and the English are an ugly race amongst the
Europeans. In America, the best blood strains of Europe have been
blended, and therefore, the American women are very beautiful. And how
they take care of their beauty! Can a woman retain her beauty if she
gives birth to children . . . every hour from her tenth year on? Damn
nonsense! What a terrible sin! Even the most beautiful woman of our
country will look like a black owl here. Yet it must be admitted that
the women of the Punjab have very well-drawn features. Many of the
American women are very well educated and put many a learned professor
to shame; nor do they care for anyone's opinion. And as regards their
virtues: what kindness, what noble thought and action! Just think, if a
man of this country were to visit India, nobody would even touch him;
yet here I am allowed to do as I please in the houses of the best
families — like their own son! I am like a child; their women shop for
me, run errands for me. For example: I have just written to a girl for
information about the machine, which she will gather carefully and send
to me. Again, a phonograph was sent to the Maharaj of Khetri: the girls
managed the whole affair very well. Lord! Lord! It is the difference
between heaven and hell! "They are the goddess Lakshmi in beauty and the
goddess Saraswati in talents and accomplishments." This cannot be
achieved through the study of books. I say, can you send out some men
and women to see the world? Only then will the country wake up — not
through the reading of books. The men here are very clever in earning
wealth. Where others do not see even dust, there they see gold. Whoever
will leave India and visit another country will earn great merit.

Keeping aloof from the community of nations is the only cause for the
downfall of India. Since the English came, they have been forcing you
back into communion with other nations, and you are visibly rising
again. Everyone that comes out of the country confers a benefit on the
whole nation; for it is by doing that alone that your horizon will
expand. And as women cannot avail themselves of this advantage, they
have made almost no progress in India. There is no station of rest;
either you progress upwards or you go back and die out. The only sign of
life is going outward and forward and expansion. Contraction is death.
Why should you do good to others? Because that is the only condition of
life; thereby you expand beyond your little self; you live and grow. All
narrowness, all contraction, all selfishness is simply slow suicide, and
when a nation commits the fatal mistake of contracting itself and of
thus cutting off all expansion and life, it must die. Women similarly
must go forward or become idiots and soulless tools in the hands of
their tyrannical lords. The children are the result of the combination
of the tyrant and the idiot, and they are *slaves*. And this is the
whole history of modern India. Oh, who would break this horrible
crystallisation of death? Lord help us! (This paragraph was written in
English.)

Gradually all this will come about: "One should cross a road slowly and
cautiously; one should patch a quilt carefully and cautiously; so should
one be slow and cautious in crossing a mountain".

The papers have arrived duly and in good shape; there has not been any
difficulty about that. The enemy has been silenced. Consider this: They
have allowed me, an unknown young man, to live among their grown-up
young daughters, and when my own countryman, Mazoomdar, says I am a
rogue, they don't pay any attention! How noble they are, and how kind! I
shall not be able to repay this debt even in a hundred lives, I am like
a foster son to the American women; they are really my mother. If they
don't flourish in every way, who would?

A while back several hundred intellectual men and women were gathered in
a place called Greenacre, and I was there for nearly two months. Every
day I would sit in our Hindu fashion under a tree, and my followers and
disciples would sit on the grass all around me. Every morning I would
instruct them, and how earnest they were!

The whole country now knows me. The ministers are very angry; but,
naturally, not all of them. There are many followers of mine amongst the
learned ministers of this country. The ignorant and the stubborn amongst
them don't understand anything but only make trouble, and thereby they
only hurt themselves. But abusing me, Mazoomdar has lost three-fourths
of what little popularity he had in this country. I have been adopted by
them. When anyone abuses me he is condemned everywhere by the women.

I cannot say when I shall return to India, possibly next winter. There I
shall have to wander, and here also I do the same.

There is nothing more to add. Please don't make this letter public. You
understand, I have to be careful about every word I say — I am now a
public man. Everybody is watching, particularly the clergy. 

Yours faithfully,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
