---
title: XXIV

---
<div>

[←](23_mr_bhattacharya.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](25_brother_shivananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/053_govinda_sahay.htm)
Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/054_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/030_kali.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/053_kali.htm)

## XXIV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7148e7024.pdf)* )

U.S.A.  
(*November* ?) *1894*.

DEAR KALI \[ABHEDANANDA\],

Thanks for all that I come to know from your letter. I had no news of
the telegram in question having appeared in the *Tribune*. It is six
months since I left Chicago, and I have not been yet free to return. So
I could not keep myself well posted. You have taken great pains indeed!
And for this how can I thank you adequately? You have all evinced a
wonderful capacity for work. And how can Shri Ramakrishna's words prove
false? — You have got wonderful spirit in you. About Shashi Sanyal, I
have already written. Nothing remains undetected, through the grace of
Shri Ramakrishna. But let him found a sect or whatever he will, what
harm? "शिवा वः सन्तु पन्थानः — May blessings attend your path!"
Secondly, I could not catch the drift of your letter. I shall collect my
own funds to build a monastery for ourselves, and if people criticise me
for it, I see nothing in this to affect us either way. You have your
minds pitched high and steady, it will do you no harm. May you have
exceeding love for one another among yourselves, and it would be enough
to have an attitude of indifference towards public criticisms.
Kalikrishna Babu has deep love for the cause and is a great man. Please
convey my special love to him. So long as there is no feeling of
disunion amongst you, through the grace of the Lord, I assure you, there
is no danger for you, "रणे वने पर्वतमस्तके वा — be it in battle, in the
forest, or on the top of mountains". "श्रेयांसि बहुविघ्नानि — All noble
undertakings are fraught with obstacles". It is quite in the nature of
things. Keep up the deepest mental poise. Take not even the slightest
notice of what puerile creatures may be saying against you.
Indifference, indifference, indifference! I have already written to
Shashi (Ramakrishnananda) in detail. Please do not send newspapers and
tracts any more. "Take the husking hammer to heaven, and there it will
do its husking", as the Bengali saying goes. The same trudging about
here as it was in India, only with the carrying of others' loads added!
How can I procure customers for people's books in this land? I am only
one amongst the many here and nothing more. Whatever the papers and
things of that sort in this country write about me, I make an offering
of to the Fire-God. You also do the same. That is the proper course.

A bit of public demonstration was necessary for Guru Maharaja's work. It
is done, and so far so good. Now you must on no account pay any heed to
what the rabble may be prattling about us. Whether I make my pile or do
whatever else I am reported to, shall the opinions of the riff-raff
stand in the way of His work? My dear brother, you are yet a boy, while
I am growing grey. What regard I have for the pronouncements and
opinions of such people, you should guess from this. So long as you gird
up your loins and rally behind me, there is no fear even if the whole
world combine against us. This much I understand that I shall have to
take up a very lofty attitude, I should not, I think, write to anyone
except to you. By the by, where is Gunanidhi? Try to find him out and
bring him to the Math with all kindness. He is a very sincere man and
highly learned. You must try your best to secure two plots of land, let
people say what they will. Let anyone write anything for or against me
in the papers; you shouldn't take the slightest notice. And my dear
brother, I beseech you repeatedly not to send me any more newspapers by
the basketful. How can you talk of rest now? We shall have rest awhile
only when we give up this body. Just do once get up the celebration,
brother, in that spirit, so that all the country around may burn with
enthusiasm. Bravo! Capital indeed! The whole band of scoffers will be
swept away by the tidal wave of love. You are elephants, forsooth, what
do you fear from an ant-bite?

The address (The Address presented by the citizens of Calcutta who
gathered at a meeting at the Town Hall on September 5, 1894, under the
Presidentship of Raja Pyari Mohan Mookherjee.) you sent me reached me
long ago and the reply to it has also been despatched to Pyari Babu (18
Nov. 1894).

Bear in mind — the eyes are two in number and so the ears, but the mouth
is but one! Indifference, indifference, indifference! "न हि
कल्याणकृत्कश्चिद्दुर्गतिं तात् गच्छति — The doer of good deeds never
comes to grief, my dear". Ah! To fear! and whom are we going to fear,
brother? Here the missionaries and their ilk have howled themselves into
silence — and the whole world will but do likewise.

"निन्दन्तु नीतिनिपुणा यदि वा स्तुवन्तु  
लक्ष्मी समाविशतु गच्छतु वा यथेष्टम्।  
अद्यैव वा मरणमस्तु शतान्तरे वा  
न्याय्यात्पथः प्रविचलन्ति पदं न धीराः॥

— Whether people skilled in policy praise or blame, whether the Goddess
of Fortune favours or goes her way, whether death befalls today or after
hundreds of years — persons of steady mind never swerve from the path of
righteousness" (Bhartrihari, *Nitishataka*)

You need not even mix with the humdrub people, nor beg of them either.
The Lord is supplying everything and will do so in future. What fear, my
brother? All great undertakings are achieved through mighty obstacles.
हे वीर, कुरु पौरुषमात्मनः उपेक्षितव्या जनाः सुकृपणाः कामकाञ्चनवशगाः —
You valiant one, put forth your manly efforts; wretched people under the
grip of lust and gold deserve to be looked upon with indifference. Now I
have got a firm footing in this country, and therefore need no
assistance. But my one prayer to you all is that you should apply to the
service of the Lord that active impulse of manliness which your
eagerness to help me through brotherly love has brought out in you. Do
not open out your mind, unless you feel it will be positively
beneficial. Use agreeable and wholesome language towards even the
greatest enemy. The desire for fame, for riches, for enjoyment is quite
natural to every mortal, dear brother, and if that agrees well with
serving both ways (i.e. serving both God and mammon), why, all men would
exhibit great zeal! It is only the great saint who can work, making a
mountain of an atom of virtue in others and cherishing no desire but
that of the good of the world — "परगुणपरमाणून् पर्वतीकृत्य,
त्रिभुवनमुपकारश्रेणीभिः प्रीणयन्तः" etc., (Bhartrihari, *Nitishataka*,
70). Therefore let dullards whose intellect is steeped in ignorance and
who look upon the non-Self as all in all, play out their boyish pranks.
They will of themselves leave off the moment they find it too hot. Let
them try to spit upon the moon — it will but recoil upon themselves.
शुभं भवतु तेषाम् — Godspeed to them! If they have got anything
substantial in them, who can bar their success? But if it be only empty
swagger due to jealousy, then all will be in vain. Haramohan has sent
rosaries. All right. But you should know that religion of the type that
obtains in our country does not go here. You must suit it to the taste
of the people. If you ask them to become Hindus, they will all give you
a wide berth and hate you, as we do the Christian missionaries. They
like some of the ideas of the Hindu scriptures — that is all. Nothing
more than that, you should know. The men, most of them, do not trouble
about religion and all that. The women are a little interested — that is
all, but no large doses of it! A few thousands of people have faith in
the Advaita doctrine. But they will give you the go-by if you talk
obscure mannerisms about sacred writings, caste, or women. Everything
proceeds slowly, by degrees. Patience, purity, perseverance.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
