---
title: XXXI

---
<div>

[←](30_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](32_dear.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/060_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/095_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/060_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/063_alasinga.htm)

## XXXI

U.S.A.  
*March, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

Last week I wrote you about the *Brahmavâdin*. I forgot to write about
the Bhakti lectures. They ought to be published in a book all together.
A few hundreds may be sent to America to Goodyear in New York. Within
twenty days I sail for England. I have other big books on Karma, Jnana,
and Raja Yogas — the Karma is out already, the Raja will be a very big
book and is already in the Press. The Jnana will have to be published, I
think, in England.

A letter you published from Kripananda in the *Brahmavadin* was rather
unfortunate. Kripananda is smarting under the blows the Christians have
given him and that sort of letter is vulgar, pitching into everybody. It
is not in accord with the tone of the *Brahmavadin*. So in future when
Kripananda writes, tone down everything that is an attack upon any sect,
however cranky or crude. Nothing which is against any sect, good or bad,
should get into the *Brahmavadin*. Of course, we must not show active
sympathy with frauds. Again let me remind you that the paper is too
technical to find any subscriber here. The average Western neither knows
nor cares to know all about jaw-breaking Sanskrit terms and
technicalities. The paper is well fitted for India — that I see. Every
word of special pleading should be eliminated from the Editorials, and
you must always remember that you are addressing the whole world, not
India alone, and that the same world is entirely ignorant of what you
have got to tell them. Use the translation of every Sanskrit term
carefully and make things as easy as possible.

Before this reaches you I will be in England. So address me c/o E. T.
Sturdy, Esq., High View, Caversham, Eng. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
