---
title: XXXVI

---
<div>

[←](35_adhyapakji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](37_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/099_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/100_shashi.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/082_dear.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/100_miss_noble.htm)

## XXXVI

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON,  
*7th June, 1896*.

DEAR MISS NOBLE,

My ideal indeed can be put into a few words and that is: to preach unto
mankind their divinity, and how to make it manifest in every movement of
life.

This world is in chain of superstition. I pity the oppressed, whether
man or woman, and I pity more the oppressors.

One idea that I see clear as daylight is that misery is caused by
ignorance and nothing else. Who will give the world light? Sacrifice in
the past has been the Law, it will be, alas, for ages to come. The
earth's bravest and best will have to sacrifice themselves for the good
of many, for the welfare of all. Buddhas by the hundred are necessary
with eternal love and pity.

Religions of the world have become lifeless mockeries. What the world
wants is character. The world is in need of those whose life is one
burning love, selfless. That love will make every word tell like
thunderbolt.

It is no superstition with you, I am sure, you have the making in you of
a world-mover, and others will also come. Bold words and bolder deeds
are what we want. Awake, awake, great ones! The world is burning with
misery. Can you sleep? Let us call and call till the sleeping gods
awake, till the god within answers to the call. What more is in life?
What greater work? The details come to me as I go. I never make plans.
Plans grow and work themselves. I only say, awake, awake!

May all blessings attend you for ever! 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
