---
title: XLI

---
<div>

[←](40_shuddhananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](42_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/098_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/131_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/096_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](42_miss_noble.htm)

## XLI

ALMORA,  
*23rd July, 1897*.

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

Excuse these few lines. I shall write more fully as soon as I reach some
place. I am on my way from the hills to the plains.

I do not understand what you mean by frankness without familiarity — I
for one will give anything to get rid of the last lingering bit of
Oriental formality in me and speak out like a child of nature. Oh, to
live even for a day in the full light of freedom, to breathe the free
air of simplicity! Is not that the highest purity?

In this world we work through fear of others, we talk through fear, we
think through fear, alas! we are born in a land of enemies. Who is there
who has been able to get rid of this feeling of fear, as if everyone is
a spy set specially to watch him? And woe unto the man who pushes
himself forward! Will it ever be a land of friends? Who knows? We can
only try.

The work has already begun and at present famine-relief is the thing
next to hand. Several centres have been opened and the work goes on;
famine-relief, preaching, and a little teaching. As yet of course it is
very very insignificant, the boys in training are being taken out as
opportunity is offering itself. The sphere of action at present is
Madras and Calcutta. Mr. Goodwin working in Madras. Also one has gone to
Colombo. From the next week a monthly report of the whole work will be
forwarded to you if it has not already reached you. I am away from the
centre of work, so things go a little slow, you see; but the work is
satisfactory on the whole.

You can do more work for us from England than by coming here. Lord bless
you for your great self-sacrifice for the poor Indians.

I entirely agree with you that the work in England will look up when I
am there. But all the same it is not proper to leave India before the
machine is moving at some rate and I am sure that there are many to
guide it in my absence. That will be done in a few months. "God
willing", as the Mussulmans say. One of my best workers is now in
England, the Raja of Khetri. I expect him soon in India, and he will be
of great service to me no doubt.

With everlasting love and blessings,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
