---
title: XLII

---
<div>

[←](41_miss_noble.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](43_madam.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/079_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/100_shashi.htm)  
[«](41_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/110_margo.htm)

## XLII

ALMORA,  
*29th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

A letter from Sturdy reached me yesterday, informing me that you are
determined to come to India and see things with your own eyes. I replied
to that yesterday, but what I learnt from Miss Muller about your plans
makes this further note necessary, and it is better that it should be
direct.

Let me tell you frankly that I am now convinced that you have a great
future in the work for India. What was wanted was not a man, but a woman
— a real lioness — to work for the Indians, women specially.

India cannot yet produce great women, she must borrow them from other
nations. Your education, sincerity, purity, immense love, determination,
and above all, the Celtic blood make you just the woman wanted.

Yet the difficulties are many. You cannot form any idea of misery, the
superstition, and the slavery that are here. You will be in the midst of
a mass of half-naked men and women with quaint ideas of caste and
isolation, shunning the white skin through fear or hatred and hated by
them intensely. On the other hand, you will be looked upon by the white
as a crank, and every one of your movements will be watched with
suspicion.

Then the climate is fearfully hot; our winter in most places being like
your summer, and in the south it is always blazing.

Not one European comfort is to be had in places out of the cities. If in
spite of all this, you dare venture into the work, you are welcome, a
hundred times welcome. As for me, I am nobody here as elsewhere, but
what little influence I have shall be devoted to your service.

You must think well before you plunge in; and after work, if you fail in
this or get disgusted, on my part I promise you, *I will stand by you
unto death* whether you work for India or not, whether you give up
Vedanta or remain in it. "The tusks of the elephant come out, but never
go back"; so are the words of a man never retracted. I promise you that.
Again, I must give you a bit of warning. You must stand on your own feet
and not be under the wings of Miss Muller or anybody else. Miss Muller
is a good lady in her own way, but unfortunately it got into her head,
when she was a girl, that she was a born leader and that no other
qualifications were necessary to move world but money! This idea is
coming on the surface again and again in spite of herself, and you will
find it impossible to pull on with her in a few days. She now intends to
take a house in Calcutta for herself and yourself and other European or
American friends who may come.

It is very kind and good of her, but her Lady Abbess plan will never be
carried out for two reasons — her violent temper and overbearing
conduct, and her awfully vacillating mind. Friendship with many is best
at a distance, and everything goes well with the person who stands on
his own feet.

Mrs. Sevier is a jewel of a lady —so good, so kind! The Seviers are the
*only* English people who do not hate the *natives*, Sturdy not
excepted. Mr. and Mrs. Sevier are the only persons who *did not come* to
patronise us, but they have no fixed plans yet. When you come, you may
get them to work with you, and that will be really helpful to them and
to you. But after all it is absolutely necessary to stand on one's own
feet.

I learn from America that two friends of mine, Mrs. Ole Bull of Boston
and Miss MacLeod, are coming on a visit to India this autumn. Miss
MacLeod you already know in London, that Paris-dressed young American
lady; Mrs. Ole Bull is about fifty and has been a kind friend to me in
America. I may suggest that your joining the party may while away the
tedium of the journey, as they also are coming by way of Europe.

I am glad to receive a note at least from Sturdy after long. But it was
so stiff and cold. It seems he is disappointed at the collapse of the
London work.

With everlasting love,

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
