---
title: XLIII

---
<div>

[←](42_miss_noble.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](44_sturdy.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/146_dear.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/137_margot.htm)  
[«](../../volume_4/translation_prose/the_education_that_india_needs.htm)
Addressee

## XLIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8425e7043.pdf)* )

BELUR MATH,  
*16th April, 1899*.

DEAR MADAM (Shrimati Sarala Ghosal, B. A.),

Very glad to receive your kind note. If by the sacrifice of some
specially cherished object of either myself or my brother-disciples many
pure and genuinely patriotic souls come forward to help our cause, rest
assured, we will not hesitate in the least to make that sacrifice nor
shed a tear-drop — you will see this verified in action. But up till now
I have seen nobody coming forward to assist in this way. Only some have
wished to put their own hobby in place of ours — that is all. If it
really help our country or humanity — not to speak of giving up
Guru-worship — believe me, we are prepared to commit any dire iniquity
and suffer the eternal damnation of the Christians. But my hairs have
turned grey since I began the study of man. This world is a most trying
place, and it is long since I have taken to wandering with the lantern
of the Grecian Philosopher in hand. A popular song my Master often used
to sing comes to my mind:

"He who's a man after one's heart  
Betrays himself by his very looks.  
Rare indeed is such a one!  
He's a man of aesthetic perceptions  
Who treads a path contrary to others."

This much from my side. Please know that not one word of it is
exaggerated — which you will find to be actually the case.

But then I have some doubts about those patriotic souls who can join
with us if only we give up the worship of the Guru. Well, if, as they
pose, they are indeed panting and struggling so much — almost to the
point of dissolution from their body — to serve the country, how can the
single accident of Guru-worship stop everything!

This impetuous river with rolling waves which bade fair to sweep away
whole hills and mountains — was a bit of Guru-worship sufficient to turn
it back to the Himalayas! I put it to you, do you think anything great
will come of such patriotism, or any substantial good proceed from such
assistance? It is for you to say; I can make nothing out of it. For a
thirsty man to weigh so much the merits of water, or for a man about to
die of hunger to cogitate so much and turn up his nose at the food
presented! Well, people have strange ways of thinking. I, for one, am
inclined to think that those people were best in a glass-case; the more
they keep away from actual work, the better.

"Love stops not for questions of birth.  
Nor the hungry man for stale food."

This is what I know. But I may be wholly mistaken. Well, if this trifle
of Guru-worship sticks in one's throat to choke one to death, we had
better extricate him from this predicament.

However, I have a great longing to talk over these points with you in
detail. For talking these things over, affliction and death have given
me leave till now, and I hope they will do so yet.

May all your wishes be fulfilled in this New Year!

Yours sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
