---
title: XLVII

---
<div>

[←](46_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](48_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/157_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/158_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/157_margot.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/151_margot.htm)

## XLVII

LOS ANGELES,  
*6th Dec*.*, 1899*.

DEAR MARGOT,

Your sixth has arrived, but with it yet no change in my fortune. Would
change be any good, do you think? Some people are made that way, to love
being miserable. If I did not break my heart over people I was born
amongst, I would do it for somebody else. I am sure of that. This is the
way of some, I am coming to see it. We are all after happiness, true,
but that some are only happy in being unhappy — queer, is it not? There
is no harm in it either, except that happiness and unhappiness are both
infectious. Ingersoll said once that if he were God, he would make
health catching, instead of disease, little dreaming that health is
quite as catching as disease, if not more! That is the only danger. No
harm in the world in my being happy, in being miserable, but others must
not catch it. This is the great fact. No sooner a prophet feels
miserable for the state of man than he sours his face, beats his breast,
and calls upon everyone to drink tartaric acid, munch charcoal, sit upon
a dung-heap covered with ashes, and speak only in groans and tears! — I
find they all have been wanting. Yes, they have. If you are really ready
to take the world's burden, take it by all means. But do not let us hear
your groans and curses. Do not frighten us with your sufferings, so that
we came to feel we were better off with our own burdens. The man who
really takes the burden blesses the world and goes his own way. He has
not a word of condemnation, a word of criticism, not because there was
no evil but that he has taken it on his own shoulders willingly,
voluntarily. It is the Saviour who should "go his way rejoicing, and not
the saved".

This is the only light I have caught this morning. This is enough if it
has come to live with me and permeate my life.

Come ye that are heavy laden and lay all your burden on me, and then do
whatever you like and be happy and forget that I ever existed.

Ever with love, 

Your father,

VIVEKANANDA.  

</div>
