+++
title = "adhika mantra-s of the nIlarudropaniShat"

+++
The nIlarudropaniShat has some additional mantra-s beyond those included
in the nIlarudra sUktaM. These mantra-s are drawn from the raudra gaNa
of the paippalAda saMhitA of the AV. The combination of the nIlarudra
sUktaM along with the raudra gaNa (AV parishiShTha 19b3.4-5) is
mentioned as being part of the mantra deployment in the peculiar
atharvavedIya brahma yAga of bhArgava. This is a proto-tAntric ritual of
the atharvanic tradition involving the worship of brahmA identified with
rudra installed in a maNDala (AV pari 19b2.3-5) followed by a fire
ritual. Further, some of these adhika mantra-s of the nIlarudropaniShat
have an extremely important place in atharvaNIya prayoga. These
prayoga-s are themselves kept secret and passed only between dIkShita-s.

*namo .astu sarpebhyo ye ke ca pR^ithivIm anu |  
ye antarikShe ye divi tebhyaH sarpebhyo namaH ||*

*ye chAmI rocane divo yash cha sUryasya rashmiShu |  
yeShAm apsu sadas kR^itaM tebhyaH sarpebhyo namaH ||*

*yA iShavo yAtudhAnAnAM ye vA vanaspatInAm |  
ye vAvaTeShu sherate tebhyaH sarpebhyo namaH ||*

The first three of these mantra-s constitute the sarpa-bali mantra-s.
Here the sarpa-s are identified with the arrows of rudra. In the
AV-saMhitA-s there are two famous sUkta-s known as the praise of the
arrows of rudra. In one of these sUkta-s the arrows are identified with
various types of snakes.

*yaH svajAnAM nIlagrIvo yaH svajAnAM harir uta |  
kalmASha-puchCham oShadhe jambhayAsy arundhati ||*

This mantra is the one which gives the famous viSha-nivAraka prayoga.
The venoms of three types of vipers are countered using an extract of
the *Aristolochia indica* (At least as per contemporary tradition)

*babhrush cha babhru-karNash cha nIlAgalasAlA shivaH pashya |  
tauvilike .avelayAvA ayam ailaba ailayIt ||*

The second hemistich of this mantra is missing in most extant nIlarudra
manuscript. I suspect what has been handed down to us is also corrupt
and hope to investigate it further using a manuscript of the Orissan
paippalAda saMhitA. The snake in the first hemistich
(babhru/babhru-karNa) is the viper *Pseudocerastes bicornis*

*sharveNa nIlashikhaNDena bhavena marutAM pitrA |  
virUpAkSheNa babhrUNAM vAcaM vadiShyato hataH ||*

This is a celebrated mantra of the secret prayoga. It is the head of
that which the mahAbhArata refers to when it compares an astra to the
atharvA\~Ngirasa. When combined with the uchChuShma-s it is like the
pAshupata praised by arjuna (The bhArata subtly lets you in on the
secret).

*sharva nIlashikhaNDa vIra karmaNi-karmaNi |  
imAm asya prAshaM jahi yenedaM vivadAmahe\* ||*

Most nIlarudra manuscripts have the erroneous vibhajAmahe in place of
vivadAmahe. The latter reading is confirmed by the paippalAda
manuscripts of the Orissans.

*namo bhavAya namaH sharvAya namaH kumArAya shaMbhave\* |  
namo nIlashikhaNDAya namaH sabhAprapAdine ||*

Here the Orissan pATha has the peculiar kumAra-shatrave in place of the
kumArAya shaMbhave. At first sight it is incongruous. But in the AV-P in
the very next mantra kumAra-shatru is explained as a semantically
equivalent formation modeled on shishumAra. Interestingly, in the
taittirIya AraNyaka 2.19 shishumAra is explained as the Northern
constellation (comprised of stars of Draco and possibly Ursa Minor) and
is identified with rudra. Thus, the kumAra-shatru reading in the AV-P
most probably has nothing to do with the god kumAra but is a homonym for
shishumAra which is identified with rudra. However, in an interesting
twist the TA 2.19 also identifies shishumAra with the god kumAra
(perhaps as a name of rudra; given that the shatapatha brAhmaNa mentions
kumAra as a name of rudra). The mantra to kumAra given in TA 2.19 is
taken as the vaidika pramANa for the glorious aShTAkSharI vidyA in the
kaumAra parlance.

*yasya harI ashvatarau gardabhAv abhitaHsarau |  
tasmai nIlashikhaNDAya namaH sabhAprapAdine ||*

This is a unique reference to rudra’s chariot being drawn by a pair of
yellow mules and a pair of donkeys. This mantra is similar to another
AV-P mantra to rudra:  
*naktaM harI mR^igayete divA suparNA rohitau |  
bhavAya ca sharvAya chobhAbhyAm akaraM namaH ||**  
* Here at night the two yellow deer run and during the day two red birds
fly. These are the animals of rudra worshiped in the next hemistich as
bhava and sharva. There could be an astronomical allusion here. In the
shiva sahasranAma from the anushAsana parvan of the mahAbhArata we see
that rudra is called: hayagardabhiH. This suggests that some memory of
this tradition continued in later times.  
…

*tvaM devAnAm asi rudra shreShThas tavas tavasAm ugrabAho |  
hR^iNIyasA manasA modamAna A babhUvitha rudrasya sUnoH ||*

*yaH samAno yo .asamAno .amitro no jighAMsati |  
rudraH sharavyayA tAn amitrAn no vi vidhyatu ||*

These additional mantra-s are recited by few atharvavedin-s after the
core nIlarudropaniShat. They together with sharveNa… mantra are part of
the mighty secret prayoga. They for the three prongs of the “…” which is
alluded to by manu and known to the practitioners of bhR^igu’s spells.
