+++
title = "The grahaNa of the fourth hero"

+++
We learned that the amAtya was caught up with completing the devotions
to the terrifying vighnarAja. We tried to reach the sachiva, but we
could only reach MM. MM informed us that the sachiva had received the
intelligence that the fourth hero had been attacked fiercely and was
being pressed really hard in battle. The amAtya of the unstoppable third
hero had gone to make offerings at the parvata of rudra to help the
first hero, who was locked in his abhichAra combat. This amAtya first
rushed to the help of the falling fourth hero. Then the news was relayed
to our sachiva that he needed to enter the battle. So our sachiva
entered the battle to aid the 4th hero – he was in a stiff saMarya.

We realized that a hit on the 4th hero was a like a direct hit on the
communication center of the army in a yuddha. But we had to move to
yuvapura, and if the communication center was gone we would not know
anything of how the sachiva or the amAtya fought the yuddha. Further due
to us being in yuvapura the 4th hero could only be protected via the
low-tech mantravAda of the sachiva and the amAtya – but they did what
ever they knew well. Those who deploy karNa-yakShiNI should be careful
as she is not for the pashu-s. As we were advancing to the vyomayAna we
briefly saw the yakShiNI once – we wondered why we should see her. After
finishing with the vyomayAna, we went with one of our former warriors to
get some food in what was an unusually good summer day in the cold
wastes of yuvapura. We again saw the yakShinI briefly – this raised our
alarms a bit for we were to join a brief yuddha there after with some
mlechChAdi. \[Many years ago when were still filled with youthful
enthusiasm we decided to embark on our great quest. There we encountered
a powerful mlechCha warrior from the cold lands of the north. His skill
with various shara-s left us with wonder. We realized that if we had to
find a place amongst true yoddha-s we had to exceed him. Aided by the
1st hero who was then struggling in the grip of mohinI-s in
balabaja-sthAna we reached shAlAgrama. About 18 hours after we reached
there the deva-s gave us the shataghni, and once that was in our hand we
knew how to find that way. With the shataghni we exceeded the said
mlechCha vIra of bhagadatta-like prowess\]. After the yuddha of
yuvapura, the guru of the said mlechCha-vIra accepted our victory. We
hence realized that the appearance of the yakShiNI had nothing to do
with this. Then we encountered three prathama-s who had decayed to the
state of chaNDAla-s and were thus deservedly made servants of the
mlechCha-s. The yakShiNI suddenly appeared and prevented us from being
polluted by them.

We then retired and fell asleep. Around 2.00 AM we heard the
karNa-yakShiNI finally whisper in our ears – we suddenly realized what
was going on. She said that a mAraNa had been sent at the 4th hero. It
was a peculiar astra like one dispatched by devakI-putra in the days of
yore. Neither the amAtya nor the sachiva, nor the amAtya of the 3rd hero
nor other auShadhaprayogin-s could figure out what this astra was. For
sometime we were in dread, but we realized that only the svAyudha of
rudra could save the 4th hero. In the shmashAna we had said “namaste
rudra manyave”. We hoped that it might save. At the sight of the
approaching mAraNa the troops of the 4th hero scattered like deer at the
roar of a tiger and even the experienced amAtya of the 3rd hero trembled
in fear. Luckily the sachiva got the signal “namaste rudra manyave” and
swung into action aided by some learned auShadhaprayogin-s. They were
able to stabilize the 4th hero like analAsura countered by R^ichIka
aurva.
