+++
title = "Notes on pedagogy of śāstra(something written by axa0friend)"
date = "2017-02-27"

+++


To add, as śāstra unfolds, things become quite simple and clear. The
only issue is getting the pedagogy of śāstra. For instance, pratyakṣa
and anumāna are listed ahead of śabda pramāṇa, and deducing from the
visible natural phenomena is the primary learning underlying SAstra,
with only subtler phenomena and lessons explicated by śāstra. As
mentioned
[here](http://centreright.in/2013/07/orient-and-occident-iv-principle-of-action-and-righteousness/),
nature is the mother, teacher and trustee and what Rshis learn about
organizing human societies is entirely from nature. The lessons from
clans, prides, coalitions of animal world results in an optimal design
of human family at micro level. Just the way legs obey the commands of
brain and the way a weak body in turn compels brain into commands that
suit the body’s condition, just the way the mano-vāk-kāya “hierarchy”
works, the social being’s mano-vāk-kāya is understood. This is rather
pratyakṣa than śabda as a pramANa (though we can find upon searching
pramāṇa like “vAngme manasi pratishThita” or purusha sUkta could be
found). śāstra comes into picture only to make a proper correlation to
human society, such as Raja being divine representative who commands and
sets the society in the right path – references about prajāpati in
atharva are useful, but none better than mahābhārata and manusmṛti. The
higher aspects of dharma that are not sāmānya are to be found in śruti,
which form the substratum for the manifest layer of dharma (such as
moral facts). It helps to recall Viswanatha’s taunt in this context –
“you call it sāmānya because these things are commonly known through
observation, why do you need to teach them formally and call it a
subject”. But the sāmānya is not missed at any stage, it is visible in
the implicit expectation of its awareness as a requirement. The head and
central being two types of powers that hold the family, and a further
distribution of these into the natures of power in society (will,
knowledge and action in hierarchy, then into
knowledge-power-wealth-action in distribution) is quite visible not just
in organization but in śruti itself. The head-center nature of
Indra-Agni, which later become visible as Siva-Sakti, as the ruling
forces of the world-family are the prototypes for this. Similarly the
cyclic day-night, month (aligned with moon), year (aligned with sun),
astronomical cycles and human life cycle are pratyaksha pramāṇa for
cyclic nature of time. śāstra pramāṇa only gives the conceptualizing of
how the alignment of social cycle is to be done with the known cycles.
One of the reasons upamāna is extensively visible all through in SAstra
and kAvya is that it is not just an alaṃkāra but an integral part of the
pedagogic nature of our texts. Second aspect is which śāstra throws
light on which aspect of life. While the śruti-smṛti-śiṣṭācāra hierarchy
is well known for prāmāṇya, śruti is not a reference for understanding
the social aspects that evolve from time to time. śruti is a reference
for sanātana or immutable yet non-obvious knowledge of the world from
which the ever morphing aspects are to be derived and defined, which are
liable to change, in the derivative texts. The layers of smṛti texts, be
it MBH or dharma śāstra-s, ensure that they reproduce and record the
unchanging principles from śruti, then specify the changing ones (the
yuga and deśa-kāla layers) so that for a subsequent version of smṛti
that evolves, the seeds of permanent principles are taken and continued.
Third aspect is the untold – what a text covers is based on the scope of
authority it assumes in the knowledge system. What is not covered, if
covered elsewhere, indicates the relative authority and if is not,
indicates the nature of untold to be self-explanatory or naturally known
or not as a necessary factor. For instance the sampradāya-s that are
substantially important in the society and are honored even by kings,
find next to zero mention in the smṛti texts as influential or
authorized or holding stake in social dynamic or organization
notwithstanding their real influence, dharma nirṇaya is made the
accountability of king no matter who he consults (and there is a
different and a specific subject taught to king who he should consult
and who he should not).

  

PS: It is an axiomatic change and a change in worldview for the west to
look at things this way (their organizations are driven by ideals more
than by nature of things), but they ARE actively working to plagiarize
these concepts at various levels in sciences, and at a slower pace in
social sciences. The papers on Artificial Intelligence I linked in a
previous post indicate how they are getting natural biological phenomena
into AI by consciously learning from nature, trying to make repeatable
processes that are only cognitively decipherable.

(This was from a note by [@SkandaVeera](https://twitter.com/SkandaVeera)
which I preserved)
