+++
title = "Vema Reddy"

+++
In 1311 Alla-ad-din Khalji sent his lover and general Maliq Kaffr to
devastate the Telengana region with his ferocious army of Islam. The
invasion was savage and Hindu kshatriyas of the Kakatiya, Chalukya and
Chola clans fought with great valor but were routed in the battles
around Warangal. The survivors took shelter in the fort of Kondapalli
and held out against the Mohammedan blizzard. However, in 1316
Alla-ad-din died and the tumultuous events in Delhi triggered by the
Gujarati rebellion prevented the Mohammedans from consolidating their
grip over Telangana. As result there was severe local unrest and
Kakatiyas under Prataparudra started re-establishing themselves. The
veteran Ghazi from Afghanistan, Ghazi al Maliq Tughlaq, soon set matters
right for the Mohammedans in Delhi and decided to consolidate the
flagging Jihad in peninsular India. He sent his able successor Mohammed
bin Tughlaq to prosecute the Jihad with unrelenting vigor in South
India. M b Tughlaq charted elaborate plans for the invasion of Pune,
Devagiri, Telengana and Tondaimandalam and set them rolling in 1321.
After having sacked Pune in course of a year long siege of Kondana which
was valiantly defended by Naga Nayaka he plowed through Devagiri and
turning south east arrived in Telengana in 1322. After a prolonged,
fierce see-saw encounter in which the Mohammedans constantly receiving
supplies from Devagiri and Delhi the Kakatiya army of Prataparudra was
vanquished at Warangal. They were forced into the defensive as the army
of Islam mounted a massive encirclement attack on the fort of
Rajamahendravaram. They held out for 6 months but at the end of it the
Mohammedans stormed the fort and massacred the defenders to man.
Prataparudra and his family was captured and sent to Delhi, but on the
way he killed himself rather than go through the ordeal of converting to
Islam. The grand Shri Venugopala Swami temple built by the Chalukyas was
demolished by Tughlaq and he erected a mosque using the material from
the temple. With that the kshatriya presence in Telengana had been
smashed the the oppressive cresent banner terrorized the land.  
In 1325 the responsibility of organizing defense of the dharma was taken
up by the valiant shudra warrior Prolaya Vema Reddy. Son of local
warlord, he describes himself “as one of the 4th varNa that emerged from
the feet of mahAviShNu” who decided to rid the land of the wicked Turks
after kshatriyas had all been killed for the protection of the agrahAras
and brAhmaNas. Vema Reddy drawing inspiration from his deity ga\~nga,
who had also apparently emerged from the feet of viShNu as the fourth
varNa, and the warrior god kumAra assembled a large army drawn from the
peasants and herdsmen of the ravaged land. His clan had long excelled in
cattle raids and honed the skills of the the rapid hit and run methods.
He joined hands with two other major local landowners like Prolaya
Nayaka and Kaapaya Nayaka and they formed a coalition with at least 75
other local strongmen and warlords. Reddy assembled his Hindu armies at
Addanki and marched on the Tughlaq army. The Reddys apparently used
biological warfare in this conflict and contaminated the water supplies
leading to the Mohammedans with sewage resulting a raging dysentry which
decimated the Tughlaq army. M b Tughlaq himself fell ill and retreated.
As the Moslems were in disarray the Hindu army fell upon them and
crushed remanants in pitched encounter at the outskirts of Warangal. The
Vema Reddy realized that even though the army had departed the local
Moslem Amirs and merchants were a major obstacle in restoring Hindu
rule. So he conducted a series of raids destroy their trading networks
and militias and extirpating the pockets of Islamic garrisons
distributed over the country. In the process they were aided by the
Hindu king Vira Ballaala of Dwarasamudra, who staved of attacks by the
army of Islam from its head quarters in Devagiri. In 1335 M b Tughlaq
sent a large force under Maqbool Iqbal to smash the Hindu revival in
Telengana. However, the Reddy and Nayaka army aided by auxillaries sent
by Vira Ballaala inflicted a massive defeat on them, killing 15 Moslem
Amirs on the field. Vema Reddy chased Iqbal into the Warangal fort and
seeing that he was hard-pressed to defend it Kaapaya Nayaka stormed the
fort. Vema Reddy then moved on the fort of Kondvidu and stormed it by
hacking off the head Maliq Gurjaar, the Moslem commander. Then liberated
Nidadavolu, Vundi and Pithapuram after pitched battles. He then
massacred an army of Jalal-ud-din Shah in a raid on Tondaimandalam even
as Ballaala engaged the sultan himself. However, after a long struggle
with the Sultans of Madhurai and Delhi, Ballaala finally fell into the
hands of the Moslems. He was skinned alive and his dry skin was pegged
on one of the wall of Madhurai (seen later by ibn Battuta). Undaunted
Vema Reddy launched a series of daring attacks on the Moslem garrisons
in the forts of Bellamkonda, Vinukonda and Nagarjunakonda and captured
all of them after slaughtering the defenders. He raised his flag in
Kondavidu and declared himself a Raja. His famous inscriptions from this
period state: ” I restored all the agraharas of Brahmins, which had been
taken away by the evil Moslem kings”. “I am indeed an Agastya to the
ocean which was made of the Moslem”. To restore the dharma he instituted
major repairs to the Shrishailam rudra temple and built a flight of
steps from the Krishna river to the temple on the mountain top. He also
repaired the viShNu temple at Ahobilam. He also built a palace in
Kondavidu for housing the women he had accquired. This became the harem
for all the other subsequent Reddys. His restoration of the dharma also
caused a major revival of local literature, especially under the
auspices of the Telugu author Erranna, a vatsa bhArgava brAhmaNa of the
middle migration of the bhArgavas. His rAmAyaNa was supposed to have
been a master piece.

His successor was Anavema Reddy continued the struggle against the army
of Islam. His began by liberating Rajahmahendravaram and demolished a
Mazar which had been built there on a Hindu shrine. He then scaled the
fort of Korukonda with a small force at night liberated it from the
Moslem garrison. Next he conquered Simhachalam fort and parts of the
Kalinga kingdom.His inscription states “I the valiant member of the 4th
varNa destroyed the throngs of Moslems and gathered learned brAhmaNas at
this court”. He built the vIra shiromanDapam in the Shrishailam temple.
The Shrishailam temple was also renovated by two other great Hindu
fighters, Krishnadeva Raya and Shivaji Chatrapati at a later time.

The war of independence in Telengana is one more of those largely
forgotten stories of the provincial Hindu resistance in the aftermath of
the Khalji-Tughlaq years.
