+++
title = "Vedic Beer"

+++
Whereas beer and other alcoholic beverages were not consumed by the
brAhmaNa-s (and ascetics) unlike rest of Arya society, its production
was still a part of brAhmaNa lore. The hindus of yore had an elaborate
ritual of beer making connected with the exhalted rite called the
sautrAmaNI. The adhvaryu priest bought the following items through
barter: grass blades in exchange for a piece of zinc. Barley grains for
goat wool, parched rice in exchange for yarn. Each bargain the priest
uttered the formula “surAsomavikrayin krayyaste surAsoma”. Then these
materials are carried to the prachIna vaMsha altar and prepares fungal
powders known as nagnahU. He then boils the shyAmAka beans and rice and
collects the supernatants to which he adds the nagnahU powder and then
mixes the two and keeps them away for a while. This preparation is
called mAsara. Then he mixes the mAsara with the boiled grains of rice
and shyAmAkas in a large vessel called the surapAtra chanting the
mantras svAdvIM… He deposits this vessel in a pit at the naiR^ita corner
of the prAchina vaMsha altar for 3 nights. Then a cow is freshly milked
with the mantra ashivibhyAM apAkaromi and the milk is poured into the
ferment with the mantra parIto si\~nchatA… He then shreds the rice
leaves into fine pieces and adds them to the ferment and lets is stay
for a night. The next morning he milks two cows with the mantra
‘sarasvatyai apAkaromi…’ and adds the milk to the ferment. He also
adds the powder of fresh barley grains and lets it stand for a night.
The next day he adds the milk of 3 cows into the ferment and adds the
flour of parched grains into it. This is let to ferment for 4 days.

He then goes to the southern altar and pours the ferment through a ox
hide funnel through a hoof-sieve with the mantra “si\~nchati pari
si\~nchati..” to get a preliminary liquor. This liquor is further
purified by straining through ox and horse hair filters in a pot made of
palAsa wood by reciting the mantra “punAti te parisrutaM..”. This liquor
is termed the surA. At this point if a yajamAna or his patni are
morbidly reacting to the soma drink by vomitting or flux they are given
the surA as a remedy. indra, ashvins and sarasvati are offered several
cups of the beer, milk and soma in the sacrifice that follows. The
brAhmaNas performing the rite reverse the direction of their
yaGNYOpavItas and drink what is left behing in one of the cups or they
merely smell the liquor, collect the remnants and offer it to a
kshatriya or a vaishya to drink along with a gift. If they do not get a
drinker, they may smell it and then burn all the liquor in charcoal
pyres outside the ritual area with mantras to offer it to the ancestors.
