---
title: JNANA YOGA - II

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_i.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_iii.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - II

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

The greatest teacher of the Vedanta philosophy was Shankârachârya. By
solid reasoning he extracted from the Vedas the truths of Vedanta, and
on them built up the wonderful system of Jnâna that is taught in his
commentaries. He unified all the conflicting descriptions of Brahman and
showed that there is only one Infinite Reality. He showed too that as
man can only travel slowly on the upward road, all the varied
presentations are needed to suit his varying capacity. We find something
akin to this in the teachings of Jesus, which he evidently adapted to
the different abilities of his hearers. First he taught them of a Father
in heaven and to pray to Him. Next he rose a step higher and told them,
"I am the vine, you are the branches", and lastly he gave them the
highest truth: "I and my Father are one", and "The Kingdom of Heaven is
within you." Shankara taught that three things were the great gifts of
God: (1) human body, (2) thirst after God, and (3) a teacher who can
show us the light. When these three great gifts are ours, we may know
that our redemption is at hand. Only knowledge can free and save us, but
with knowledge must go virtue.

The essence of Vedanta is that there is but one Being and that every
soul is that Being in full, not a part of that Being. *All* the sun is
reflected in each dew-drop. Appearing in time, space and causality, this
Being is man, as we know him, but behind all appearance is the one
Reality. Unselfishness is the denial of the lower or apparent self. We
have to free ourselves from this miserable dream that we are these
bodies. We must *know* the truth, "I am He". We are not drops to fall
into the ocean and be lost; each one is the *whole*, infinite ocean, and
will know it when released from the fetters of illusion. Infinity cannot
be divided, the "One without a second" can have no second, all *is* that
One. This knowledge will come to all, but we should struggle to attain
it now, because until we have it, we cannot really give mankind the best
help. The Jivanmukta ('the living free' or one who knows) alone is able
to give real love, real charity, real truth, and it is truth alone that
makes us free. Desire makes slaves of us, it is an insatiable tyrant and
gives its victims no rest; but the Jivanmukta has conquered all desire
by rising to the knowledge that he is the One and there is nothing left
to wish for.

The mind brings before us all our delusions — body, sex, creed, caste,
bondage; so we have to tell the truth to the mind incessantly, until it
is made to realise it. Our real nature is all bliss, and all the
pleasure we know is but a reflection, an atom, of that bliss we get from
touching our real nature. *That* is beyond both pleasure and pain. It is
the "witness" of the universe, the unchanging reader before whom turn
the leaves of the book of life.

Through practice comes Yoga, through Yoga comes knowledge, through
knowledge love, and through love bliss.

"Me and mine" is a superstition; we have lived in it so long that it is
well-nigh impossible to shake it off. Still we must get rid of it if we
would rise to the highest. We must be bright and cheerful, long faces do
not make religion. Religion should be the most joyful thing in the
world, because it is the best. Asceticism cannot make us holy. Why
should a man who loves God and who is pure be sorrowful? He should be
like a happy child, be truly a child of God. The essential thing in
religion is making the heart pure; the Kingdom of Heaven is within us,
but only the pure in heart can see the King. While we think of the
world, it is only the world for us; but let us come to it with the
feeling that the world is God, and we shall have God. This should be our
thought towards everyone and everything — parents, children, husbands,
wives, friends, and enemies. Think how it would change the whole
universe for us if we could consciously fill it with God! See nothing
but God! All sorrow, all struggle, all pain would be for ever lost to
us!

Jnana is "creedlessness", but that does not mean that it despises
creeds. It only means that a stage above and beyond creeds has been
gained. The Jnâni seeks not to destroy, but to help all. As all rivers
roll their waters into the sea and become one, so all creeds should lead
to Jnana and become one.

The reality of everything depends upon Brahman, and only as we really
grasp this truth, have we any reality. When we cease to see any
differences, then we know that "I and the Father are One".

Jnana is taught very clearly by Krishna in the Bhagavad-Gitâ. This great
poem is held to be the Crown jewel of all Indian literature. It is a
kind of commentary on the Vedas. It shows us that our battle for
spirituality must be fought out in this life; so we must not flee from
it, but rather compel it to give us all that it holds. As the Gita
typifies this struggle for higher things, it is highly poetical to lay
the scene in a battlefield. Krishna in the guise of a charioteer to
Arjuna, leader of one of the opposing armies, urges him not to be
sorrowful, not to fear death, since he knows he is immortal, that
nothing which changes can be in the *real* nature of man. Through
chapter after chapter, Krishna teaches the higher truths of philosophy
and religion to Arjuna. It is these teachings which make this poem so
wonderful; practically the whole of the Vedanta philosophy is included
in them. The Vedas teach that the soul is infinite and in no way
affected by the death of the body. The soul is a circle whose
circumference is nowhere, but whose centre is in some body. Death
(so-called) is but a change of centre. God is a circle whose
circumference is nowhere and whose centre is everywhere, and when we can
get out of the narrow centre of body, we shall realise God — our true
Self.

The present is only a line of demarcation between the past and the
future; so we cannot rationally say that we care only for the present,
as it has no existence apart from the past and the future. It is all one
complete whole, the idea of time being merely a condition imposed upon
us by the form of our understanding.

</div>
