---
title: JNANA YOGA - III

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_ii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_iv.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - III

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

Jnâna teaches that the world should be given up, but not on that account
to be abandoned. To be *in* the world, but not *of* it, is the true test
of the Sannyâsin. This idea of renunciation has been in some form common
to nearly all religions. Jnana demands that we look upon all alike, that
we see only "sameness". Praise and blame, good and bad, even heat and
cold, must be equally acceptable to us. In India there are many holy men
of whom this is literally true. They wander on the snow-clad heights of
the Himalayas or over the burning desert sands, entirely unclothed and
apparently entirely unconscious of any difference in temperature.

We have first of all to give up this superstition of body; we are not
the body. Next must go the further superstition that we are mind. We are
not mind; it is but the "silken body", not any part of the soul. The
mere word "body", applied to nearly all things, includes something
common among all bodies. This is *existence*.

Our bodies are symbols of thought behind, and the thoughts themselves
are in their turn symbols of something behind them, that is, the one
Real Existence, the Soul of our soul, the Self of the universe, the Life
of our life, our true Self. As long as we believe ourselves to be even
the least different from God, fear remains with us; but when we know
ourselves to be the One, fear goes: of what can we be afraid? By sheer
force of will the Jnâni rises beyond body, beyond mind, making this
universe zero. Thus he destroys Avidyâ and knows his true Self, the
Âtman. Happiness and misery are only in the senses, they cannot touch
our real Self. The soul is beyond time, space, and causality — therefore
unlimited, omnipresent.

The Jnani has to come out of all forms, to get beyond all rules and
books, and be his own book. Bound by forms, we crystallise and die.
Still the Jnani must never condemn those who cannot yet rise above
forms. He must never even think of another, "I am holier than thou".

These are the marks of the true Jnana-Yogi: (1) He desires nothing, save
to know. (2) All his senses are under perfect restraint; he suffers
everything without murmuring, equally content if his bed be the bare
ground under the open sky, or if he is lodged in a king's palace. He
shuns no suffering, he stands and bears it-he has given up all but the
Self. (3) He knows that all but the One is unreal. (4) He has an intense
desire for freedom. With a strong will, he fixes his mind on higher
things and so attains to peace. If we know not peace, what are we more
than the brutes? He does everything for others — for the Lord — giving
up all fruits of work and looking for no result, either here or
hereafter. What can the universe give us more than our own soul?
Possessing that, we possess *all*. The Vedas teach that the Atman, or
Self, is the One Undivided Existence. It is beyond mind, memory,
thought, or even consciousness as we know it. From it are all things. It
is that through which (or because of which) we see, hear, feel, and
think. The goal of the universe is to realise oneness with the "Om" or
One Existence. The Jnani has to be free from all forms; he is neither a
Hindu, a Buddhist, nor a Christian, but he is all three. All action is
renounced, given up to the Lord; then no action has power to bind. The
Jnani is a tremendous rationalist; he denies everything. He tells
himself day and night, "There are no beliefs, no sacred words, no
heaven, no hell, no creed, no church — there is only Atman." When
everything has been thrown away until what cannot be thrown away is
reached, that is the Self. The Jnani takes nothing for granted; he
analyses by pure reason and force of will, until he reaches Nirvâna
which is the extinction of all relativity. No description or even
conception of this state is possible. Jnana is never to be judged by any
earthly result. Be not like the vulture which soars almost beyond sight,
but which is ever ready to swoop downwards at the sight of a bit of
carrion. Ask not for healing, or longevity, or prosperity, ask only to
be free.

We are "Existence, Knowledge, Bliss" (Sachchidânanda). Existence is the
last generalisation in the universe; so we exist, we know it; and bliss
is the natural result of existence without alloy. Now and then we know a
moment of supreme bliss, when we ask nothing, give nothing, and know
nothing but bliss. Then it passes and we again see the panorama of the
universe going on before us and we know it is but a "mosaic work set
upon God, who is the background of all things". When we return to earth
and see the Absolute as relative, we see Sachchidananda as Trinity —
Father, Son, Holy Ghost. Sat = the creating principle; Chit = the
guiding principle; Ânanda = the realising principle, which joins us
again to the One. No one can know "existence" (Sat) except through
"knowledge" (Chit), and hence the force of the saying of Jesus, No man
can see the Father save through the Son. The Vedanta teaches that
Nirvana can be attained here and now, that we do not have to wait for
death to reach it. Nirvana is the realisation of the Self, and after
having once, if only for an instant, known this, never again can one be
deluded by the mirage of personality. Having eyes, we must see the
apparent; but all the time we know it for what it is, we have found out
its true nature. It is the "screen" that hides the Self which is
unchanging. The screen opens and we find the Self behind it — all change
is in the screen. In the saint the screen is thin and the Reality can
almost shine through; but in the sinner it is thick, and we are apt to
lose sight of the truth that the Atman is there, as well as behind the
saint.

All reasoning ends only in finding Unity; so we first use analysis, then
synthesis. In the world of science, the forces are gradually narrowed
down in the search for one underlying force. When physical science can
perfectly grasp the final unity, it will have reached an end, for
reaching unity we find rest. Knowledge is final.

Religion, the most precious of all sciences, long ago discovered that
final unity, to reach which is the object of Jnana-Yoga. There is but
one Self in the universe, of which all lower selves are but
manifestations. The Self, however, is infinitely more than all of its
manifestations. All is the Self or Brahman. The saint, the sinner, the
lamb, the tiger, even the murderer, as far as they have any reality, can
be nothing else, because there is nothing else. "That which exists is
One, sages call It variously." Nothing can be higher than this
knowledge, and in those purified by Yoga it comes in flashes to the
soul. The more one has been purified and prepared by Yoga and
meditation, the clearer are these flashes of realisation. This was dis
covered 4,000 years ago, but has not yet become the property of the
race; it is still the property of some individuals only.

</div>
