---
title: JNANA YOGA - IV

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_iii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_v.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - IV

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

All men, so-called, are not yet really human beings. Every one has to
judge of this world through his own mind. The higher understanding is
extremely difficult. The concrete is more to most people than the
abstract. As an illustration of this, a story is told of two men in
Bombay — one a Hindu and the other a Jain — who were playing chess in
the house of a rich merchant of Bombay. The house was near the sea, the
game long; the ebb and flow of the tide under the balcony where they sat
attracted the attention of the players. One explained it by a legend
that the gods in their play threw the water into a great pit and then
threw it out again. The other said: No, the gods draw it up to the top
of a high mountain to use it, and then when they have done with it, they
throw it down again. A young student present began to laugh at them and
said, "Do you not know that the attraction of the moon causes the
tides?" At this, both men turned on him in a fury and inquired if he
thought they were fools. Did he suppose that they believed the moon had
any ropes to pull up the tides, or that it could reach so far? They
utterly refused to accept any such foolish explanation. At this juncture
the host entered the room and was appealed to by both parties. He was an
educated man and of course knew the truth, but seeing plainly the
impossibility of making the chess-players understand it, he made a sign
to the student and then proceeded to give an explanation of the tides
that proved eminently satisfactory to his ignorant hearers. "You must
know", he told them, "that afar off in the middle of the ocean, there is
a huge mountain of sponge — you have both seen sponge, and know what I
mean. This mountain of sponge absorbs a great deal of the water and then
the sea falls; by and by the gods come down and dance on the mountain
and their weight squeezes all the water out and the sea rises again.
This, gentlemen, is the cause of the tides, and you can easily see for
yourselves how reasonable and simple is this explanation." The two men
who ridiculed the power of the moon to cause the tides, found nothing
incredible in a mountain of sponge, danced upon by the gods! The gods
were real to them, and they had actually seen sponge; what was more
likely than their joint effect upon the sea!

"Comfort" is no test of truth; on the contrary, truth is often far from
being "comfortable". If one intends to really find truth, one must not
cling to comfort. It is hard to let all go, but the Jnâni *must* do it.
He must become pure, kill out all desires and cease to identify himself
with the body. Then and then only, the higher truth can shine in his
soul. Sacrifice is necessary, and this immolation of the lower self is
the underlying truth that has made sacrifice a part of all religions.
All the propitiatory offerings to the gods were but dimly understood
types of the only sacrifice that is of any real value, the surrender of
the apparent self, through which alone we can realise the higher Self,
the Âtman. The Jnani must not try to preserve the body, nor even wish to
do so. He must be strong and follow truth, though the universe fall.
Those who follow "fads" can never do this. It is a life-work, nay, the
work of a hundred lives! Only the few dare to realise the God within, to
renounce heaven and Personal God and all hope of reward. A firm will is
needed to do this; to be even vacillating is a sign of tremendous
weakness. Man always is perfect, or he never could become so; but he had
to realise it. If man were bound by external causes, he could only be
mortal. Immortality can only be true of theunconditioned. Nothing can
act on the Atman — the idea is pure delusion; but man must identify
himself with that, not with body or mind. Let him know that he is the
witness of the universe, then he can enjoy the beauty of the wonderful
panorama passing before him. Let him even tell himself, "I am the
universe, I am Brahman." When man *really* identifies himself with the
One, the Atman, everything is possible to him and all matter becomes his
servant. As Shri Ramakrishna has said: After the butter is churned, it
can be put in water or milk and will never mix with either; so when man
has once realised the Self, he can no more be contaminated by the world.

"From a balloon, no minor distinctions are visible, so when man rises
high enough, he will not see good and evil people." "Once the pot is
burned, no more can it be shaped; so with the mind that has once touched
the Lord and has had a baptism of fire, no more can it be changed."
Philosophy in Sanskrit means "clear vision", and religion is practical
philosophy. Mere theoretic, speculative philosophy is not much regarded
in India. There is no church, no creed, no dogma. The two great
divisions are the "Dvaitists" and the "Advaitists". The former say, "The
way to salvation is through the mercy of God; the law of causation, once
set in motion, can never be broken; only God, who is not bound by this
law, by His mercy helps us to break it". The latter say, "Behind all
this nature is something that is free; and finding that which is beyond
all law gets us freedom; and freedom is salvation." Dualism is only one
phase, Advaitism goes to the ultimate. To become pure is the shortest
path to freedom. Only that is ours which we earn. No authority can save
us, no beliefs. If there is a God, *all* can find Him. No one needs to
be told it is warm; each one can discover it for himself. So it should
be with God. He should be a fact in the consciousness of all men. The
Hindus do not recognise "sin", as it is understood by the Western mind.
Evil deeds are not "sins", we are not offending some Ruler in committing
these; we are simply injuring ourselves, and we must suffer the penalty.
It is not a sin to put one's finger in the fire, but he who does so will
surely suffer just as much as if it were. All deeds produce certain
results, and "every deed returns to the doer". "Trinitarianism" is an
advance on "Unitarianism" (which is dualism, God and man for ever
separate). The first step upwards is when we recognise ourselves as the
children of God; the last step is when we realise ourselves as the One,
the Atman.

</div>
