---
title: JNANA YOGA - V

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_iv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_vi.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - V

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

The question why there cannot be eternal bodies is in itself illogical,
as "body" is a term applied to a certain combination of elements,
changeable and in its very nature impermanent. When we are not passing
through changes, we will not have bodies (so-called). "Matter" beyond
the limit of time, space, and causality will not be matter at all. Time
and space exist only in us, we are the one Permanent Being. All forms
are transitory, that is why all religions say, "God has no form".
Menander was a Greco-Bactrian king. He was converted to Buddhism about
150 B.C. by one of the Buddhist missionary monks and was called by them
"Milinda". He asked a young monk, his teacher, "Can a perfect man (such
as Buddha) be in error or make mistakes?" The young monk's answer was :
The perfect man can remain in ignorance of minor matters not in his
experience, but he can *never* be in error as to what his insight has
actually realised. He is perfect here and now. He knows the whole
mystery, the Essence of the universe, but he may not know the mere
external variation through which that Essence is manifested in time and
space. He knows the *clay* itself, but has not had experience of every
shape it may be wrought into. The perfect man knows the Soul itself, but
not every form and combination of its manifestation. He would have to
attain more relative knowledge just as we do, though on account of his
immense power, he would learn it far more quickly.

The tremendous "search-light" of a perfectly controlled mind, when
thrown on any subject, would rapidly reduce it to possession. It is very
important to understand this, because it saves so much foolish
explanation as to how a Buddha or a Jesus could be mistaken in ordinary
relative Knowledge, as we well know they were. The disciples should not
be blamed as having put down the sayings erroneously. It is humbug to
say that one thing is true and another untrue in their statements.
Accept the whole account, or reject it. How can *we* pick out the true
from the false?

If a thing happens once, it can happen again. If any human being has
ever realised perfection, we too can do so. If we cannot become perfect
here and now, we never can in any state or heaven or condition we may
imagine. If Jesus Christ was not perfect, then the religion bearing his
name falls to the ground. If he was perfect, then we too can become
perfect. The perfect man does not reason or "know", as we count
"knowing", for all our knowledge is mere comparison, and there is no
comparison, no classification, possible in the Absolute. Instinct is
less liable to error than reason, but reason is higher and leads to
intuition, which is higher still. Knowledge is the parent of intuition,
which like instinct, is also unerring, but on a higher plane. There are
three grades of manifestation in living beings: (1) sub-conscious —
mechanical, unerring; (2) conscious — knowing, erring; (3)
superconscious — intuitional, unerring; and these are illustrated in an
animal, man, and God. For the man who has become perfect, nothing
remains but to apply his understanding. He lives only to help the world,
desiring nothing for himself. What distinguishes is negative — the
positive is ever wider and wider. What we have in common is the widest
of all, and that is "Being".

"Law is a mental shorthand to explain a series of phenomena"; but law as
an entity, so to speak, does not exist. We use the word to express the
regular succession of certain occurrences in the phenomenal world. We
must not let law become a superstition, a something inevitable, to which
we must submit. Error must accompany reason, but the very struggle to
conquer error makes us gods. Disease is the struggle of nature to cast
out something wrong; so sin is the struggle of the divine in us to throw
off the animal. We must "sin" (that is, make mistakes) in order to rise
to Godhood.

Do not pity anyone. Look upon all as your equal, cleanse yourself of the
primal sin of inequality. We are all equal and must not think, "I am
good and you are bad, and I am trying to reclaim you". Equality is the
sign of the free. Jesus came to publicans and sinners and lived with
them. He never set himself on a pedestal. Only sinners see sin. See not
man, see only the Lord. We manufacture our own heaven and can make a
heaven even in hell. Sinners are only to be found in hell, and as long
as we see them around us, we are there ourselves. Spirit is not in time,
nor in space. Realise "I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute,
Bliss Absolute — I am He, I am He". Be glad at birth, be glad at death,
rejoice always in the love of God. Get rid of the bondage of body; we
have become slaves to it and learnt to hug our chains and love our
slavery; so much so that we long to perpetuate it, and go on with "body"
"body" for ever. Do not cling to the idea of "body", do not look for a
future existence in any way like this one; do not love or want the body,
even of those dear to us. This life is our teacher, and dying only makes
room to begin over again. Body is our schoolmaster, but to commit
suicide is folly, it is only killing the "schoolmaster". Another will
take his place. So until we have learnt to transcend the body, we must
have it, and losing one, will get another. Still we must not identify
ourselves with the body, but look upon it only as an instrument to be
used in reaching perfection. Hanumân, the devotee of Râma, summed up his
philosophy in these words: When I identify myself with the body, O Lord,
I am Thy creature, eternally separate from Thee. When I identify myself
with the soul, I am a spark of that Divine Fire which Thou art. But when
I identify myself with the Atman, I and Thou art one.

Therefore the Jnani strives to realise the Self and nothing else.

</div>
