---
title: JNANA YOGA - VI

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_v.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_vii.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - VI

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

Thought is all important, for "what we think we become". There was once
a Sannyâsin, a holy man, who sat under a tree and taught the people. He
drank milk, and ate only fruit, and made endless "Prânâyâmas", and felt
himself to be very holy. In the same village lived an evil woman. Every
day the Sannyasin went and warned her that her wickedness would lead her
to hell. The poor woman, unable to change her method of life which was
her only means of livelihood, was still much moved by the terrible
future depicted by the Sannyasin. She wept and prayed to the Lord,
begging Him to forgive her because she could not help herself. By and by
both the holy man and the evil woman died. The angels came and bore her
to heaven, while the demons claimed the soul of the Sannyasin. "Why is
this!" he exclaimed, "have I not lived a most holy life, and preached
holiness to everybody? Why should I be taken to hell while this wicked
woman is taken to heaven?" "Because," answered the demons, "while she
was forced to commit unholy acts, her mind was always fixed on the Lord
and she sought deliverance, which has now come to her. But you, on the
contrary, while you performed only holy acts, had your mind always fixed
on the wickedness of others. You saw only sin, and thought only of sin,
so now you have to go to that place where only sin is." The moral of the
story is obvious: The outer life avails little. The heart must be pure
and the pure heart sees only good, never evil. We should never try to be
guardians of mankind, or to stand on a pedestal as saints reforming
sinners. Let us rather purify ourselves, and the result must be that in
so doing we shall help others.

Physics is bounded on both sides by metaphysics. So it is with reason —
it starts from non-reason and ends with non-reason. If we push inquiry
far enough in the world of perception, we must reach a plane beyond
perception. Reason is really stored up and classified perception,
preserved by memory. We can never imagine or reason beyond our
sense-perceptions. Nothing beyond reason can be an object of
sense-knowledge. We feel the limited character of reason, yet it does
bring us to a plane where we get a glimpse of something beyond. The
question then arises: Has man an instrument that transcends reason? It
is very probable that in man there is a power to reach beyond reason; in
fact the saints in all ages assert the existence of this power in
themselves. But it is impossible in the very nature of things to
translate spiritual ideas and perceptions into the language of reason;
and these saints, each and all, have declared their inability to make
known their spiritual experiences. Language can, of course, supply no
words for them, so that it can only be asserted that these are actual
experiences and can be had by all. Only in that way can they become
known, but they can never be described. Religion is the science which
learns the transcendental in nature through the transcendental in man.
We know as yet but little of man, consequently but little of the
universe. When we know more of man, we shall probably know more of the
universe. Man is the epitome of all things and all knowledge is in him.
Only for the infinitesimal portion of the universe, which comes into
sense-perception, are we able to find a reason; never can we give the
reason for any fundamental principle. Giving a reason for a thing is
simply to classify it and put it in a pigeon-hole of the mind. When we
meet a new fact, we at once strive to put it in some existing category
and the attempt to do this is to reason. When we succeed in placing the
fact, it gives a certain amount of satisfaction, but we can never go
beyond the physical plane in this classification. That man can transcend
the limits of the senses is the emphatic testimony of all past ages. The
Upanishads told 5,000 years ago that the realisation of God could never
be had through the senses. So far, modern agnosticism agrees, but the
Vedas go further than the negative side and assert in the plainest terms
that man can and does transcend this sense-bound, frozen universe. He
can, as it were, find a hole in the ice, through which he can pass and
reach the whole ocean of life. Only by so transcending the world of
sense, can he reach his true Self and realise what he really is.

Jnâna is never sense-knowledge. We cannot *know* Brahman, but we *are*
Brahman, the whole of It, not a piece. The unextended can never be
divided. The apparent variety is but the reflection seen in time and
space, as we see the sun reflected in a million dewdrops, though we know
that the sun itself is one and not many. In Jnana we have to lose sight
of the variety and see only the Unity. Here there is no subject, no
object, no knowing, no thou or he or I, only the one, absolute Unity. We
*are* this all the time; once free, ever free. Man is *not* bound by the
law of causation. Pain and misery are not in man, they are but as the
passing cloud throwing its shadow over the sun, but the cloud passes,
the sun is unchanged; and so it is with man. He is not born, he does not
die, he is not in time and space. These ideas are mere reflections of
the mind, but we mistake them for the reality and so lose sight of the
glorious truth they obscure. Time is but the method of our thinking, but
we are the eternally present tense. Good and evil have existence only in
relation to us. One cannot be had without the other, because neither has
meaning or existence apart from the other. As long as we recognise
duality, or separate God and man, so long we must see good and evil.
Only by going to the centre, by unifying ourselves with God can we
escape the delusions of the senses. When we let go the eternal fever of
desire, the endless thirst that gives us no rest, when we have for ever
quenched desire, we shall escape both good and evil, because we shall
have transcended both. The satisfaction of desire only increases it, as
oil poured on fire but makes it burn more fiercely. The further from the
centre, the faster goes the wheel, the less the rest. Draw near the
centre, check desire, stamp it out, let the false self go, then our
vision will clear and we shall see God. Only through renunciation of
this life and of all life to come (heaven etc.), can we reach the point
where we stand firmly on the true Self. While we hope for anything,
desire still rules us. Be for one moment really "hopeless", and the mist
will clear. For what to hope when one is the all of existence? The
secret of Jnana is to give up all and be sufficient unto ourselves. Say
"not", and you become "not"; say "is", and you become "is". Worship the
Self within, naught else exists. All that binds us is Mâyâ-delusion.

</div>
