---
title: JNANA YOGA - VII

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_vi.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_viii.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - VII

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

The Self is the condition of all in the universe, but It can never be
conditioned. As soon as we know that we are It, we are free. As mortals
we are not and never can be free. Free mortality is a contradiction in
terms, for mortality implies change, and only the changeless can be
free. The Atman alone is free, and that is our real essence. We feel
this inner freedom; in spite of all theories, all beliefs, we know it,
and every action proves that we know it. The will is not free, its
apparent freedom is but a reflection from the Real. If the world were
only an endless chain of cause and effect, where could one stand to help
it? There must needs be a piece of dry land for the rescuer to stand on,
else how can he drag anyone out of the rushing stream and save him from
drowning? Even the fanatic who cries "I am a worm", thinks that he is on
the way to become a saint. He sees the saint even in the worm.

There are two ends or aims of human life, real knowing (Vijnâna) and
bliss. Without freedom, these two are impossible. They are the
touchstone of all life. We should feel the Eternal Unity so much, that
we should weep for all sinners, knowing that it is we who are sinning.
The eternal law is self-sacrifice, not self-assertion. What self to
assert when all is one? There are no "rights", all is love. The great
truths that Jesus taught have never been lived. Let us try his method
and see if the world will not be saved. The contrary method has nearly
destroyed it. Selflessness only, not selfishness, can solve the
question. The idea of "right" is a limitation; there is really no "mine"
and "thine", for I am thou and thou art I. We have "responsibility", not
"rights". We should say, "I am the universe", not "I am John" or "I am
Mary". These limitations are all delusions and are what holds us in
bondage, for as soon as I think, "I am John", I want exclusive posses
sion of certain things and begin to say "me and mine", and continually
make new distinctions in so doing. So our bondage goes on increasing
with every fresh distinction, and we get further and further away from
the central Unity, the undivided Infinite. There is only one Individual,
and each of us is That. Oneness alone is love and fearlessness;
separation leads us to hatred and fear. Oneness fulfils the law. Here,
on earth, we strive to enclose little spaces and exclude outsiders, but
we cannot do that in the sky, though that is what sectarian religion
tries to do when it says, "Only *this* way leads to salvation, all
others are wrong". Our aim should be to wipe out these little enclosures
to widen the boundaries until they are lost sight of, and to realise
that all religions lead to God. This little puny self must be
sacrificed. This is the truth symbolised by baptism into a new life, the
death of the old man, the birth of the new — the perishing of the false
self, the realisation of the Atman, the one Self of the universe.

The two great divisions of the Vedas are Karma Kânda — the portion
pertaining to doing or work, and Jnâna Kânda — the portion treating of
knowing, true knowledge. In the Vedas we can find the whole process of
the growth of religious ideas. This is because when a higher truth was
reached, the lower perception that led to it, was still preserved. This
was done, because the sages realised that the world of creation being
eternal, there would always be those who needed the first steps to
knowledge, that the highest philosophy, while open to all, could never
be grasped by all. In nearly every other religion, only the last or
highest realisation of truth has been preserved, with the natural
consequence that the older ideas were lost, while the newer ones were
only understood by the few and gradually came to have no meaning for the
many. We see this result illustrated in the growing revolt against old
traditions and authorities. Instead of accepting them, the man of today
boldly challenges them to give reasons for their claims, to make clear
the grounds upon which they demand acceptance. Much in Christianity is
the mere application of new names and meanings to old pagan beliefs and
customs. If the old sources had been preserved and the reasons for the
transitions fully explained, many things would have been clearer. The
Vedas preserved the old ideas and this fact necessitated huge
commentaries to explain them and why they were kept. It also led to many
superstitions, through clinging to old forms after all sense of their
meaning had been lost. In many ceremonials, words are repeated which
have survived from a now forgotten language and to which no real meaning
can now be attached. The idea of evolution was to be found in the Vedas
long before the Christian era; but until Darwin said it was true, it was
regarded as a mere Hindu superstition.

All external forms of prayer and worship are included in the Karma
Kanda. These are good when performed in a spirit of unselfishness and
not allowed to degenerate into mere formality. They purify the heart.
The Karma-Yogi wants everyone to be saved before himself. His only
salvation is to help others to salvation. "To serve Krishna's servants
is the highest worship." One great saint prayed, "Let me go to hell with
the sins of the whole world, but let the world be saved." This true
worship leads to intense self-sacrifice. It is told of one sage that he
was willing to give all his virtues to his dog, that it might go to
heaven, because it had long been faithful to him, while he himself was
content to go to hell.

The Jnana Kanda teaches that knowledge alone can save, in other words,
that he must become "wise unto salvation". Knowledge is first objective,
the Knower knowing Himself. The Self, the only subject, is in
manifestation seeking only to know Itself. The better the mirror, the
better reflection it can give; so man is the best mirror, and the purer
the man, the more clearly he can reflect God. Man makes the mistake of
separating himself from God and identifying himself with the body. This
mistake arises through Maya, which is not exactly delusion but might be
said to be seeing the real as something else and not as it is. This
identifying of ourselves with the body leads to inequality, which
inevitably leads to struggle and jealousy, and so long as we see
inequality, we can never know happiness. "Ignorance and inequality are
the two sources of all misery", says Jnana.

When man has been sufficiently buffeted by the world, he awakes to a
desire for freedom; and searching for means of escape from the dreary
round of earthly existence, he seeks knowledge, learns what he really
is, and is free. After that he looks at the world as a huge machine, but
takes good care to keep his fingers out of the wheels. Duty ceases for
him who is free; what power can constrain the free being? He does good,
because it is his nature, not because any fancied duty commands it. This
does not apply to those who are still in the bondage of the senses. Only
for him, who has transcended the lower self, is this freedom. He stands
on his own soul, obeys no law; he is free and perfect. He has undone the
old superstitions and got out of the wheel. Nature is but the mirror of
our own selves. There is a limit to the working power of human beings,
but no limit to desire; so we strive to get hold of the working powers
of others and enjoy the fruits of their labours, escaping work
ourselves. Inventing machinery to work for us can never increase
well-being, for in gratifying desire, we only find it, and then we want
more and more without end. Dying, still filled with ungratified desires,
we have to be born again and again in the vain search for satisfaction.
"Eight Millions of bodies have we had, before we reached the human", say
the Hindus. Jnana says, "Kill desire and so get rid of it". That is the
only way. Cast out all causation and realise the Atman. Only freedom can
produce true morality. If there were only an endless chain of cause and
effect, Nirvâna could not be. It is extinction of the seeming self,
bound by this chain. That is what constitutes freedom, to get beyond
causality.

Our true nature is good, it is free, the pure being that can never be or
do wrong. When we read God with our eyes and minds, we call Him this or
that; but in reality there is but One, all variations are our
interpretations of that One. We *become* nothing; we *regain* our true
Self. Buddha's summary of misery as the outcome of "ignorance and caste"
(inequality) has been adopted by the Vedantists, because it is the best
ever made. It manifests the wonderful insight of this greatest among
men. Let us then be brave and sincere: whatever path we follow with
devotion, must take us to freedom. Once lay hold of one link of the
chain and the whole must come after it by degrees. Water the root of the
tree and the whole tree is watered. It is of little advantage to waste
time to water each leaf. In other words, seek the Lord and getting Him
we get all. Churches, doctrines, forms — these are merely the hedges to
protect the tender plant of religion; but later on they must all be
broken down, that the little plant may become a tree. So the various
religious sects, Bibles, Vedas, and scriptures are just "tubs" for the
little plant; but it has to get out of the tub and fill the world.

We must learn to feel ourselves as much in the sun, in the stars, as
here. Spirit is beyond all time and space; every eye seeing is my eye;
every mouth praising the Lord is my mouth; every sinner is I. We are
confined nowhere, we are not body. The universe is our body. We are just
the pure crystal reflecting all, but itself ever the same. We are
magicians waving magic wands and creating scenes before us at will, but
we have to go behind appearances and know the Self. This world is like
water in a kettle, beginning to boil; first a bubble comes, then
another, then many until all is in ebullition and passes away in steam.
The great teachers are like the bubbles as they begin — here one, there
one; but in the end every creature has to be a bubble and escape.
Creation, ever new, will bring new water and go through the process all
over again. Buddha and Christ are the two greatest "bubbles" the world
has known. They were great souls who having realised freedom helped
others to escape. Neither was perfect, but they are to be judged by
their virtues, never by their defects. Jesus fell short, because he did
not always live up to his own highest ideal; and above all, because he
did not give woman an equal place with man. Woman did everything for
him, yet not one was made an apostle. This was doubtless owing to his
Semitic origin. The great Aryans, Buddha among the rest, have always put
woman in an equal position with man. For them sex in religion did not
exist. In the Vedas and Upanishads, women taught the highest truths and
received the same veneration as men.

</div>
