---
title: JNANA YOGA - VIII

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_vii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_ix.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - VIII

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

Both happiness and misery are chains, the one golden, the other iron;
but both are equally strong to bind us and hold us back from realising
our true nature. The Atman knows neither happiness nor misery. These are
mere "states", and states must ever change. The nature of the soul is
bliss and peace unchanging. We have not to *get* it; we *have* it; let
us wash away the dross from our eyes and see it. We must stand ever on
the Self and look with perfect calmness upon all the panorama of the
world. It is but baby's play and ought never to disturb us. If the mind
is pleased by praise, it will be pained by blame. All pleasures of the
senses or even of the mind are evanescent, but within ourselves is the
one true unrelated pleasure, dependent on nothing outside. "The pleasure
of the Self is what the world calls religion." The more our bliss is
within, the more spiritual we are. Let us not depend upon the world for
pleasure.

Some poor fishwives, overtaken by a violent storm, found refuge in the
garden of a rich man. He received them kindly, fed them, and left them
to rest in a summer-house, surrounded by exquisite flowers which filled
all the air with their rich perfume. The women lay down in this
sweet-smelling paradise, but could not sleep. They missed something out
of their lives and could not be happy without it. At last one of the
women arose and went to the place where they had left their fish
baskets, brought them to the summer-house, and then once more happy in
the familiar smell, they were all soon sound asleep.

Let not the world be our "fish basket" which we have to depend upon for
enjoyment. This is Tâmasika, or being bound by the lowest of the three
qualities (or Gunas). Next higher come the egotistical who talk always
about "I", "I". Sometimes they do good work and may become spiritual.
These are Râjasika or active. Highest come the introspective nature
(Sâttvika), those who live only in the Self. These three qualities are
in every human being in varying proportions, and different ones
predominate at different times. We must strive to overcome Tamas with
Rajas and then to submerge both in Sattva.

Creation is not a "making" of something, it is the struggle to regain
equilibrium, as when atoms of cork are thrown to the bottom of a pail of
water: they rush to the top singly and in clusters, and when all have
reached the top and equilibrium has been regained, all motion or "life"
ceases. So with creation; if equilibrium were reached, all change would
cease and life, so-called, would end. Life must be accompanied with
evil, for when the balance is regained, the world must end, as sameness
and destruction are one. There is no possibility of ever having pleasure
without pain, or good without evil, for living itself is just the lost
equilibrium. What we want is freedom, not life, nor pleasure, nor good.
Creation is eternal, without beginning, without end, the ever moving
ripple in an infinite lake. There are yet unreached depths and others
where stillness has been regained, but the ripple is ever progressing,
the struggle to regain the balance is eternal. Life and death are but
different names for the same fact, they are the two sides of one coin.
Both are Mâyâ, the inexplicable state of striving at one point to live
and a moment later to die. Beyond all this is the true nature, the
Atman. We enter into creation, and then, for us, it becomes living.
Things are dead in themselves, only we give them life, and then, like
fools, we turn round and are afraid of them or enjoy them! The world is
neither true nor untrue, it is the shadow of truth.

"Imagination is the gilded shadow of truth", says the poet. The internal
universe, the Real, is infinitely greater than the external one, which
is but the shadowy projection of the true one. When we see the "rope",
we do not see the "serpent", and when the "serpent" is, the "rope" is
not. Both cannot exist at the same time; so while we see the world we do
not realise the Self, it is only an intellectual concept. In the
realisation of Brahman, the personal "I" and all sense of the world is
lost. The Light does not know the darkness, because it has no existence
in the light; so Brahman is all. While we recognise a God, it is really
only the Self that we have separated from ourselves and worship as
outside of us; but all the time it is our own true Self, the one and
only God. The nature of the brute is to remain where he is, of man to
seek good and avoid evil, of God to neither seek nor avoid, but just to
be blissful eternally. Let us be Gods, let us make our hearts like an
ocean, to go beyond all the trifles of the world and see it only as a
picture. We can then enjoy it without being in any way affected by it.
Why look for good in the world, what can we find there? The best it has
to offer is only as if children playing in a mud puddle found a few
glass beads. They lose them again and have to begin the search anew.
Infinite strength is religion and God. We are only souls if we are free,
there is immortality only if we are free, there is God only if He is
free.

Until we give up the world manufactured by the ego, never can we enter
the Kingdom of Heaven. None ever did, none ever will. To give up the
world is to utterly forget the ego, to know it not at all, living in the
body but not being ruled by it. This rascal ego must be obliterated.
Power to help mankind is with the silent ones who only live and love and
withdraw their own personality entirely. They never say "me" or "mine",
they are only blessed in being the instruments to help others. They are
wholly identified with God, asking nothing and not *consciously* doing
anything. They are the true Jivanmuktas — the absolutely selfless, their
little personality thoroughly blown away, ambition non-existent. They
are all principle, with no personality. The more we sink the "little
self", the more God comes. Let us get rid of the little "I" and let only
the great "I" live in us. Our best work and our greatest influence is
when we are without a thought of self. It is the "desireless" who bring
great results to pass. Bless men when they revile you. Think how much
good they are doing by helping to stamp out the false ego. Hold fast to
the real Self, think only pure thoughts, and you will accomplish more
than a regiment of mere preachers. Out of purity and silence comes the
word of power.

</div>
