+++
title = "Visualizing higher dimensions"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RicNk84rMrI/AAAAAAAAAGs/vac2l0MP3xI/s320/bubbles.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RicNk84rMrI/AAAAAAAAAGs/vac2l0MP3xI/s1600-h/bubbles.jpg)

When most people look at the above figure they know it is two
dimensional yet they perceive it as a 3D object. But most of us stop at
3D. Most of us do not see a 3D object and visualize it as a depiction of
higher dimensional object, unlike the 2D object in which we see 3D. In
the West Möbius started thinking of this perception by bring to light
the silhouette problem: the 2D silhouette of the left hand cannot be
made into that of the right hand unless you have the 3rd dimension. Only
with the 3rd dimension can you rotate the silhouette around in 3D and
make into that of the right hand. Likewise he wondered if an equivalent
operation in the 4th dimension could make a 3D right hand into a 3D left
hand. Some mathematicians like Hinton, Stringham and Poincare felt that
they could perceive the 4th dimension. Following them a number of
mathematicians have felt that they possessed such perception and a
profound exposition of polyhedra in higher dimensions is offered by
Coxeter with illustrations of how their projections in 2 and 3
dimensions might appear. Though these projections give a sense of how
algebraic operations on such objects might be carried most regular
people cannot perceive the tesseract One may term it a siddhi from janma
after pata\~njali. Attaining this siddhi is of considerable difficulty
but once one attains it opens certain higher realms for the sAdhaka.
When this siddhi is attained many things that appear paradoxical or
contradictory to the the lower mind suddenly free up.

After I originally brought this topic up, it seemed to have struck a
chord in two acquaintances: R and SRA. Both seemed to respond to
different aspects that I originally wished to touch upon. R informed me
of the case of Alicia Stott which illustrates that higher dimensional
perception is indeed a siddhi that, like some others, comes with janma
\[it may have genetic causes\]. Alicia Stott starting at the age of 17
started “seeing” higher dimensional polyhedra, which she named polytopes
and was able conceive them as sections and nets of 3D polyhedra. By
means of her higher dimensional visualization capabilities she was able
to show that there were only 6 regular polytopes in the 4D space, just
like there are only 5 Platonic solids in 3D space. Her ability to
perceive the higher dimensions was used by mathematicians, including the
famous Coxeter, in their studies on higher dimensional polyhedra. One
has to only look at her models depicting the sections through the
120-cell a 4D regular polytope to get a feel for the stupendous nature
of her higher dimensional perception. The important point in this
context to note is that Alicia Stott had no formal education in
mathematics or any formally earned degree. However, she was the daughter
of the mathematician Boole and her mother was a teacher with a high
degree of intelligence. Her grand-uncle was the trignometer Everest
involved in the surveying of India. Thus, the genes gave her the siddhi
with janma.

In another direction: When the sAdhaka performing japa of that great
mantra of mahAvaiShNavI with his dhyAna on the yantra nears its siddhi
sees a reflection of the aShTa dala in the bindu. He then \*sees\* the
16 petaled padma. If he advances further he enters space and \*sees\* 8
cubes. He then transcends space and \*perceives\* the rahasya of the
yantra and the hidden rahasya of the mantra. He becomes the over-lord.
