+++
title = "Some considerations on Hindu atomism"

+++
tanIyAMsaM pAMsuM tava charaNa pa\~NkeruhabhavaM  
viri\~nchiH saMchinvan virachayati lokAn avikalam   
vahaty enaM shauriH katham api sahasreNa shirasAM  
haraH saM-kShubhyainaM bhajati bhasitod-dhUlana-vidhim || (saundarya
lahari 2)

Minute particles have arisen from the dust of your feet,  
gathering these together brahmA constructs the orderly universe,  
viShNu with his thousand heads verily holds these,  
hara in destroying the universe splits these apart and smears himself
with them as ash.

The learned kaivalyAshrama, the late medieval tantric guru from an
orthoprax maTHa in the southern Konkans, in his commentary on the
saundaryalahari clearly explains this shloka as describing the paramANus
as emerging from the feet of tripura-sundarI and being used by the
trimurti in their loka-kAryam. In his commentary mentions how the
fundamental particles the paramANu-s combine to give rise to the basic
aNu combinations like dvyANu-s and tryANu-s. This is consonant with the
mantra prayoga of this shloka — mastery over the knowledge of all matter
or nature (Long back while studying this shloka I was inspired by
ShoDashikA that great mistress of the kula path, flanked by sa\~nketA
and sachiveshI).

In my opinion, one of the pinnacles of Hindu thought, along with
pANini’s study of language are the vaisheShika sUtra-s of kaNAda. The
vaisheShika thought in its pristine form was largely dead in the later
days of Hindu thought. Yet, it was the beginning of physics in India,
and the foundation of a very productive line of addressing the universe.
To us (this a very personal view) vaisheShika is the best of the
darshana-s for a veda-practicing AstIka in the context of modern
knowledge. Many Hindus are unable to grasp the significance vaisheShika.
We believe that vaisheShika is a prelude to scientific thought and not
just a metaphysics. Thus, a “modern darshana” that an AstIka can follow
without a contradiction in Weltanschauung would build from the base of
vaisheShika, just as medieval Hindus built on early vaisheShika thought
(e.g. [vAchaspati
mishra](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/09/vachaspati-on-atomic-coordinates.html)).
Sadly many early works of the pristine vaisheShika period are now lost.
It was once a great challenge to the nAstIka-s who expended their
efforts to undermine or co-opt it.

Some early lost vaisheShika works are preserved in citations of
nAstIka-s in their debates against the AstIkas. One example is given by
paramArtha (499-569 CE), an AchArya who traveled from bhArata to the
land of the chIna-s to teach darshanas and translated a number of works
from Sanskrit to chIna-bhASha. In one such, the lakShaNAnusAra shAstra,
he describes vaisheShika, albeit mistaking certain points. He gives an
account of tIrthaka, a successor of prashastapAda, on the universe,
which in broad outline agrees with the idea that saundaryalahari 2 has
as its background: 1) The universe has two kinds of saMvarta-s (end or
dissolution) — the antara saMvarta and the tejaH saMvarta. 2) The former
saMvarta occurs at the end of each kalpa comprised of approximately
10^10 years, the total life of the universe being roughly 3\*10^10
years. 3) The first kalpa is known as the tapah kalpa (the period of
heat), the second the the jala-kalpa (the period of liquid) and the
third the vAyu-kalpa (the period of gas). 4) At the end of each kalpa
all matter is dissolved into the constituent paramANu-s (fundamental
particles of vaisheShika) and exist in state of disjunction. 5) At the
beginning of each kalpa the paramANu-s combine due to the unseen forces
(as kaNada states) and produce aNu-s that grow larger in size to produce
the entire universe. 5) The consciousness and mind are conjoined or
separated when atoms do the same. 6) After three rounds of tejah
saMvarta one coming at the end of each triadic universal period the
universe lapses into a state of pure disjoint paramANu-s and
consciousness.

A certain parallel with jaimini’s sUtra-s and the vaisheShika sUtra-s
exists suggesting that their authors belonged to a common intellectual
tradition (i.e. successors of the veda):  
athAto dharma jij\~nAsA | (MS1)  
athAto dharma vyAkhyAsyAmaH | (VS1)  
both mean the approximately same (jij\~nAsA= inquire into or
vyAkhyAsyAmaH – explain) and are clearly distinguished from the inquiry
into brahman or yoga or causes of sorrow or principles of logic.  
chodanAlatho artho dharmaH | (MS2)  
yato.abhyudaya niHshreyasa siddhiH sa dharmaH | (VS2)  
The constructs are very similar between mImAmsa and vaisheShika, but the
former declares that the veda’s prescription is dharma. Whereas,
vaisheShika declares that one that produces abhyudaya and niHshreyasa is
dharma (Note that there two distinct terms used and not mokSha. Much
after the pristine vaisheShika faded away, later authors thought that
these terms were related to mokSha of vedAnta).

tasya nimitta-parIShTiH | (MS3)  
tadvachanAd AmnAyasya prAmANyaM | (VS3)  
Here again the two darshana-s probably imply similar (not same) things:
The mImAmsaka-s seem to mean (going by shabara svAmin): examination (of
veda) is proof of that (dharma).  
The aNuvAdins state: authoritativeness rest with that vedas because it
is a declaration of that (dharma).

So of all darshana-s these are the two that directly express their
intent on dharma and its vedic roots. \[As an aside- Since the tathAgata
and his successors wanted to subvert precisely this, namely dharma, they
used the same term dharma and tried to give it an entirely different
meaning. It is not a big surprise that the initial conflicts of the
bauddha nAstIka-s was precisely with these two darshanas (e.g. buddha
attacking uruvelA jaTila kAshyapa).\]

We observe that vaisheShika thought is present in the bhArata and the
purANa-s. In the former it is seen in the lecture of the great kShatrIya
woman sulabhA prAdhAnI during the discourse with the king of mithilA. In
the purANa-s, for example the bhagavata purANa, it appears in the
lecture of
[maitreya](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/09/maitreyas-atomism.html).
However, unlike sAMkhya (yoga) and in the much latter paurANic milieu,
vedAnta, neither mImAmsa nor vaisheShika are discussed in their
technical details in these texts. Again, chANakya only mentions sAMkhya,
yoga and lokAyata, suggesting the former two were the “popular”
philosophies that were seen as successors of the upaniShadic
philosophical speculation. Both mImAmsa and vaisheShika instead appear
to have arisen in a specialized setting of vedic ritualists (ironically
bauddha nAstIka-s also later arose in this setting), but assumed very
different paths despite certain similar foundational concepts.

Many philosophers have noted the points of divergence of mImAmsa and
vaisheShika after a similar opening of their darshana sUtra-s.
vaisheShika is not interested in the two prime issues of mImAmsa: 1) The
veda being by its very nature valid. 2) The eternal existence of the
veda. While not bothered about these issues, in the very last sUtra-s
(adhyAya 10, Ahnika 2), kaNAda stresses the authoritativeness of the
veda. Then both vaisheShika and mImamsa agree upon a critical point:
There is no creator for the universe and there is no Ishvara. The
universe is entirely a result of combination of the fundamental
particles and the sole agent for their combination is karma. Finally,
mImAmsa depends heavily on the position that sound is eternal, and this
is connected with its world view of the apauruSheyatva of the veda.
kaNAda examines the possibility of the eternality of sound and then
rejects it. To me in addition to the above positions, it is this
position on sound that makes vaisheShika an over all superior philosophy
of all the hindu systems.

If the opening stress on dharma and the closing stress on the veda is an
important feature of vaisheShika, then the question arises as to its
specific vedic antecedents if any. The use of vaisheShika terminology in
charaka’s medical treatise is an important pointer in this regard. In
charaka, vaisheShika is heavily overlayed by the “populist” saMkhya
thought. It is possible that in the yajur-vedic school of charaka and
kaThas arose the early formal vaisheShika which continued to linger on
the later medical treatises produced by the former school. \[Of the
kR^iShNa yajurvedin-s the kaThas appear to be closest to the charakas.
The brAhmaNa of the kaTha-s preserved now as the terminal brahmaNa of
the kAThaka section of the taittirIya-s has a mImAmsa on the chyana with
different metals, like gold, silver, lead etc. It is in this context
that the paMsu-s (atoms) are mentioned.\] An important corollary to this
use of vaisheShika thought by the charaka-s is that vaisheShika actually
served as a proto-scientific naturalistic base in hindu analysis of
nature’s phenomena. The charaka-s saw that vaisheShika theories provided
a reasonable frame to understand chemistry of substances, and there by
determine the behavior or particular substances in the animal body or
guide the deployment of particular substances in therapeutics.

That vaisheShika theory was principally meant as a system of
proto-scientific explanation is seen in its application within its
tradition starting from kaNAda. udyotakAra following the tradition used
it to explain refraction of light. udayana used it to explain how heat
from the sun was the ultimate source of all earthly heat stores. bhaTTa
jayanta used it to explain photo-chemical reactions. It also influenced
the great nAstIka intellectual, the jaina umAsvati who incorporated the
vaisheShika concept of saMyoga, vibhAga in the form attractive and
repulsive forces between paramANu-s and aNu-s.

In conclusion it might be said that the ancient Hindus had in
vaisheShika a proto-scientific frame work whose important features
included: 1) The absence of a creator for the universe or an Ishvara as
the cause of the universe; 2) The construction of the universe through
the combination of fundamental particles paramANu-s- “atoms” to give
rise to “aNu-s” molecular particles. 3) The particle nature of light and
heat. 4) An explanation of natural phenomena using molecular and atomic
particles and a small set of basic physical forces. 5) karma chiefly
implies physical forces and force itself has a particle nature. 6) The
mind is molecular in nature. 7) consciousness is not per say
“non-material” but associated with matter- perhaps as a distinct
particle or as a “property” of a particle, perhaps like charge.

But going by later Indian thought and modern Hindus it is clear that
this naturalism has been receding to the background. In this context, I
have been puzzled by certain observations: I believe that the majority
of modern Hindus believe in Ishvara as the cause of the universe or are
creationists of different grades. Some may restrict themselves with
seeing the universe’s cause as the Ishvara, others may see all the
diversity and complexity of nature as a sign of Ishvara. Yet others may
believe in the special entities like the sUkShma sharIra transmitting
their pApa-s and puNya-s from one sthUla sharIra to another and so on.
Majority of Hindus using the Abrahamistic terminology say they believe
in God and even go through some effort to say that they are not
polytheistic but actually believe in one basic God. Many Hindus and
particularly Hindu vedAntic achArya-s do not accept evolution of life by
natural selection. Is all of this because of Abrahamistic subversion of
their thought alone? Or is it because they have been pre-conditioned for
this mental state due to their separation from old vaisheShika and
sAMkhya thought?

I feel that it might be a combination of both factors. If this were so
it is disappointing that Hindus have actually lost their intellectual
rigor and are no longer philosophically innovative as their
predecessors.  
…  
At this point the learned jaina muni-s bhuvana-vijaya and jambu-vijaya
must be acknowledged for their tremendous services to the AstIka-s. A
proper text of the vaisheShika sUtra-s had been hard to get in modern
times, in part due to the above reasons. muni bhuvana-vijaya obtained
pristine manuscripts of the vaisheShika sUtra-s along with a commentary
of chandrAnanda (\~700-800 CE) from a jaina manuscript collection in
jaisAlmer, rAjasthana. His son jambu-vijaya carefully edited the text to
provide a reliable version of the vaisheShika sUtra along with
chandrAnanda-s commentary. chandrAnanda cites the veda-s and purANa-s
showing his wide knowledge of Hindu lore in general. My teacher knowing
my proclivities pointed to me to chandrAnanda’s commentary and its
importance in grasping the vedic milieu in which vaisheShika arose.
