+++
title = "Past thoughts"

+++
Before the battle of dashAnta we were shackled, but in that fierce raNa,
miraculously aided by vinAyaka we won a battle and obtained freedom.
During the battle of dvAdashAnta we were completely free and memories go
back to many warriors who fought in the pitched battle for fame and
glory: chArvAka, bR^ihat-sphik, hrasvaroman, ashvamukha, shUdraka,
shrIvaiShNava, kShetra-dhR^ita, shveta-dadhna and braindeya.
bR^ihat-sphik and ashvamukha hated us. In the battlefield of
rasa-kShetra we were trapped in a dangerous position, but Mis-creant
supplied us with intelligence regarding their positions like a
pa\~nchAla spy and we were able make our escape. In the great charge of
battle that followed we were weakened by a takman, even as the Assamese
general against the Mogols. But in that great yuddha the deva-s bore us
aid and we extirpated bR^ihat-sphik and ashvamukha from our loka, as
also their secret ally patita-putraka. During the fierce battle of
pa\~nchadashAnta our tapas aided us against the sena of strI-s and we
blew them away.

While the thoughts often linger on these battle, it was the multi-front
war of saptadashAnta that posed an existential crisis for us. There were
two major fronts and several minor ones. Our most hated shatru
maireya-pAyin faced us on the first major front and the hyona and
rasagola warriors who even hated our shadow stood on the second. the
maireya-pAyin tried at first to detach the amAtya and sachiva to corner
us. We were at that time tied down with a takman and unable to act for a
month. But then we retaliated in a big way and routed maireya-pAyin-s
men in a skirmish. Then we were wounded in our hand and unable to wield
the bow, when maireya-payin’s army bore down on us. We fought on with
our wounded hand– even though we could not prepare for battle, we
emerged completely victorious after our auxiliary force \[we thought of
Napoleon\] helped to overthrow the va\~nga allies of maireya-payin. But
on the other front the hyona and rasagola warriors were scoring
victories against our men and had surrounded them completely. The muni-s
army had already been routed completely and was on the retreat. It was
at that instance that Jx came to our aid with a large force in the
foreign field. He smashed the mlechCha warriors who aided the hyonas and
rasagolas. Using the opening in the shatru-vyUha created by Jx, we
rushed in an scored an incredible sweeping victory.

Jx moved on the score several victories against the mlechCha vIra-s and
conquered the kingdom of hima-hrada. He was reigning supreme there and
enjoying bhoga. When was caught in the bliss of bhoga two mishaps struck
him. The chIna-s sent their spasha-s to probe him and he was caught
unaware. He was then seized by a dreaded DAmarikA. The DAmarikA had kept
him imprisoned and suffering till the virile taittirIya saved him from
destruction. But in the mean time he lost the kingdom of hima-hrada to
the chIna-s. He by his valor fled to bhAnu-kakSha and carved himself a
small estate there. In a long conversation with Jx then a little did we
know that same DAmarikA was waiting for us.
