+++
title = "Adriosaurs and the origin of snakes and the snake-like form"

+++
We had earlier seen how the Lee camp had claimed that snakes are a
sister group of the marine varanoid lizards, and how the Rieppel camp
had repeatedly engaged in falsifying these claims. The [molecular
phylogenies](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/04/22/najash-rionegrina-and-yurlunggur-camfieldensis/)
showed that snakes were not particularly close to the extant varanoids.
Lee tried to strike back by claiming that even in a tree constrained by
the robust nodes determined by molecular phylogeny the snakes and
mesozoic marine lizards continued to group together. Caldwell another
major protagonist of the Lee camp has now brought up a new adriosaur
species Adriosaurus microbrachis to support their theory. The adriosaurs
definitely make one sit back and consider the snake-marine lizard
connection again with greater care.

This issue of the origin of the snakes, like the origin of the turtles,
is an enduring problem in paleontology and I have been fascinated by the
lessons it offers. The current debates have a long history: In the 1860s
the prolific American scientist Edward Cope (who published about 1200
papers in his life) first noted the similarities between the marine
lizards, varanoids and snakes. From 1908 to 1923 the prophetic [Franz
von
Nopsca](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/06/15/von-nopscas-jurassic-deja-vu/)
published papers (including “Zur Kenntnis der fossilen Eidechsen”,1908;
an early classic on lizard evolution) in which he proposed that the
marine forms like dolichosaurs and adriosaurs with progressively
snake-like bodies presented an evolutionary pathway leading from marine
lizards to snakes. A modern variant of this theory was to become the
mainstay of the Lee camp. In the 1930s the great explorer of reptilian
anatomy, Mahendra (who produced the first modern survey of Indian
snakes), proposed the rival fossorial or burrowing origin of snakes. His
works, however, were largely ignored and forgotten until the fossorial
theory from extant snakes was revived by Bellairs and gang a decade or
so later. It was in Bellairs’s stupendous classic on reptiles which I
started reading when I was 8 or so that I encountered this fascinating
evolutionary issue of snake origins. The story was so riveting that I
just could not put the books down. I had obtained some skulls of lizards
and snakes from the vAnara parvata and intently studied them to gain an
appreciation for the issue. The main issue supporting the fossorial
origin of extant snakes was the presence of the peculiar eye-lens
focusing muscles. These clearly suggested degeneration of vision as seen
in other fossorial forms of lizards followed by revival of vision by
this highly derived lens focusing apparatus. However, it was not
impossible that the earliest snakes were marine and only the ancestor of
the extant forms was fossorial.

The Mesozoic marine lizards are typified the following major lineages:
1) aigialosaurs 2) mosasaurs 3) dolichosaurs 4) adriosaurs and 5) the
distinctive Aphanizocnemus that might define a lineage of its own. All
these forms show several clear similarities with terrestrial varanoid
lizards that had already pretty much settled into their modern form by
the late Cretaceous as suggested by forms like giant Gila monster-like
lizard Estesia from the Mongolian Gobi. Anatomically, the aigialosaurs
appear to retain the most primitive condition. Forms like Carsosaurus
have fairly large well-developed limbs capable of supporting weight on
land, though they have the marine adaptation of being viviparous with
tail first birth. In a general sense these lizards would have very well
resembled the varanoid lizards like the water monitor that is seen
occasionally in the desh (I had a good chance to study it after a
Dravidian interested only in eating the torso had hacked of the head and
given it to me). The water monitor is competent on both land and water
and grabs fishes with considerable efficiency. The more recently
described primitive mosasaur, Dallasaurus from Texas retains several
aigialosaur-like features. This suggests that the ancestor of the
agialosaurs and mosasaur at least was an amphibious form, much like many
extant varanoids. The extreme marine adaptations of the classical
mosasaurs thus appear to be much later feature in their evolution. The
dolichosaurs, Aphanizocnemus and adriosaurs appear to be much more
derived– they have much longer bodies in general with elongation of
their neck as well as increase in number to dorsal vertebrae and
reduction of forelimbs to different degrees. What Caldwell found was
that Adriosaurus microbrachis has an extreme reduction of the forelimbs
— just an atrophied humerus. This was seen as a tendency towards
forelimb loss that preceded the emergence of snakes.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNy_Y9MdHI/AAAAAAAAAHc/LM4ra_y2XiY/s320/water-monitor.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNy_Y9MdHI/AAAAAAAAAHc/LM4ra_y2XiY/s1600-h/water-monitor.jpg)

A water-montior navigating a river

It has to be admitted that the dolichosaurs and adriosaurs are indeed
pretty snake-like in a generic sense. However, this does not necessarily
imply a close relationship. The snake-like form has occasionally emerged
independently in different aquatic vertebrate lineages. Such a
morphology might have been primitive for the extant agnathans– lamprey
and hagfishes — suggesting that anguiliform morphology was first
acquired very early on by swimming vertebrates. In the sharks, this form
emerged in the deep-sea forms like *Chlamydoselachus* and among fishes
it is seen in eels. Thus, given the right conditions this form is
convergently adopted by different aquatic forms. However, one point to
note is that snake-like morphologies were rare amongst tetrapods
returning to the water. While numerous reptilian lineages re-entered the
waters few really acquired a snake-like form. It is not seen in
mesosaurs, pachypleurosaurs, nothosaurs, plesiosaurs, Hupehsuchus,
ichthyosaurs, choristoderes, placodonts, turtles and crocodylomorphs.
For all the axial elongation seen in the sauropterygians
(pachypleurosaurs, nothosaurs, plesiosaurs) there was no snake-like
form.

In contrast, snake-like forms emerged in terrestrial lizards that burrow
or exhibit an undulatory locomotion on multiple occasions as shown by
the dibamids, pygopodids, skinks, amphisbaenians, and anguid lizards .
Even in “amphibians” the terrestrially well-adapted and predominantly
fossorial caecilians show this form. The other snake-like amphibians —
the lepospondyl radiation of aistopods were probably aquatic in origin,
though this is not certain. Thus, the anguiform morphology might evolve
in both terrestrial niches (fossorial or otherwise) as well as aquatic
niches convergently. Hence, there is no reason that the snakes and
marine lizards did not adopt axially elongated morphologies
independently in different situations. On the other hand there is the
infrequency of marine to terrestrial transitions in tetrapods, which has
been cited in favor of the terrestrial origin of snakes.

In conclusion, given the frequent convergent emergence of the snake-like
body plan in different niches, its origin should be examined
unconstrained by preconceptions. A robust phylogenetic reconstruction
and a general survey of the morphological features on this phylogenetic
framework would then help in understanding the degree of repeated
re-emergence and loss of derived states.

In 1975, the zoologist Gans analyzed the various factors related to
limblessness in tetrapods. However, it should noted that it is subset of
a more general issue of why snake-like morphologies emerged in
vertebrates from agnathans to reptiles. While various factors were
correlated with limblessness by Gans it is clear that most of these
might be a consequence rather than a cause for limblessness. For
example, the question arises as to whether burrowing behavior is a
consequence of the snake-like form or vice-versa. However, a few points
must be noted: 1) The snake-like form provides some kind of ecological
“release” at least in terrestrial vertebrates. For example the
snake-like pygopodids in Australia occupy far more diverse niches than
their sister group the classical geckos (see below). Likewise snakes are
amongst the most ecologically diverse group of lizards. Thus, the
snake-like form may offer certain adapative advantages that have favored
its repeated emergence. 2) It should be noted that the snake-like
morphology does not emerge in endothermic vertebrates like archosaurs
and synapsids. Considering a unit body volume, increase in length
results in increase in surface area (in the ascending arm of the curve:
A=2\*(sqrt(PI\*l)+1/l); where l=body length) making such elongation
generally costly for an endotherm (need to warm more area). More
importantly these vertebrates have an “erect” gait with the body wall
not being thrown into undulations while moving.

These points suggest that, in line with Gans’ earlier analysis, the
undulatory locomotion involving body wall muscles that in some form is
primitive to the vertebrates is the key to the emergence of the
snake-like body form. Thus an initial elongation, perhaps due to
different reasons, leads towards the snake-like body plan as undulatory
locomotion is perfected, and this form opens up other ecological
advantages. Since a similar pattern of basic undulatory locomotion is
used by vertebrates in both land and water this form might emerge in the
context of swimming, “sand-swimming”, entering crevices or burrowing.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjOBo49MdLI/AAAAAAAAAH8/RY5uxziMJDQ/s320/lizard_tree.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjOBo49MdLI/AAAAAAAAAH8/RY5uxziMJDQ/s1600-h/lizard_tree.jpg)  
The molecular phylogeny of lizards

The molecular phylogenies of lizards have overturned most conclusions
derived from morphological studies. Just as in the case of mammalian
phylogeny, they have shown that, except for the closest higher order
relationships, the morphological studies have failed to produce a
correct tree on most occasions. In fact, even in the case of some close
relationships they have failed quite badly. The result of the molecular
phylogenies is summarized in the tree produced by the works of Vidal et
al and Townsend et al’s pioneering efforts. Some of the most striking
features are the crown group of Toxicofera uniting snakes, anguimorphs
and iguanians, which was never expected by any morphologist (just like
Afrotheria in mammalian phylogeny). In addition it showed that within
anguimorphs varanids and Gila monsters are not sister clades. It also
surprisingly showed that the amphisbaenians with snake-like forms are
derived from the Lacertid-teiid assemblage and have no connection with
snakes. It shows that the skinks, cordylids and Xantusiids from a
monophyletic clade and are not specifically related in anyway to the
lacertid-teiid assemblage. It shows the gekkotans and dibamids as basal
lizard lineages with no apparent relationship between dibamids and
amphisbaenids. Thus, both the Lee and Rieppel camps were falsified in
one stroke.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjFlN49MdEI/AAAAAAAAAHE/gyOL1sa-Rbw/s320/Gecko.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjFlN49MdEI/AAAAAAAAAHE/gyOL1sa-Rbw/s1600-h/Gecko.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjFlgI9MdFI/AAAAAAAAAHM/HbGV61vwum8/s320/lialis.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjFlgI9MdFI/AAAAAAAAAHM/HbGV61vwum8/s1600-h/lialis.jpg)

The above picture illustrates two gekkotans: The classical Gekko gecko
and its close relative the snake lizard (pygopodid) Lialis (gekkota is a
basal lizard clade, very distant from the real snakes and anguimorphs).
It illustrates how the snake-like morphology easily convergently emerges
amongst terrestrial lizards. 

Now on this phylogenetic model we can analyze the convergent emergence
of various body forms. Among extant reptiles the snake-like form emerged
convergently in 5 different lineages (and perhaps more than once within
them): 1) snakes 2) amphisbaenids 3) anguids 4) pgyopodids 5) dibamids.
At least 4 of these emergences appear to be in a strictly terrestrial
context. A corollary to this is that the presence of a snake-like form
should no longer be considered a major indication of sister group
relationship. Thus, the adriosaurs being particularly close to snakes
must be questioned. Since this phylogeny decouples the snake-varanoid
connection and also breaks up a Varanus-Heloderma sister grouping, it
indeed seriously questions if we should be certain about the position of
adriosaurs, dolichosaurs, mosasaurs and their relatives. My own
consideration of their anatomy, omitting the biasing features of the
snake-like body form, suggests that they lie within anguimorpha. But
snakes apparently do not lie within anguimorpha, but are only a related
clade and can even be closer to iguania than anguimorpha. Further,
recent molecular studies suggest that homeobox gene HoxC8 in other
tetrapods is expressed just posterior to the pectoral girdle. In snakes
its zone of expression of HoxC8 starts very close to the anterior-most
vertebra. This suggests that the neck in snakes was not greatly
elongated, much like the situation in skinks (where the key elongation
is in the torso). This is in contrast to the elongated neck of the
adriosaurs. Thus, I feel the adriosaurs and dolichosaurs are not close
to snake origins, and are a 6th snake-like form convergently emerging
amongst lizards.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNy_o9MdJI/AAAAAAAAAHs/F-SxrFNYyYk/s320/skink.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNy_o9MdJI/AAAAAAAAAHs/F-SxrFNYyYk/s1600-h/skink.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNzt49MdKI/AAAAAAAAAH0/4l5HewWOfOM/s320/redtail_gymnophthal.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RjNzt49MdKI/AAAAAAAAAH0/4l5HewWOfOM/s1600-h/redtail_gymnophthal.jpg)

Convergence in the “skink-like body form” in skinks (left) and teiioids
(right)

In addition to the classic snake-like form, other elongate forms have
repeatedly convergently evolved in lizards. For example the “skink-like”
form are seen convergently in certain teiids as well as classical
skinks, which are very distant from the former. This, illustrates a
certain persistent driving force towards such adaptations in lizards,
operating on basic locomotory mechanism which uses the body-wall
muscles. In this context it would be useful to consider the coupling of
the locomotory body wall muscles and respiration that restrict a lizard
from running at high speeds without stopping to exhibit the panting
behavior. The varanoids solved this problem by evolving a gular sac that
allows pumping of air even while running at high speeds and keep the
lungs working. The snake-like form might provide other locomotory
alternatives for this, and might explain the adaptive successes of
snakes and pygopodids.

While convergence is rampant in the snake-like form, we find that the
converse might be true for the bifurcated or forked tongue. Most lizards
have a notched tongue tip. However, it is prominently forked in
teiioids, serpents, anguimorphs where it allows for “binocular”
olfaction or precise perception of the smell source. Now, a simple
notching might either be a primitive state of the lizard tongue or a
reversal from an even more forked state. What ever the case, the fact
that the iguanians are a crown group taxon with the anguimorphs makes it
clear that the forking was lost secondarily in them as they specialized
in using tongue prehension prey capture. This trait culminated in the
highly specialized use of the tongue in the chameleonid lineage within
the iguanians. With the iguanians in the crown group tongue bifurcation
becomes a primitive condition.

Finally, the thorough smashing of the morphological trees suggests that
the whole issue of the relationships of Mesozoic lizards must be
revisited. The comprehensive review by SE Evans on lizard evolution
needs a serious reconsideration in many aspects. While the presence of
vomerine and pterygoid teeth rows in Kuehneosaurs and Marmoretta suggest
that they might indeed be primitive many of the other forms need a more
careful consideration. For example, do the paramacellodids from the
Jurassic and Cretaceous really group with scincomorph lizards? Do the
forms like Bharatagama and Tikiguania from the Jurassic and Late
Triassic really belong to the iguanian radiation or did this radiation
only occur in the Cretaceous ? The latter possibility is suggested by
the recent discovery of a well-preserved fossil gliding lizard,
Xianglong from the Early Cretaceous Yixian formation that clearly
appears to be an iguanian, perhaps an agamid, just like its modern
equivalent Draco. Is Parviraptor from the middle Jurassic really related
to the anguimorphs? A revised study of the well-preserved Dalinghosaurus
from the Yixian formation would also be beneficial. We feel this taxon
may have a bearing on the relationship between the anguimorphs and
iguanians. Answering all this means a thorough revamp of the
evolutionary understanding of lizard anatomy. Again molecular studies
might help– for example molecular markers to study the development of
cervical and pectoral muscles could help in the snake origin problem. A
study of skull development could again help in unraveling issues that
were previously missed

(We wish we could invade these issues ourselves but for now we conclude
this excursion into lizards by remembering the halcyon days when we
studied the agamids Psammophilus– the yellow-black rock lizard in the
city of our birth and Calotes and Sitana in the city of our growth).
