+++
title = "In the samarA~NgaNa"

+++
The news reached that our most skilled senAnI had captured the fort of
amukhAsthika after a very fierce and prolonged struggle. In the thick of
battle with shara-s raining all over it was not known who was friend or
foe, but in the end he held his cool and we routed our foemen. At that
point we turned our attention to personally lead the forces against a
fort that had for long kept slipping from us, though we had planted our
flag on that parvata before our foes. But even as we were closing into
to make a large attack on it, our skilled senAnI sent us a messenger
that the young commandant who had fought with great distinction on the
battle of shulbAri hala had been ambushed by a combine of our most
dreaded shatru-s who possessed a large force. Our young commandant
panicked greatly. But our senAnI tried to calm him down and asked him to
remain bold on the field. We saw the grim advance of our hated
bhrAtR^ivya and spent a sleepless night wondering over the battle plan.
We drew our battle plans and to protect the front manned by our young
commandant, when we faced another unexpected attack. The
abhichAraymAna-s had earlier slowed us down with a dreaded attack, which
is another story in itself. Now they incited the khANDavans into a
rebellion. Just before we set forth for the other front we were probed
by the khANDavans and spent a while in a prolonged skirmish. While we
drove them away ,like the bhR^igus driving away dIrghajihvI, they were
resorting to mitra-bheda to try to break up our allies. Suddenly we
found ourself under a massive alignment of our enemies, all hoping that
we never see the sun again. We turned to maghavan to confer victory on
us.
