+++
title = "Ruminations on meteorites, organics andxa0water"

+++
In our times the Christian Anglo-Saxons were famous for their “war on
drugs”. However, in the 1800s, when they lorded over India, they were
famous as global drug dealers. On the morning of August 25, 1865 CE
around 9:00 AM, one such dealer, Mr. Peppe (titled the sub-deputy opium
agent), was making his rounds overseeing his Indian serfs laboring in
the poppy fields at Sherghati in Bihar. The still air on that cloudy day
was pierced by an earth-shattering detonation — a stone had fallen from
the heavens. The laborers reaching the place in the fields where it had
fallen recovered a 5 kilogram heavenly stone buried knee-deep in the
mud. The stone was conveyed to a senior drug dealer, Costley (titled
Deputy Magistrate of Sherghati). After examining it, he did not believe
it was a meteorite because it did not resemble that which he had known
to have fallen from the skies in Faridpur, in 1850 CE. However, Peppe
confirmed that he has seen it fall in the poppy fields; thus, it
survived being discarded. Eventually, it landed in the hands of the
English tyrants of Bengal who promptly conveyed it to the British Museum
in London, where the meteor-collector Mervyn Herbert Nevil Story
Maskelyne was greedily gobbling up the meteorites that his agents from
India would supply. It so happened that this 5kg stone was a little
piece of Martian real estate, which became the founding member of a
class of Martian meteorites known as the shergottites.

Having read this tale in our early youth, alongside our first sightings
of meteors as though cast from the mouth of the Kṣetrapāla, we became
increasingly interested in meteoroids and meteorites. Soon we learnt
that these objects offer windows into the solid material of the solar
system and the very origin of planets such as earth. Meteoroids have
diverse origins. Some, like the progenitors of the shergottites, are
pieces of other planetary bodies like Mars, the asteroid Vesta and the
Moon. Yet others are the dust of comets or fragments of cometary nuclei.
These are behind the meteor showers which occur when the earth crosses a
cometary orbit and cometary dust burns up in the atmosphere from
friction, resulting in visible meteors. However, the most common are
material left from the collisional and accretionary process that formed
the rocky planets. Such collisions continue to occur in the asteroid
belt generating meteoroids. Some such meteoroids survive the atmospheric
burnout and drop to the surface of the earth. Every year a flux of at
least
![10^7](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=10%5E7&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "10^7")
kg of meteorites reaches the earth and the bigger pieces are much sought
after by collectors to this date. In the past 2 centuries, it has become
clear that there is much diversity among meteorites. One way of
classifying them (by no means exhaustive) is shown Figure 1.

[![meteorites](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/meteorites.jpg)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/meteorites.jpg)Figure
1

The iron meteorites are largely inorganic, ![\\ge
90\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cge+90%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\ge 90\%")
metals like iron and nickel. We read in the memoirs of the Mogol tyrant
Jahangir:

“One of the strangest things that happened during this period occurred
on the thirtieth of Farvardin of the present year \[April 9, 1621\] in a
village in the pargana of Jalandhar. At dawn a tremendous noise arose in
the east. It was so terrifying that it nearly frightened the inhabitants
out of their skins. Then, in the midst of the tumultuous noise,
something bright fell to the earth from above. The people thought fire
was falling from heaven. A moment later the noise ceased, and the people
regained their composure. A swift messenger was sent to Muhammad Sa’id
the tax collector to inform him of the event. He got on his horse at
once and went to the site to see for himself. For a distance of ten or
twelve ells \[ ![\\approx
11.5-14](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+11.5-14&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\approx 11.5-14")
m\] in length and breadth the earth had been so scorched that no trace
of greenery or plants remained and it was still hot. He ordered the
earth dug up. The deeper they dug, the hotter it was. Finally they
reached a spot where a piece of hot iron appeared. It was so hot it was
as though it had been taken out of a furnace. After a while it cooled
off, and Muhammad Sa’id took it home with him. He placed it in a purse,
sealed it, and sent it to court. I ordered it weighed in my presence. It
weighed 160 tolas \[ ![\\approx
1.866209](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+1.866209&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\approx 1.866209")
kg\]. I ordered Master Daud to make a sword, dagger, and knife of it and
show them to me.” (translation by Wheeler M. Thackston)

This is a classic example of an iron meteorite, which was probably the
first source of iron used by humans sometime before the regular iron
age. In contrast, the stony iron meteorites feature different kinds of
mixtures of metals and minerals. The stony meteorites are usually
divided into chondrites which have “chondrules” and achondrites which
lack them. Chondrules are crystalline material derived from molten
silicate droplets. The shergottites and related Martian meteorites are
typically classified as achondrites. The stony meteorites often contain
organic and inorganic carbon. The presence of organic compounds was
first noticed in the carbonaceous meteors by the famous early modern
chemists Jöns Jacob Berzelius and Marcellin Berthelot. But the
significance of these organic compounds came to the fore only after the
dramatic event that took place on 28 September 1969 10:58 AM near a
place called Murchison in Australia. A blazing bolide flew into earth
breaking up initially into 3 pieces and vanishing with a cloud of smoke
followed by an earthquake. One fragment smashed through a barn and fell
on the hay without any deaths. A search of the location recovered
numerous fragments totaling to over 100 kg. This came to be known as the
famous Murchison meteorite. An analysis of its composition revealed that
it had
![&gt;10\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%3E10%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 ">10\%")
water and ![\\approx
2.2\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+2.2%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\approx 2.2\%")
carbon by weight, consistent with its smoky disintegration.

Since then the organics of the Murchison meteorite have been intensely
studied and the following have been detected: 1) Over 70 distinct amino
acids; 2) fatty acids; 3) purines; 4) pyrimidines; 5) A complex mixture
of sugars; 6) alcohols; 7) aldehydes; 8) ketones; 9) amines; 10) amides;
11) aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons; 12) some heterocyclic
aromatics; 13) ethers; 14) organo-sulfur and organo-phosphorus
compounds. Some of these are at very low concentrations like amines
while fatty acids are quite abundant. The fact that these compounds show
a mixture of chiralities and a distinct Carbon 13 isotopic signature
showed that they had a celestial rather than an earthly biological
origin. Given that the Murchison meteorite represents material as old or
considerably older than the Earth, it established beyond doubt that
interstellar organic matter was a component of the material that formed
the original rocky bodies of the solar system. It also suggests that
upon accretion into asteroidal bodies, the originally simple
interstellar organic molecules reacted abiotically by the action or
water and heat to form the entire range of more complex molecules that
could serve as building blocks of life. However, given that life is
characterized by homochirality of its building blocks, it also suggested
at least a subset of such bodies was not transmitting life itself but
only its building blocks.

In our youth, when we first read of the Murchison meteorite, we believed
the majority view that meteors such as this had delivered the building
blocks of life to the early Earth and it was followed by local
pre-biotic evolution resulting in life. However, as our understanding of
biology improved we increasingly started moving towards panspermia
though cellular life on Earth had a single common ancestor. First, the
archaeo-bacterial split implied a certain barrier to lateral gene
transfer that had since then broken down on Earth. This could be most
easily explained by two seeding events, one which brought the bacteria
and the other which brought the archaea. Second, consistent with the
above, there are many protein divergences among housekeeping functions
that imply divergence time that likely greater than the age of the
Earth, even assuming early acceleration in virus-like primitive
replicators. Third, genomic analysis strongly favors a heterotrophic
ancestral organism. Abundant food sources that would have allowed such
organisms to get started before autotrophy evolved are not likely to
have existed on the early Earth. Being in the hot inner Solar System it
is less likely to have had materials like tholins that would have fed
the early heterotrophs. Hence, we again see hints that life emerged
elsewhere in a tholin-rich region and secondarily reached Earth. Thus,
we came to see the Murchison meteorite and other carbonaceous chondrites
as merely part of a spectrum of stony material with interstellar
organics and their processed products which went all the way to life.
Thus our view was that some such body could have delivered life to Earth
from outside.

The key to this, which still remains quite mysterious, is the emergence
of homochirality. Laboratory organic syntheses attempting to mimic
prebiotic processes do not easily reproduce the homochiral constraint
typical of biosynthesis. In our adulthood, even as we were locked in
other scientific explorations, new studies on the Murchison meteorite
that cleverly avoided the effects of contamination and racemization
indicated that there was a ![\\approx
2-9\\%](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox+2-9%5C%25&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\approx 2-9\%")
excess of L-enantiomers among the amino acids found in it. This
supported the hypothesis that there was an initial step wherein a
limited anisotropy was established (as seen on the meteorite) followed
by an amplification step with selection for one enantiomer. This brought
the focus on certain earlier studies in organic chemistry which have
shown that asymmetric photolysis by circularly polarized light could
produce notable enantiomeric excess (e.g. the photolysis of camphor).
Thus, early on, it had been proposed that pulsars emitting circularly
polarized synchrotron radiation could have caused the initial
enantiomeric anisotropy. But it has been pointed out that such radiation
could break up amino acids. Others have hence suggested circularly
polarized light scattered from dusty regions in the Milky Way could
provide the appropriate light for such reactions. Such light has been
directly observed in the reflection nebulae of the OMC-1 star-forming
cloud in the Orion region, which is rich in organic compounds. However,
the energetics of this proposal remains to be understood because UV
radiation could destroy the amino acids. In any case, the photochemical
enantiomer selection remains the most likely possibility, and those
conditions are not found on Earth. This suggests that enantiomeric
excess happened in space. Now one could still argue that after this
excess was established such an enantiomerically biased mixture was
delivered to Earth by meteorites and that provided the building blocks
for life on Earth. However, this does not take into account the
racemization and re-equilibration of enantiomers on Earth post-landing.
Hence, we see this as additional support to the idea that life formed
close to the site where the enantiomeric excess was already established
and maintained and then seeded on Earth.

An unintended consequence of the dramatic Murchison fall has been the
relative neglect of other types of meteorites. On 26 April 1895 CE
multiple detonations were heard over what is today Uttar Pradesh and
four stones fell from the sky. Two of the pieces were found at Bishunpur
(942 g) and Parjabatpur (97 g), 1.8 km apart. The insatiable appetite of
the British mineralogists for meteorites resulted in them being promptly
shipped to the British Museum in London to become one of the famous
representative specimens of the ordinary class of chondrites. It has
been subject to several studies and was reliably shown to contain at
least two organics, toluene and dimethyl ethyl naphthalene. Indeed, the
ordinary chondrites contain a considerable amount of organic compounds
(probably more than Murchison) but their composition and concentrations
remain poorly explored, indicating that Murchison-type carbonaceous
chondrites cannot be considered the sole candidates for vehicles of
organic compounds. Further, the shergottites have been reliably shown to
contain aromatic and alkylaromatic hydrocarbons, phenol and
benzonitrile. The famous Allan Hills 84001, which was found in
Antarctica, also belonging to the Martian class, was initially claimed
to contain fossils of bacteria but this claim should be seen as plainly
dubious as those structures can also form through inorganic processes.
Nevertheless, this meteorite contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
Given that these compounds are fairly common on rocky asteroid material
and comets, it is unlikely that they have special significance for the
formation of the building blocks of life. However, a better study of
these might still give us clues regarding the possible baselines for
organics forming on various rocky planets of the Solar System.

Finally, we come to the question if any of these asteroids resemble the
Earth in their composition? The simple answer is no. However, over the
years several workers have been invoking the parent-bodies of
enstatites, which are magnesium silicate-containing chondrites, as
possible candidates for the progenitors of the Earth. While the Earth as
it stands is not identical to the composition of the enstatites they do
have similar isotopic signatures to terrestrial rocks making them a
likely contributor to the origin of the Earth. Astrochemists have
invoked their high
![^{15}N](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5E%7B15%7DN&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "^{15}N")
content to propose that the high carbon content in the enstatite
chondrites was derived from an organic precursor. However, having
undergone thermal metamorphosis in the inner Solar System it has been
mostly converted to a graphite-like material. Recently, enstatites have
been in the news because a recent study has shown that they contain
sufficient Hydrogen with a specific isotopic signature to have
contributed to the emergence of a major fraction of the water on the
Earth. This strengthens a big role for the enstatite bodies in the
origin of the Earth and its water. Nevertheless, the ocean compositions
are not exactly of the isotopic signature one would expect from a purely
enstatite origin. The authors of the said recent study admit this fact
and propose that carbonaceous chondrites of the Ivuna-type could have
supplied additional water after the initial formation of the Earth to
result in its current isotopic signature.

What are the implications of this for the origin of life? One
possibility is that the secondary delivery of water by carbonaceous
chondrites after the initial formation of the earth from enstatite-like
material could have also been the vehicle for the seedings of life. The
presence of preexisting water from the enstatite building blocks could
have provided for already congenial conditions for the seeded life to
take root and expand. Of course, an alternative possibility exists. Most
proposals do not see the Earth as arising purely from enstatite
chondrites. Additionally, the original mix is likely to have had some
kind of carbonaceous chondrites. They too could have seeded life.
Further, we cannot rule out the role of other rarer bodies involved in
the early collisions.
