---
title: CXLV

---
<div>

[←](144_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](146_sturdy.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/148_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/149_christina.htm)  
[«](144_mary.htm) Addressee [»](149_mary.htm)

## CXLV

*To Miss Mary Hale*

RIDGELY MANOR,  
*30th October, 1899*.

MY DEAR OPTIMIST,

I received your letter and am thankful that something has come to force
optimistic *laissez faire* into action. Your questions have tapped the
very source of pessimism, however. British rule in modern India has only
one redeeming feature, though unconscious; it has brought India out once
more on the stage of the world; it has forced upon it the contact of the
outside world. If it had been done with an eye to the good of the people
concerned, as circumstances favoured Japan with, the results could have
been more wonderful for India. No good can be done when the main idea is
blood-sucking. On the whole the old regime was better for the people, as
it *did not* take away everything they had, and there was some justice,
some liberty.

A few hundred, modernised, half-educated, and denationalised men are all
the show of modern English India — *nothing else*. The Hindus were 600
million in number according to Ferishta, the Mohammedan historian, in
the 12th century — now less than 200 million.

In spite of the centuries of anarchy that reigned during the struggles
of the English to conquer, the terrible massacre the English perpetrated
in 1857 and 1858, and the still more terrible famines that have become
the inevitable consequence of British rule (there never is a famine in a
native state) and that take off millions, there has been a good increase
of population, but not yet what it was when the country was entirely
independent — that is, before the Mohammedan rule. Indian labour and
produce can support five times as many people as there are now in India
with comfort, if the whole thing is not taken off from them.

This is the state of things — even education will no more be permitted
to spread; freedom of the press stopped already, (of course we have been
disarmed long ago), the bit of self-government granted to them for some
years is being quickly taken off. We are watching what next! For writing
a few words of innocent criticism, men are being hurried to
*transportation for life*, others imprisoned without *any trial*; and
nobody knows when his head will be off.

There has been a reign of terror in India for some years. English
soldiers are killing our men and outraging our women — only to be sent
home with passage and pension at our expense. We are in a *terrible*
gloom — where is the Lord? Mary, you can afford to be optimistic, can I?
Suppose you simply publish this letter — the law just passed in India
will allow the English Government in India to drag me from here to India
and kill me without trial. And I know all your Christian governments
will only rejoice, because we are heathens. Shall I also go to sleep and
become optimistic? Nero was the greatest optimistic person! They don't
think it worth while to write these terrible things as news items even!
If necessary, the news agent of *Reuter* gives the exactly opposite news
fabricated to order! Heathen-murdering is only a legitimate pastime for
the Christians! Your missionaries go to preach God and dare not speak a
word of truth for fear of the English, who will kick them out the next
day.

All property and lands granted by the previous governments for
supporting education have been swallowed up, and the present Government
spends even less than Russia in education. And what education?

The least show of originality is throttled. Mary, it is hopeless with
us, unless there really is a God who is the father of all, who is not
afraid of the strong to protect the weak, and who is not bribed by
wealth. Is there such a God? Time will show.

Well, I think I am coming to Chicago in a few weeks and talk of things
fully! Don't quote your authority.

With all love, ever your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. As for religious sects — the Brahmo Samaj, the Arya Samaj, and other
sects have been useless mixtures; they were only voices of apology to
our English masters to allow us to live! We have started a *new India —
a growth* — waiting to see what comes. We believe in new ideas only when
the nation wants them, and what will be true for us. The test of truth
for this Brahmo Samaj is "what our masters approve"; with us, what the
Indian reasoning and experience approves. The struggle has begun — not
between the Brahmo Samaj and us, for they are gone already, but a
harder, deeper, and more terrible one.

V.

</div>
