---
title: CLII

---
<div>

[←](151_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](153_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/151_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/153_mary.htm)  
[«](151_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee [»](154_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

921 W. 21ST STREET,  
LOS ANGELES,  
*27th December, 1899*.

BELOVED DHIRA MATA,

An eventful and happy New Year to you and many such returns!

I am much better in health — able enough to work once more. I have
started work already and have sent to Saradananda some money — Rs. 1,300
already — as expenses for the law suit. I shall send more, if they need
it. I had a very bad dream this morning and had not any news of
Saradananda for three weeks. Poor boys! How hard I am on them at times.
Well, they know, in spite of all that, I am their best friend.

Mr. Leggett has got a little over £500 I had with Sturdy on account of
*Raja-Yoga* and the Maharaja of Khetri. I have now about a thousand
dollars with Mr. Leggett. If I die, kindly send that money to my mother.
I wired to the boys three weeks ago that I was perfectly cured. If I
don't get any worse, this much health as I have now will do well enough.
Do not worry at all on my account; I am up and working with a will.

I am sorry I could not write any more of the stories. I have written
some other things and mean to write something almost every day.

I am very much more peaceful and find that the only way to keep my peace
is to teach others. Work is my only safety valve.

I only want some clear business head to take care of the details as I
push onwards and work on. I am afraid it will be a long time to find
such in India, and if there are any, they ought to be educated by
somebody from the West.

Again, I can only work when thrown completely on my own feet. I am at my
best when I am alone. Mother seems to arrange so. Joe believes great
things are brewing — in Mother's cup; hope it is so.

Joe and Margot have developed into actual prophets, it seems. I can only
say, every blow I had in this life, every pang, will only become joyful
sacrifice if Mother becomes propitious to India once more.

Miss Greenstidel writes a beautiful letter to me, about you most of it.
She thinks a lot about Turiyananda too. Give Turiyananda my love. I am
sure he will work well. He has the pluck and stamina.

I am going soon to work in California; when I leave I shall send for
Turiyananda and make him work on the Pacific coast. I am sure here is a
great field. The Raja-Yoga book seems to be very well known here. Miss
Greenstidel had found great peace under your roof and is very happy. I
am so glad it is so. May things go a little better with her every day.
She has a good business head and practical sense.

Joe has unearthed a magnetic healing woman. We are both under her
treatment. Joe thinks she is pulling me up splendidly. On her has been
worked a miracle, she claims. Whether it is magnetic healing, California
ozone, or the end of the present spell of bad Karma, I am improving. It
is a great thing to be able to walk three miles, even after a heavy
dinner.

All love and blessings to Olea. My love to Dr. Janes and other Boston
friends.

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
