---
title: CLIII

---
<div>

[←](152_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](154_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](152_dhira_mata.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/161_christina.htm)  
[«](149_mary.htm) Addressee [»](156_mary.htm)

## CLIII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

C/O MRS. BLODGETT,  
921, WEST 21ST ST.,  
LOS ANGELES,  
*27th December, 1899*.

MY DEAR MARY,

Merry Christmas and Happy New Year and many, many glorious returns of
such for your birthday. All these wishes, prayers, greetings in one
breath. I am cured, you will be glad to know. It was only indigestion
and no heart or kidney affection, quoth the healers; nothing more. And I
am walking three miles a day — after a heavy dinner.

Say — the person healing me insisted on my smoking! So I am having my
pipe nicely and am all the better for it. In plain English the
nervousness etc. was all due to dyspepsia and nothing more.

. . . I am at work too; working, working, not hard; but I don't care,
and I want to make money this time. Tell this to Margot, especially the
pipe business. You know who is healing me? No physician, no Christian
Science healer, but a magnetic healing woman who skins me every time she
treats me. Wonders — she performs operations by rubbing — internal
operations too, her patients tell me.

It is getting late in the night. I have to give up writing separate
letters to Margot, Harriet, Isabelle, and Mother Church. Wish is half
the work. They all know how I love them dearly, *passionately*; so you
become the medium for my spirit for the time, and carry them my New
Year's messages.

It is exactly like Northern Indian winter here, only some days a little
warmer; the roses are here and the beautiful palms. Barley is in the
fields, roses and many other flowers round about the cottage where I
live. Mrs. Blodgett, my host, is a Chicago lady — fat, old, and
extremely witty. She heard me in Chicago and is very motherly.

I am so sorry, the English have caught a Tartar in South Africa. A
soldier on duty outside a camp bawled out that he had caught a Tartar.
"Bring him in", was the order from inside the tent. "He will not come",
replied the sentry. "Then you come yourself", rang the order again. "He
will not let me come either". Hence the phrase "to catch a Tartar".
Don't you catch any.

I am happy just now and hope to remain so for all the rest of my life.
Just now I am Christian Science — no evil, and "love is a drawing card".

I shall be very happy if I can make a lot of money. I am making some.
Tell Margot, I am going to make a lot of money and go home by way of
Japan, Honolulu, China, and Java. This is a nice place to make money
quick in; and San Francisco is better, I hear. Has she made any?

You could not get the millionaire. Why don't you start for half or
one-fourth million? Something is better than nothing. We want money; he
may go into Lake Michigan, we have not the least objection. We had a bit
of an earthquake here the other day. I hope it has gone to Chicago and
raised Isabelle's mud-puddle up. It is getting late. I am yawning, so
here I quit.

Good-bye; all blessings, all love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
