---
title: CLV

---
<div>

[←](154_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](156_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/153_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](156_mary.htm)  
[«](154_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee [»](158_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLV

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

LOS ANGELES,  
*15th February, 1900*.

DEAR DHIRA MATA,

Before this reaches you, I am off to San Francisco. You already know all
about the work. I have not done much work, but my heart is growing
stronger every day, physically and mentally. Some days I feel I can bear
everything and suffer everything. There was nothing of note inside the
bundle of papers sent by Miss Müller. I did not write her, not knowing
her address. Then again, I am afraid.

I can always work better alone, and am physically and mentally best when
entirely alone! I scarcely had a day's illness during my eight years of
lone life away from my brethren. Now I am again getting up, being alone.
Strange, but that is what Mother wants me to be. "Wandering alone like
the rhinoceros", as Joe likes it. I think the conferences are ended.
Poor Turiyananda suffered so much and never let me know; he is so strong
and good. Poor Niranjan, I learn from Mrs. Sevier, is so seriously ill
in Calcutta that I don't know whether he has passed away or not. Well,
good and evil both love company; queer, they come in strings. I had a
letter from my cousin telling me her daughter (the adopted little child)
was dead. Suffering seems to be the lot of India! Good. I am getting
rather callous, rather stilted, of late. Good. Mother knows. I am so
ashamed of myself — of this display of weakness for the last two years!
Glad it is ended.

Ever your loving son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
