---
title: CLVII

---
<div>

[←](156_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](158_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/154_akhandananda.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/163_joe.htm)  
[«](156_mary.htm) Addressee [»](162_mary.htm)

## CLVII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

1251 PINE STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*2nd March, 1900*.

DEAR MARY,

Very kind of you to write to invite me to Chicago. I wish I could be
there this minute. But I am busy making money; only I do not make much.
Well, I have to make enough to pay my passage home at any rate. Here is
a new field, where I find ready listeners by hundreds, prepared
beforehand by my books.

Of course money making is slow and tedious. If I could make a few
hundreds, I would be only too glad. By this time you must have received
my previous note. I am coming eastward in a month or six weeks, I hope.

How are you all? Give Mother my heartfelt love. I wish I had her
strength, she is a true Christian. My health is much better, but the old
strength is not there yet. I hope it will come some day, but then, one
had to work so hard to do the least little thing. I wish I had rest and
peace for a few days at least, which I am sure I can get with the
sisters at Chicago. Well, Mother knows best, as I say always. She knows
best. The last two years have been specially bad. I have been living in
mental hell. It is partially lifted now, and I hope for better days,
better states. All blessings on you and the sisters and Mother. Mary,
you have been always the sweetest notes in my jarring and clashing life.
Then you had the great good Karma to start without oppressive
surroundings. I never know a moment's peaceful life. It has always been
high pressure, mentally. Lord bless you.

Ever your loving brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
