---
title: CLVIII

---
<div>

[←](157_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](159_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/155_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](159_dhira_mata.htm)  
[«](155_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee [»](159_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLVIII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

1502 JONES STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*4th March, 1900*.

DEAR DHIRA MATA,

I have not had a word from you for a month. I am in Frisco. The people
here have been prepared by my writing beforehand, and they come in big
crowds. But it remains to be seen how much of that enthusiasm endures
when it comes to paying at the door. Rev. Benjamin Fay Mills invited me
to Oakland and gave me big crowds to preach to. He and his wife have
been reading my works and keeping track of my movements all the time. I
sent the letter of introduction from Miss Thursby to Mrs. Hearst. She
has invited me to one of her musicals Sunday next.

My health is about the same; don't find much difference; it is
improving, perhaps, but very imperceptibly. I can use my voice, however,
to make 3,000 people hear me, as I did twice in Oakland, and get good
sleep too after two hours of speaking.

I learn Margot is with you. When are you sailing for France? I will
leave here in April and go to the East. I am very desirous of getting to
England in May if I can. Must not go home before trying England once
more.

I have nice letters from Brahmananda and Saradananda; they are all doing
well. They are trying to bring the municipality to its senses; I am
glad. In this world of Maya one need not injure, but "spread the hood,
without striking". That is enough.

Things must get round; if they don't, it is all right. I have a very
nice letter from Mrs. Sevier too. They are doing fine in the mountains.
How is Mrs. Vaughan? When is your conference to close? How is
Turiyananda?

With everlasting love and gratitude.

Your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
