---
title: CLXI

---
<div>

[←](160_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](162_mary.htm)

  

[«](160_joe.htm) Chronology [»](162_mary.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/160_brahmananda.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/117_rakhal.htm)

## CLXI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8466e8161.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

SAN FRANCISCO,  
*12th March, 1900*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I got a letter from you some time ago. A letter from Sharat reached me
yesterday. I saw a copy of the invitation letters for the birthday
anniversary of Gurudeva (Divine Master). I am frightened hearing that
Sharat is troubled by rheumatism. Alas, sickness, sorrow, and pain have
been my companions for the last two years. Tell Sharat that I am not
going to work so hard any more. But he who does not work enough to earn
his food will have to starve to death! . . . I hope Durgaprasanna has
done by this time whatever was necessary for the compound wall. . . .
The raising of a compound wall is not, after all, a difficult thing. If
I can, I shall build a small house there and serve my old grandmother
and mother. Evil actions leave none scot-free; Mother never spares
anybody. I admit my actions have been wrong. Now, brother, all of you
are Sâdhus and great saints, kindly pray to the Mother that I do not
have to shoulder all this trouble and burden any longer. Now I desire a
little peace — it seems there is no more strength left to bear the
burden of work and responsibility — rest and peace for the few days that
I shall yet live! Victory to the Guru! Victory to the Guru! . . . No
more lectures or anything of that sort. Peace!

As soon as Sharat sends the trust-deed of the Math, I shall put my
signature to it. You all manage — truly I require rest. This disease is
called neurasthenia, a disease of the nerves. Once it comes, it
continues for some years. But after a complete rest for three or four
years it is cured. This country is the home of the disease, and here it
has caught me. However, it is not only no fatal disease, but it makes a
man live long. Don't be anxious on my account. I shall go on rolling.
But there is only this sorrow that the work of Gurudeva is not
progressing; there is this regret that I have not been able to
accomplish anything of his work. How much I abuse you all and speak
harshly! I am the worst of men! Today, on the anniversary of his
birthday, put the dust of your feet on my head — and my mind will become
steady again. Victory to the Guru! Victory to the Guru! You are my only
refuge — you are my only refuge! Now that my mind is steady, let me tell
you that this resignation is the permanent attitude of my mind. All
other moods that come are, you should know, only disease. Please don't
allow me to work at all any longer. Now I shall quietly do Japa and
meditation for some time — nothing more. Mother knows all else. Victory
to the Mother of the Universe!

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
