---
title: CLXIV

---
<div>

[←](163_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](165_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/49_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/156_nivedita.htm)  
[«](162_mary.htm) Addressee [»](165_mary.htm)

## CLXIV

*To Miss Mary Hale*

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*22nd March, 1900*.

MY DEAR MARY,

Many thanks for your kind note. You are correct that I have many other
thoughts to think besides Indian people, but they have all to go to the
background before the all-absorbing mission — my Master's work.

I would that this sacrifice were pleasant. It is not, and naturally
makes one bitter at times; for know, Mary, I am yet a man and cannot
wholly forget myself; hope I shall some time. Pray for me.

Of course I am not to be held responsible for Miss MacLeod's or Miss
Noble's or anybody else's views regarding myself or anything else, am I?
You never found me smart under criticism.

I am glad you are going over to Europe for a long period. Make a long
tour, you have been long a house-dove.

As for me, I am tired on the other hand of eternal tramping; that is why
I want to go back home and be quiet. I do not want to work any more. My
nature is the retirement of a scholar. I never get it! I pray I will get
it, now that I am all broken and worked out. Whenever I get a letter
from Mrs. Sevier from her Himalayan home, I feel like flying off the
Himalayas. I am really sick of this platform work and eternal trudging
and seeing new faces and lecturing.

You need not bother about getting up classes in Chicago. I am getting
money in Frisco and will soon make enough for my passage home.

How are you and the sisters? I expect to come to Chicago some time
towards the first part of April.

Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
