---
title: CLXV

---
<div>

[←](164_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](166_haribhai.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/157_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/166_haribhai.htm)  
[«](164_mary.htm) Addressee [»](177_mary.htm)

## CLXV

*To Miss Mary Hale*

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*28th March, 1900*.

WELL BLESSED MARY,

This is to let you know "I am very happy". Not that I am getting into a
shadowy optimism, but my power of suffering is increasing. I am being
lifted up above the pestilential miasma of this world's joys and
sorrows; they are losing their meaning. It is a land of dreams; it does
not matter whether one enjoys or weeps; they are but dreams, and as
such, must break sooner or later. How are things going on with you folks
there? Harriet is going to have a good time at Paris. I am sure to meet
her over there and *parler français*! I am getting by heart a French
*dictionnaire*! I am making some money too; hard work morning and
evening; yet better for all that. Good sleep, good digestion, perfect
irregularity.

You are going to the East. I hope to come to Chicago before the end of
April. If I can't, I will surely meet you in the East before you go.

What are the McKindley girls doing? Eating grapefruit concoctions and
getting plump? Go on, life is but a dream. Are you not glad it is so?
My! They want an eternal heaven! Thank God, nothing is eternal except
Himself. He alone can bear it, I am sure. Eternity of nonsense!

Things are beginning to hum for me; they will presently roar. I shall
remain quiet though, all the same. Things are not humming for you just
now. I am so sorry, that is, I am trying to be, for I cannot be sorry
for anything and more. I am attaining peace that passeth understanding,
which is neither joy nor sorrow, but something above them both. Tell
Mother that. My passing through the valley of death, physical, mental,
last two years, has helped me in this. Now I am nearing that *Peace*,
the eternal silence. Now I mean to see things as they are, everything in
that peace, perfect in its way. "He whose joy is only in himself, whose
desires are only in himself, he has *learned* his lessons." This is the
great lesson that we are here to learn through myriads of births and
heavens and hells — that there is nothing to be asked for, desired for,
beyond one's Self. "The greatest thing I can obtain is my Self." "I am
free", therefore I require none else for my happiness. "Alone through
eternity, because I was free, am free, and will remain free for ever."
This is Vedantism. I preached the theory so long, but oh, joy! Mary, my
dear sister, I am realising it now every day. Yes, I am — "I am free."
"Alone, alone, I am the one without a second."

Ever yours in the Sat-Chit-Ânanda,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Now I am going to be truly Vivekananda. Did you ever enjoy evil! Ha!
ha! you silly girl, all is good! Nonsense. Some good, some evil. I enjoy
the good and I enjoy the evil. I was Jesus and I was Judas Iscariot;
both my play, my fun. "So long as there are two, fear shall not leave
thee." Ostrich method? Hide your heads in the sand and think there is
nobody seeing you! All is good! Be brave and face everything — come
good, come evil, both welcome, both of you my play. I have no good to
attain, no ideal to clench up to, no ambition to fulfil; I, the diamond
mine, am playing with pebbles, good and evil; good for you — evil, come;
good for you-good, you come too. If the universe tumbles round my ears,
what is that to me? I am Peace that passeth understanding; understanding
only gives us good or evil. I am beyond, I am peace.

V.

</div>
