---
title: CLXIX

---
<div>

[←](168_haribhai.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](170_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](168_haribhai.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/170_dhira_mata.htm)  
[«](167_joe.htm) Addressee [»](174_joe.htm)

## CLXIX

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO, CALIF.  
*April, 1900*.

MY DEAR JOE,

Just a line before you start for France. Are you going via England? I
had a beautiful letter from Mrs. Sevier in which I find that Miss Müller
sent simply a paper without any other words to Kali who was with her in
Darjeeling.

Congreave is the name of her nephew, and he is in the Transvaal war;
that is the reason she underlined that, to show her nephew fighting the
Boers in Transvaal. That was all. I cannot understand it any more now
than then, of course.

I am physically worse than at Los Angeles, mentally much better,
stronger, and peaceful. Hope it will continue to be so.

I have not got a reply to my letter to you; I expect it soon.

One Indian letter of mine was directed by mistake to Mrs. Wheeler; it
came all right to me in the end. I had nice notes from Saradananda; they
are doing beautifully over there. The boys are working up; well,
scolding has both sides, you see; it makes them up and doing. We Indians
have been so dependent for so long that it requires, I am sorry, a good
lot of tongue to make them active. One of the laziest fellows had taken
charge of the anniversary this year and pulled it through. They have
planned and are successfully working famine works by themselves without
my help. . . . All this comes from the terrific scolding I have been
giving, sure!

They are standing on their own feet. I am so glad. See Joe, the Mother
is working.

I sent Miss Thursby's letter to Mrs. Hearst. She sent me an invitation
to her musical. I could not go. I had a bad cold. So that was all.
Another lady for whom I had a letter from Miss Thursby, an Oakland lady,
did not reply. I don't know whether I shall make enough in Frisco to pay
my fare to Chicago! Oakland work has been successful. I hope to get
about $100 from Oakland, that is all. After all, I am content. It is
better that I tried. . . . Even the magnetic healer had not anything for
me. Well, things will go on anyhow for me; I do not care how. . . . I am
very peaceful. I learn from Los Angeles, Mrs. Leggett has been bad
again. I wired to New York to learn what truth was in it. I will get a
reply soon, I expect.

Say, how will you arrange about my mail when the Leggetts are over on
the other side? Will you so arrange that they reach me right?

I have nothing more to say; all love and gratitude is yours; already you
know that. You have already done more than I ever deserved. I don't know
whether I go to Paris or not, but I must go to England sure in May. I
must not go home without trying England a few weeks more. With all
love, 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Mrs. Hansborough and Mrs. Appenul have taken a flat for a month at
1719 Turk Street. I am with them, and shall be a few weeks.

V.

</div>
