---
title: CLXXIV

---
<div>

[←](173_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](175_american_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/165_sister_christine.htm)
Chronology [»](175_american_friend.htm)  
[«](169_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/158_joe.htm)

## CLXXIV

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*10th April, 1900*.

DEAR JOE,

There is a squabble in New York, I see. I got a letter from A\_\_
stating that he was going to leave New York. He thought Mrs. Bull and
you have written lots against him to me. I wrote him back to be patient
and wait, and that Mrs. Bull and Miss MacLeod wrote only good things
about him.

Well, Joe Joe, you know my method in all these rows; to leave all rows
alone! "Mother" sees to all such things. I have finished my work. I am
retired, Joe. "Mother" will work now Herself. That is all.

Now, as you say, I am going to send all the money I have made here. I
could do it today, but I am waiting to make it a thousand. I expect to
make a thousand in Frisco by the end of this week. I will buy a draft on
New York and send it or ask the bank the best way to do it.

I have plenty of letters from the Math and the Himalayan centre. This
morning came one from Swarupananda. Yesterday one from Mrs. Sevier.

I told Mrs. Hansborough about the photos.

You tell Mr. Leggett from me to do what is best about the Vedanta
Society matter. The only thing I see is that in every country we have to
follow its own method. As such, if I were you, I would convene a meeting
of all the members and sympathisers and ask them what they want to do.
Whether they want to organise or not, what sort of organisation they
want if any, etc. But Lordy, do it on your own hook. I am quits. Only if
you think my presence would be of any help I can come in fifteen days.

I have finished my work here; only, out of San Francisco, Stockton is a
little city I want to work a few days in; then I go East. I think I
should rest now, although I can have $100 a week average in this city,
all along. This time I want to let upon New York the charge of the Light
Brigade.

With all love,

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. If the workers are all averse to organising, do you think there is
any benefit in it? You know best. Do what you think best. I have a
letter from Margot from Chicago. She asks some questions; I am going to
reply.

V.

</div>
