---
title: CLXXV

---
<div>

[←](174_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](176_joe.htm)

  

[«](174_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/51_mr_leggett.htm)

## CLXXV

*To an American friend*

ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA,  
*12th April, 1900*.

Mother is becoming propitious once more. Things are looking up. They
must.

Work always brings evil with it. I have paid for the accumulated evil
with bad health. I am glad. My mind is all the better for it. There is a
mellowness and a calmness in life now, which was never there before. I
am learning now how to be detached as well as attached, and mentally
becoming my own master. . . .

Mother is doing Her own work; I do not worry much now. Moths like me die
by the thousand every instant. Her work goes on all the same. Glory unto
Mother! . . . Alone and drifting about in the will-current of the Mother
has been my whole life. The moment I have tried to break this, that
moment I have been hurt. Her will be done! . . .

I am happy, at peace with myself, and more of the Sannyasin than I ever
was before. The love for my own kith and kin is growing less every day,
and that for Mother increasing. Memories of long nights of vigil with
Shri Ramakrishna under the Dakshineswar Banyan are waking up once more.
And work? What is work? Whose work? Whom shall I work for?

I am free. I am Mother's child. She works, She plays. Why should I plan?
What should I plan? Things came and went, just as She liked, without my
planning. We are Her automata. She is the wirepuller.

</div>
