---
title: CLXXVI

---
<div>

[←](175_american_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) /  [→](177_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/158_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](177_mary.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/158_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](185_joe.htm)

## CLXXVI

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA,  
*20th April, 1900*.

MY DEAR JOE,

Received your note today. I wrote you one yesterday but directed it to
England thinking you will be there.

I have given your message to Mrs. Betts. I am so sorry this little
quarrel came with A\_\_. I got also his letter you sent. He is correct
so far as he says, "Swami wrote me 'Mr. Leggett is not interested in
Vedanta and will not help any more. You stand on your own feet.'" It was
as you and Mrs. Leggett desired me to write him from Los Angeles about
New York — in reply to his asking me what to do for funds.

Well, things will take their own shape, but it seems in Mrs. Bull's and
your mind there is some idea that I ought to do something. But in the
first place I do not know anything about the difficulties. None of you
write me anything about what that is for, and I am no thought-reader.
You simply wrote me a general idea that A\_\_ wanted to keep things in
his hands. What can I understand from it? What are the difficulties?
Regarding what the differences are about, I am as much in the dark as
about the exact date of the Day of Destruction! And yet Mrs. Bull's and
your letters show quite an amount of vexation! These things get
complicated sometimes, in spite of ourselves. Let them take their shape.

I have executed and sent the will to Mr. Leggett as desired by Mrs.
Bull.

I am going on, sometimes well and at other times ill. I cannot say, on
my conscience, that I have been the least benefited by Mrs. Milton. She
has been good to me, I am very thankful. My love to her. Hope she will
benefit others.

For writing to Mrs. Bull this fact, I got a four page sermon, as to how
I ought to be grateful and thankful, etc., etc. All that is, sure, the
outcome of this A\_\_ business! Sturdy and Mrs. Johnson got disturbed by
Margot, and they fell upon me. Now A\_\_ disturbs Mrs. Bull and, of
course, I have to bear the brunt of it. Such is life!

You and Mrs. Leggett wanted me to write him to be free and independent
and that Mr. Leggett was not going to help them. I wrote it — now what
can I do? If John or Jack does not obey you, am I to be hanged for it?
What do I know about this Vedanta Society? Did I start it? Had I any
hand in it? Then again, nobody condescends to write me anything about
what the affair is! Well, this world is a great fun.

I am glad Mrs. Leggett is recovering fast. I pray every moment for her
complete recovery. I start for Chicago on Monday. A kind lady has given
me a pass up to New York to be used within three months. The Mother will
take care of me. She is not going to strand me now after guarding me all
my life.

Ever yours gratefully,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
