---
title: CLXXXII

---
<div>

[←](181_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](183_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/159_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/174_christina.htm)  
[«](181_mary.htm) Addressee [»](183_sister.htm)

## CLXXXII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

VEDANTA SOCIETY,  
146 E. 55TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*23rd June, 1900*.

MY DEAR MARY,

Many, many thanks for your beautiful letter. I am very well and happy
and same as ever. Waves must come before a rise. So with me. I am very
glad you are going to pray. Why don't you get up a Methodist
camp-meeting? That will have quicker effect, I am sure.

I am determined to get rid of all sentimentalism, and emotionalism, and
hang me if you ever find me emotional. I am the Advaitist; our goal is
*knowledge* — no feelings, no love, as all that belongs to matter and
superstition and bondage. I am only existence and knowledge.

Greenacre will give you good rest. I am sure. I wish you all joy there.
Don't for a moment worry on my account. "Mother" looks after me. She is
bringing me fast out of the hell of emotionalism, and bringing me into
the light of pure reason. With everlasting wishes for your happiness,

Ever your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Margot starts on the 26th. I may follow in a week or two. Nobody has
any power over me, for I am the spirit. I have no ambition; it is all
Mother's work; I have no part.

V.

I could not digest your letter as the dyspepsia was rather bad last few
days.

V.

Non-attachment has always been there. It has come in a minute. Very soon
I stand where no sentiment, no feeling, can touch me.

V.

</div>
