---
title: CXCIII

---
<div>

[←](192_hari.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](194_mademoiselle.htm)

  

[«](192_hari.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/163_mother.htm)  
[«](192_hari.htm) Addressee

## CXCIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8508e8193.pdf)* )

*To Swami Turiyananda*

6 PLACE DES ETATS UNIS,  
*September, 1900*.

MY DEAR TURIYANANDA,

Just now I received your letter. Through Mother's will all work will go
on; don't be afraid. I shall soon leave for some other place. Perhaps I
shall be on a tour of Constantinople and other places for some time.
Mother knows what will come next. I have received a letter from Mrs.
Wilmot. From this, too, it appears that she is very enthusiastic. Sit
firm and free from worries. Everything will be all right. If hearing the
Nada etc. does anyone harm, he can get rid of it if he gives up
meditation for a time and takes to fish and meat. If the body does not
become progressively weak, there is no cause for alarm. Practice should
be slow.

I shall leave this place before your reply comes. So do not send the
reply to this letter here. I have received all the issues of Sarada's
paper, and wrote to him lots a few weeks ago. I have a mind to send more
later on. There is no knowing where my next stop will be. This much I
can say that I am trying to be free from care.

I received a letter from Kali, too, today. I shall send him a reply
tomorrow. The body is somehow rolling on. Work makes it ill, and rest
keeps it well — that is all. Mother knows. Nivedita has gone to England.
She and Mrs. Bull are collecting funds. She has a mind to run a school
at Kishengarh with the girls she had there. Let her do what she can. I
do not intervene any more in any matter — that is all.

My love to you. But I have nothing more to advise as regards work.

Yours in service,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
