---
title: XI

---
<div>

[←](010_haripada.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](012_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](010_haripada.htm) Chronology
[»](../../unpublished/i_your_highness.htm)  
Addressee [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/003_alasinga.htm)

## XI

*To Shri Alasinga Perumal*

C/o Babu Madhusudan Chattopadhyaya  
Superintending Engineer  
KHARTABAD, HYDERABAD,  
*11th February, 1893*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

Your friend, the young graduate, came to receive me at the station, so
also a Bengali gentleman. At present I am living with the Bengali
gentleman; tomorrow I go to live with your young friend for a few days,
and then I see the different sights here, and in a few days you may
expect me at Madras. For I am very sorry to tell you that I cannot go
back at present to Rajputana. It is so very dreadfully hot here already.
I do not know how hot it would be at Rajputana, and I cannot bear heat
at all. So the next thing, I would do, would be to go back to Bangalore
and then to Ootacamund to pass the summer there. My brain boils in heat.

So all my plans have been dashed to the ground. That is why I wanted to
hurry off from Madras early. In that case I would have months left in my
hands to seek out for somebody amongst our northern princes to send me
over to America. But alas, it is now too late. First, I cannot wander
about in this heat — I would die. Secondly, my fast friends in Rajputana
would keep me bound down to their sides if they get hold of me and would
not let me go over to Europe. So my plan was to get hold of some new
person without my friends' knowledge. But this delay at Madras has
dashed all my hopes to the ground, and with a deep sigh I give it up,
and the Lord's will be done! However, you may be almost sure that I
shall see you in a few days for a day or two in Madras and then go to
Bangalore and thence to Ootacamund to see "if" the M—Maharaja sends me
up. "If" — because you see I cannot be sure of any promise of a Dakshini
(southern) Raja. They are not Rajputs. A Rajput would rather die than
break his promise. However, man learns as he lives, and experience is
the greatest teacher in the world.

"Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, for Thine is the glory
and the kingdom for ever and ever." My compliments to you all.

Yours etc.,  
SACHCHIDANANDA.  
(Swamiji used to call himself such in those days.)

</div>
