---
title: XII

---
<div>

[←](011_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](013_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/038_doctor.htm) Chronology
[»](013_diwanji_saheb.htm)  
[«](009_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](013_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## XII

*To Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai*

KHETRI  
*28th April, 1893*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB,

On my way here, I wanted to go to your place at Nadiad and redeem my
pledge, but certain circumstances prevented me, and the greatest of them
was that you were not there; and to play Hamlet leaving Hamlet's part
out is a ridiculous affair; and as I know for certain that you are to
return in a few days to Nadiad, and as I am shortly going back to
Bombay, say in 20 days, I thought it better to postpone my visit for
that time.

Here the Khetri Rajaji was very, very anxious to see me and had sent his
Private Secretary to Madras; and so I was bound to leave for Khetri. But
the heat is quite intolerable, and so I am flying off very soon.

By and by, I have made the acquaintances of nearly all the Dakshini
Rajas and have seen most queer sights in many places of which I would
tell you *in extenso* when we meet next. I know your love for me and am
sure that you would excuse my not going down to your place. However, I
am coming to you in a few days.

One thing more. Have you got lion's cubs now in Junagad? Can you lend me
one for my Raja? He can give you some Rajputana animals in exchange, if
you like.

I saw Ratilalbhai in the train. He is the same nice and kind gentleman;
and what more shall I wish for you, my dear Diwanji Saheb, but that the
Lord would be your all in all in your well-merited, well-applauded and
universally respected latter end of a life which was ever holy, good,
and devoted to the service of so many of the sons and daughters of the
great Father of Mercies. Amen!

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
