---
title: XIX

---
<div>

[←](018_sister_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](020_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/15_brother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/015_mother.htm)  
[«](017_babies.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)  
[«](018_sister_mary.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)  
[«](017_babies.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)  
[«](018_sister_mary.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)

## XIX

*To Miss Mary Hale*

DETROIT,  
*30th March, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER,

Your and Mother Church's letters came together just now, acknowledging
the receipt of the money. I am very glad to receive the Khetri letter,
which I send back for your perusal. You would find from it that he wants
some newspaper clippings. I do not think I have any except the Detroit
one, which I will send to him. If you can get hold of some others,
kindly send some over to him if it be possible and convenient. You know
his address — H. H. the Maharajah of Khetri, Rajputana, India. Of
course, this letter is for the perusal of the holy family alone. Mrs.
Breed wrote to me a stiff burning letter first, and then today I got a
telegram from her inviting me to be her guest for a week. Before this I
got a letter from Mrs. Smith of New York writing on her behalf and
another lady Miss Helen Gould and another Dr.\_\_ to come over to New
York. As the Lynn Club wants me on the 17th of next month, I am going to
New York first and come in time for their meeting at Lynn.

Next summer, if I do not go away, which Mrs. Bagley insists I should
not, I may go to Annisquam where Mrs. Bagley has engaged a nice house.
Mrs. Bagley is a very spiritual lady, and Mr. Palmer a spirituous
gentleman but very good. What shall I write more? I am all right in nice
health of body and mind. May you all be blessed, ever blessed, my dear,
dear sisters. By the by, Mrs. Sherman has presented me with a lot of
things amongst which is a nail set and letter holder and a little
satchel etc., etc. Although I objected, especially to the nail set, as
very dudish with mother-of-pearl handles, she insisted and I had to take
them, although I do not know what to do with that brushing instrument.
Lord bless them all. She gave me one advice — never to wear this Afrikee
dress in society. Now I am a society man! Lord! What comes next? Long
life brings queer experiences! My inexpressible love for you all, my
holy family. 

Your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
