---
title: XX

---
<div>

[←](019_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](021_dear.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/22_adhyapakji.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_4/writings_prose/our_duty_to_the_masses.htm)  
[«](015_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](029_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## XX

*To Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai*

CHICAGO,  
*20th June, 1894*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB,

Your very kind note came today. I am so sorry that I could have caused
pain to such a noble heart as yours with my rash and strong words. I bow
down to your mild corrections. "Thy son am I, teach me thus bowing" —
Gita. But you well know, Diwanji Saheb, it was my love that prompted me
to say so. The backbiters, I must tell you, have not indirectly
benefited me; on the other hand, they have injured me immensely in view
of the fact that our Hindu people did not move a finger to tell the
Americans that I represented them. Had our people sent some words
thanking the American people for their kindness to me and stating that I
was representing them! . . . have been telling the American people that
I have donned the Sannyasin's garb only in America and that I was a
cheat, bare and simple. So far as reception goes, it has no effect on
the American nation; but so far as helping me with funds goes, it has a
terrible effect in making them take off their helping hands from me. And
it is one year since I have been here, and not one man of note from
India has thought it fit to make the Americans know that I am no
*cheat*. There again the missionaries are always seeking for something
against me, and they are busy picking up anything said against me by the
Christian papers of India and publishing it here. Now you must know that
the people here know very little of the distinction in India between the
Christian and the Hindu.

Primarily my coming has been to raise funds for an enterprise of my own.
Let me tell it all to you again.

The whole difference between the West and the East is in this: They are
nations, we are not, i.e., civilisation, education here is general, it
penetrates into the masses. The higher classes in India and America are
the same, but the distance is infinite between the lower classes of the
two countries. Why was it so easy for the English to conquer India? It
was because they are a nation, we are not. When one of our great men
dies, we must sit for centuries to have another; they can produce them
as fast as they die. When our Diwanji Saheb will pass away (which the
Lord may delay long for the good of my country), the nation will see the
difficulty at once of filling his place, which is seen even now in the
fact that they cannot dispense with your services. It is the dearth of
great ones. Why so? Because they have such a bigger field of recruiting
their great ones, we have so small. A nation of 300 millions has the
smallest field of recruiting its great ones compared with nations of
thirty, forty, or sixty millions, because the number of educated men and
women in those nations is so great. Now do not mistake me, my kind
friend, this is the great defect in our nation and must be removed.

Educate and raise the masses, and thus alone a nation is possible. Our
reformers do not see where the wound is, they want to save the nation by
marrying the widows; do you think that a nation is saved by the number
of husbands its widows get? Nor is our religion to blame, for an idol
more or less makes no difference. The whole defect is here: The real
nation who live in cottage have forgotten their manhood, their
individuality. Trodden under the foot of the Hindu, Mussulman, or
Christian, they have come to think that they are born to be trodden
under the foot of everybody who has money enough in his pocket. They are
to be given back their lost individuality. They are to be educated.
Whether idols will remain or not, whether widows will have husbands
enough or not, whether caste is good or bad, I do not bother myself with
such questions. Everyone must work out his own salvation. Our duty is to
put the chemicals together, the crystallisation will come through God's
laws. Let us put ideas into their heads, and they will do the rest. Now
this means educating the masses. Here are these difficulties. A pauper
government cannot, will not, do anything; so no help from that quarter.

Even supposing we are in a position to open schools in each village
free, still the poor boys would rather go to the plough to earn their
living than come to your school. Neither have we the money, nor can we
make them come to education. The problem seems hopeless. I have found a
way out. It is this. If the mountain does not come to Mohammed, Mohammed
must go to the mountain. If the poor cannot come to education, education
must reach them at the plough, in the factory, everywhere. How? You have
seen my brethren. Now I can get hundreds of such, all over India,
unselfish, good, and educated. Let these men go from village to village
bringing not only religion to the door of everyone but also education.
So I have a nucleus of organising the widows also as instructors to our
women.

Now suppose the villagers after their day's work have come to their
village and sitting under a tree or somewhere are smoking and talking
the time away. Suppose two of these educated Sannyasins get hold of them
there and with a camera throw astronomical or other pictures, scenes
from different nations, histories, etc. Thus with globes, maps, etc. —
and all this orally — how much can be done that way, Diwanji? It is not
that the eye is the only door of knowledge, the ear can do all the same.
So they would have ideas and morality, and hope for better. Here our
work ends. Let them do the rest. What would make the Sannyasins do this
sacrifice, undertake such a task? — religious enthusiasm. Every new
religious wave requires a new centre. The old religion can only be
revivified by a new centre. Hang your dogmas or doctrines, they never
pay. It is a character, a life, a centre, a God-man that must lead the
way, that must be the centre round which all other elements will gather
themselves and then fall like a tidal wave upon the society, carrying
all before it, washing away all impurities. Again, a piece of wood can
only easily be cut along the grain. So the old Hinduism can only be
reformed through Hinduism, and not through the new-fangled reform
movements. At the same time the reformers must be able to unite in
themselves the culture of both the East and the West. Now do you not
think that you have already seen the nucleus of such a great movement,
that you have heard the low rumblings of the coming tidal wave? That
centre, that God-man to lead was born in India. He was the great
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, and round him this band is slowly gathering.
They will do the work. Now, Diwanji Maharaj, this requires an
organisation, money — a little at least to set the wheel in motion. Who
would have given us money in India? — So, Diwanji Maharaj, I crossed
over to America. You may remember I begged all the money from the poor,
and the offers of the rich I would not accept because they could not
understand my ideas. Now lecturing for a year in this country, I could
not succeed at all (of course, I have no wants for myself) in my plan
for raising some funds for setting up my work. First, this year is a
very bad year in America; thousands of their poor are without work.
Secondly, the missionaries and the Brahmo Samajists try to thwart all my
views. Thirdly, a year has rolled by, and our countrymen could not even
do so much for me as to say to the American people that I was a real
Sannyasin and no cheat, and that I represented the Hindu religion. Even
this much, the expenditure of a few words, they could not do! Bravo, my
countrymen! I love them, Diwanji Saheb. Human help I spurn with my foot.
He who has been with me through hills and dales, through deserts or
forests, will be with me, I hope; if not, some heroic soul would arise
some time or other in India, far abler than myself, and carry it out. So
I have told you all about it. Diwanji, excuse my long letter, my noble
friend, one of the few who really feel for me, have real kindness for
me. You are at liberty, my friend, to think that I am a dreamer, a
visionary; but believe at least that I am sincere to the backbone, and
my greatest fault is that I love my country only too, too well. May you
and yours be blessed ever and ever, my noble, noble friend. May the
shadow of the Almighty ever rest on all those you love. I offer my
eternal gratitude to you. My debt to you is immense, not only because
you are my friend, but also because you have all your life served the
Lord and your motherland so well. 

Ever yours in gratitude,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
