---
title: XXI

---
<div>

[←](020_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](022_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/022_mother.htm)

## XXI

*To a Madras disciple*

541 DEARBORN AVE.,  
CHICAGO,  
*28 June, 1894*.

DEAR\_\_ ,

The other day I received a letter from G. G., Mysore. G. G.
unfortunately thinks that I am all-knowing, else he would have written
his Canarese address on the top of the letter more legibly. Then again
it is a great mistake to address me letters to any other place but
Chicago. It was my mistake of course at first, because I ought to have
thought of the fine Buddhi (intellect) of our friends who are throwing
letters at me anywhere they find an address at the top. But tell our
Madras Brihaspatis (i.e. wise fellows) that they already knew full well
that before their letters reach, I may be 1000 miles away from that
particular place, for I am continuously travelling. In Chicago there is
a friend whose house is my headquarters.

Now as to my prospects here — it is well-nigh zero. Why, because
although I had the best purpose, it has been made null and void by these
causes. All that I get about India is from Madras letters. Your letters
say again and again how I am being praised in India. But that is between
you and me, for I never saw a single Indian paper writing about me,
except the three square inches sent to me by Alasinga. On the other
hand, everything that is said by Christians in India is sedulously
gathered by the missionaries and regularly published, and they go from
door to door to make my friends give me up. They have succeeded only too
well, for there is not one word for me from India. Indian Hindu papers
may laud me to the skies, but not a word of that ever came to America,
so that many people in this country think me a fraud. In the face of the
missionaries and with the jealousy of the Hindus here to back them, I
have not a word to say.

I now think it was foolish of me to go to the Parliament on the strength
of the urging of the Madras boys. They are boys after all. Of course, I
am eternally obliged to them, but they are after all enthusiastic young
men without any executive abilities. I came here without credentials.
How else to show that I am not a fraud in the face of the missionaries
and the Brahmo Samaj? Now I thought nothing so easy as to spend a few
words; I thought nothing would be so easy as to hold a meeting of some
respectable persons in Madras and Calcutta and pass a resolution
thanking me and the American people for being kind to me and sending it
over officially, i.e. through the Secretary of the function, to America,
for instance, sending one to Dr. Barrows and asking him to publish it in
the papers and so on, to different papers of Boston, New York, and
Chicago. Now after all, I found that it is too terrible a task for India
to undertake. There has not been one voice for me in one year and every
one against me, for whatever you may say of me in your homes, who knows
anything of it here? More than two months ago I wrote to Alasinga about
this. He did not even answer my letter. I am afraid his heart has grown
lukewarm. So you must first think of that and then show this letter to
the Madras people. On the other hand, my brethren foolishly talk
nonsense about Keshab Sen; and the Madrasis, telling the Theosophists
anything I write about them, are creating only enemies. . . . Oh! If
only I had one man of some true abilities and brains to back me in
India! But His will be done. I stand a fraud in this country. It was my
foolishness to go to the Parliament without any credentials, hoping that
there would be many for me. I have got to work it out slowly.

On the whole, the Americans are a million times nobler than the Hindus,
and I can work more good here than in the country of the ingrate and the
heartless. After all, I must work my Karma out. So far as pecuniary
circumstances go I am all right and will be all right. The number of
Theosophists in all America is only 625 by the last census. Mixing up
with them will smash me in a minute rather than help me in any way. What
nonsense does Alasinga mean by my going to London to see Mr. Old etc.
Fool! the boys there don't know what they are talking. And this pack of
Madras babies cannot even keep a counsel in their blessed noodles! Talk
nonsense all day, and when it comes to the least business, they are
nowhere! Boobies, who cannot get up a few meetings of 50 men each and
send up a few empty *words* only to help me, talk big about influencing
the world. I have written to you about the phonograph. Now there is here
an electric fan costing $20 and working beautifully. The battery works
100 hours and then can be replenished at any electric plant. Good-bye, I
have had enough of the Hindus. Now His will be done, I obey and bow down
to my Karma. However, do not think me ungrateful. . . . The Madras
people have done for me more than I deserved and more than was in their
power. It was my foolishness — the forgetting for a moment that we
Hindus have not yet become human beings and giving up for a moment my
self-reliance and relying upon the Hindus — that I came to grief. Every
moment I expected something from India. No, it never came. Last two
months especially I was in torture at every moment. No, not even a
newspaper from India! My friends waited — waited month after month;
nothing came, not a voice. Many consequently grew cold and at last gave
me up. But it is the punishment for relying upon man and upon brutes,
for our countrymen are not men as yet. They are ready to be praised, but
when their turn comes even to say a word, they are nowhere.

My thanks eternal to the Madras young men. May the Lord bless them for
ever. America is the best field in the world to carry on my idea; so I
do not think of leaving America soon. And why? Here I have food and
drink and clothes, and everybody so kind, and all this for a few good
words! Why should I give up such a noble nation to go to the land of
brutes and ingrates and the brainless boobies held in eternal thraldom
of superstitious, merciless, pitiless wretches? So good-bye again. You
may show this letter to the people with discretion, even Alasinga upon
whom I built so much. By the by, will you kindly send up a few copies of
the sketch of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa's life written by Mazumdar to
Chicago? They have lots in Calcutta. Don't forget the address 541
Dearborn Avenue (not Street), Chicago, or c/o Thomas Cook, Chicago. Any
other address would cause much delay and confusion, as I am continually
travelling, and Chicago is my headquarters, although even this much did
not come to the brains of our Madras friends. Kindly give G. G.,
Alasinga, Secretary, and all others my eternal blessings. I am always
praying for their welfare, and I am not in the least displeased with
them, but I am not pleased with myself. I committed a terrible error —
of calculating upon others' help  — once in my life — and I have paid
for it. It was my fault and not theirs. Lord bless all the Madras
people. They are at least far superior to the Bengalis, who are simply
fools and have no souls, no stamina at all. Good-bye, good-bye. I have
launched my boat in the waves, come what may. Regarding my brutal
criticisms, I have really no right to make them. You have done for me
infinitely more than I deserve. I must bear my own Karma, and that
without a murmur. Lord bless you all.

Yours truly,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. I am afraid Alasinga's college has closed, but I have no intimation
of it, and he never gave me his home address. Kidi has dropped out, I am
afraid.

V.

</div>
