---
title: XXII

---
<div>

[←](021_dear.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](023_sisters.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/023_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](023_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/023_mother.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/024_mother.htm)

## XXII

*To Mrs. George W. Hale*

C/O Dr. E. Guernsey,  
FISHKILL LANDING, N.Y.,  
*July, 1894*.

DEAR MOTHER,

I came yesterday to this place, and shall remain here a few days. I
received in New York a letter from you but did not receive any
*Interior*, for which I am glad, because I am not perfect yet, and
knowing the "unselfish love" the Presbyterian priests, especially the
*Interior* has for "me", I want to keep aloof from rousing bad feelings
towards these "sweet Christian gentlemen" in my heart. Our religion
teaches that anger is a great sin, even if it is "righteous". Each must
follow his own religion. I could not for my soul distinguish ever the
distinction between "religious anger" and "commonplace anger",
"religious killing" and "commonplace killing", "religious slandering and
irreligious", and so forth. Nor may that "fine" ethical distinction ever
enter into the ethics of our nation! Jesting apart, Mother Church, I do
not care the least for the gambols these men play, seeing as I do
through and through the insincerity, the hypocrisy, and love of self and
name that is the *only motive power* in these men.

As to the photographs, the first time the Babies got a few copies, and
the second time you brought a few copies; you know they are to give 50
copies in all. Sister Isabelle knows better than I.

With my sincerest love and respects for you and Father Pope.

I remain,  
Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. How are you enjoying the heat? I am bearing the heat very well here.
I had an invitation to Swampscott on the sea from a very rich lady whose
acquaintance I made last winter in New York, but I declined with thanks.
I am very careful not to take the hospitality of anybody here,
especially the rich. I had a few other invitations from some very rich
people here. I refused; I have by this time seen the whole business
through. Lord bless you and yours, Mother Church, for your sincerity.
Oh! it is so rare in this world.

Yours affectionately,  
V.

</div>
