---
title: XXXII

---
<div>

[←](031_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](033_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](031_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/043_mother.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Both Sisters [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](028_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](035_sister.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](028_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](035_sister.htm)

## XXXII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

C/O MRS. E. TOTTEN,  
1703, 1ST STREET,  
WASHINGTON,  
\[*November 1*(?), *1894*\]

DEAR SISTER,

I have received two letters which you were very kind to take the trouble
to write. I am going to talk here today, tomorrow at Baltimore, then
again Monday at Baltimore, and Tuesday at Washington again. So I will be
in Philadelphia a few days after that. I shall write to you the day I
start from Washington. I shall be in Philadelphia a few days only to see
Prof. Wright, and then I go to New York and run for a little while
between New York and Boston, and then go to Chicago via Detroit; and
then "whist" . . ., as Senator Palmer says, to England.

The word "Dharma" means religion. I am very sorry they treated Petro
very badly in Calcutta. I have been very well treated here and am doing
very well. Nothing extraordinary in the meantime except I got vexed at
getting loads of newspapers from India; so after sending a cart-load to
Mother Church and another to Mrs. Guernsey, I had to write them to stop
sending their newspapers. I have had "boom" enough in India. Alasinga
writes that every village all over the country now has heard of me.
Well, the old peace is gone for ever and no rest anywhere from
heretofore. These newspapers of India will be my death, I am sure. They
will now talk what I ate on such and such a date and how I sneezed. Lord
bless them, it was all my foolery. I really came here to raise a little
money secretly and go over but was caught in the trap and now no more of
a reserved life.

Wishing you all enjoyments, 

I remain, yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
