---
title: XXXIII

---
<div>

[←](032_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](034_diwanji.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/043_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](034_diwanji.htm)  
[«](030_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](034_diwanji.htm)

## XXXIII

CHICAGO,  
*15th November, 1894*(*3*?).

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB (Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai),

I here received your kind note. So very kind of you to remember me even
here, I have not seen your Narayan Hemchandra. He is not in America, I
believe. I have seen many strange sights and grand things. I am glad
that there is a good chance of your coming over to Europe. Avail
yourself of it by any means. The fact of our isolation from all the
other nations of the world is the cause of our degeneration and its only
remedy is getting back into the current of the rest of the world. Motion
is the sign of life. America is a grand country. It is a paradise of the
poor and women. There is almost no poor in the country, and nowhere else
in the world women are so free, so educated, so cultured. They are
everything in society.

This is a great lesson. The Sannyasin has not lost a bit of his
Sannyasinship, even his mode of living. And in this most hospitable
country, every home is open to me. The Lord who guides me in India,
would He not guide me here? And He has.

You may not understand why a Sannyasin should be in America, but it was
necessary. Because the only claim you have to be recognised by the world
is your religion, and good specimens of our religious men are required
to be sent abroad to give other nations an idea that India is not dead.

Some representative men must come out of India and go to all the nations
of the earth to show at least that you are not savages. You may not feel
the necessity of it from your Indian home, but, believe me, much depends
upon that for your nation. And a Sannyasin who has no idea of doing good
to his fellows is a brute, not a Sannyasin.

I am neither a sightseer nor an idle traveller; but you will see, if you
live to see, and bless me all your life.

Mr. Dvivedi's papers were too big for the Parliament, and they had to be
cut short.

I spoke at the Parliament of Religions, and with what effect I may quote
to you from a few newspapers and magazines ready at hand. I need not be
self-conceited, but to you in confidence I am bound to say, because of
your love, that no Hindu made such an impression in America, and if my
coming has done nothing, it has done this that the Americans have come
to know that India even today produces men at whose feet even the most
civilised nations may learn lessons of religion and morality. Don't you
think that is enough to say for the Hindu nation sending over here their
Sannyasin? You would hear the details from Virchand Gandhi.

These I quote from the journals: "But eloquent as were many of the brief
speeches, no one expressed as well the spirit of the Parliament (of
religions) and its limitations as the Hindu monk. I copy his address in
full, but I can only suggest its effect upon the audience; for he is an
orator by Divine right, and his strong intelligent face in its
picturesque setting of yellow and orange was hardly less interesting
than these earnest words and the rich rhythmical utterance he gave
them." (Here the speech is quoted *in extenso*.) *New York Critique*.

"He has preached in clubs and churches until his faith has become
familiar to us. . . . His culture, his eloquence, and his fascinating
personality have given us a *new idea of Hindu civilisation* . . . . His
fine, intelligent face and his deep musical voice, prepossessing one at
once in his favour. . . . He speaks without notes, presenting his facts
and his conclusions with the greatest art and the most convincing
sincerity, and rising often to rich inspiring eloquence." (*ibid*.)

"Vivekananda is undoubtedly the greatest figure in the Parliament of
Religions. After hearing him we feel how foolish it is to send
missionaries to this learned nation." *Herald* (the greatest paper
here).

I cease from quoting more lest you think me conceited; but this was
necessary to you who have become nearly frogs in the well and would not
see how the world is going on elsewhere. I do not mean you personally,
my noble friend, but our nation in general.

I am the same here as in India, only here in this highly cultural land
there is an appreciation, a sympathy which our ignorant fools never
dream of. There our people grudge us monks a crumb of bread, here they
are ready to pay one thousand rupees a lecture and remain grateful for
the instructions for ever.

I am appreciated by these strangers more than I was ever in India. I
can, if I will, live here all my life in the greatest luxury; but I am a
Sannyasin, and "India, with all thy faults I love thee still". So I am
coming back after some months, and go on sowing the seeds of religion
and progress from city to city as I was doing so long, although amongst
a people who know not what appreciation and gratefulness are.

I am ashamed of my own nation when I compare their beggarly, selfish,
unappreciative, ignorant ungratefulness with the help, hospitality,
sympathy, and respect which the Americans have shown to me, a
representative of a foreign religion. Therefore come out of the country,
see others, and compare.

Now after these quotations, do you think it was worth while to send a
Sannyasin to America?

Please do not publish it. I hate notoriety in the same manner as I did
in India.

I am doing the Lord's work, and wherever He leads I follow. मूकं करोति
वाचालं etc.— He who makes the dumb eloquent and the lame cross a
mountain, He will help me. I do not care for human help. He is ready to
help me in India, in America, on the North Pole, if He thinks fit. If He
does not, none else can help me. Glory unto the Lord for ever and ever. 

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
