---
title: XXXIV

---
<div>

[←](033_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](035_sister.htm)

  

[«](033_diwanji_saheb.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_4/writings_prose/reply_to_the_calcutta_address.htm)  
[«](033_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee

## XXXIV

541 DEARBORN AVENUE,  
CHICAGO,  
*November*(?)*, 1894*.

DEAR DIWANJI (Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai),

Your letter pleased me extremely. I, of course, understand the joke, but
I am not the baby to be put off with a joke; now take more.

The secret of success of the Westerners is the power of organisation and
combination. That is only possible with mutual trust and co-operation
and help. Now here is Virchand Gandhi, the Jain, whom you well knew in
Bombay. This man never takes anything but pure vegetables even in this
terribly cold climate, and tooth and nail tries to defend his countrymen
and religion. The people of this country like him very well, but what
are they doing who sent him over? They are trying to outcast him.
Jealousy is a vice necessarily generated in slaves. Again it is jealousy
that holds them down.

Here were . . .; they were all trying to lecture and get money thereby.
They did something, but I succeeded better than they — why, I did not
put myself as a bar to their success. It was the will of the Lord. But
all these . . . except . . . have fabricated and circulated the most
horrible lies about me in this country, and behind my back. Americans
will never stoop to such meanness.

. . . If any man tries to move forward here, everybody is ready to help
him. In India you may try tomorrow by writing a single line of praise
for me in any of our papers (Hindu), and the next day they would be all
against me. Why? It is the nature of slaves. They cannot suffer to see
any one of their brethren putting his head the least above their rank. .
. . Do you mean to compare such stuff with these children of liberty,
self-help, and brotherly love? The nearest approach to our people are
the freed slaves of the U.S.A., the Negroes. Why, in the South they are
about twenty millions and are now free. The whites are a handful, still
the whites hold them down all the same. Why, even when they have every
right by law, a bloody war between the brothers has been fought to free
these slaves? The same defect — jealousy. Not one of these Negroes would
bear to see his brother-Negro praised or pushing on. Immediately they
would join the whites to crush him down. You can have no idea about it
until you come out of India. It is all right for those who have plenty
of money and position to let the world roll on such, but I call him a
traitor who, having been educated, nursed in luxury by the heart's blood
of the downtrodden millions of toiling poor, never even takes a thought
for them. Where, in what period of history your rich men, noblemen, your
priests and potentates took any thought for the poor — the grinding of
whose faces is the very life-blood of their power?

But the Lord is great, the vengeance came sooner or later, and they who
sucked the life-blood of the poor, whose very education was at their
expense, whose very power was built on their poverty, were in their turn
sold as slaves by hundreds and thousands, their wives and daughters
dishonoured, their property robbed for the last 1,000 years, and do you
think it was for no cause?

Why amongst the poor of India so many are Mohammedans? It is nonsense to
say, they were converted by the sword. It was to gain their liberty from
the . . . zemindars and from the . . . priest, and as a consequence you
find in Bengal there are more Mohammedans than Hindus amongst the
cultivators, because there were so many zemindars there. Who thinks of
raising these sunken downtrodden millions? A few thousand graduates do
not make a nation, a few rich men do not make a nation. True, our
opportunities are less, but still there is enough to feed and clothe and
made 300 millions more comfortable, nay, luxurious. Ninety per cent of
our people are without education — who thinks of that? — these Babus,
the so-called patriots?

Now, let me tell you — still there is a God, no joke. He is ordering our
lives, and although I know a nation of slaves cannot but try to bite at
the hand that wants to give them medicine, yet, pray with me, you — one
of the few that have real sympathy for everything good, for everything
great, one at least whom I know to be a man of true ring, nobility of
nature, and a thorough sincerity of head and heart — pray with me:

        "Lead, kindly Light,  
                amid th' encircling gloom."

I do not care what they say. I love my God, my religion, my country, and
above all, myself, a poor beggar. I love the poor, the ignorant, the
downtrodden, I feel for them — the Lord knows how much. He will show me
the way. I do not care a fig for human approbation or criticism. I think
of most of them as ignorant, noisy children — they have not penetrated
into the inner nature of sympathy, into the spirit which is all love.

I have that insight through the blessing of Ramakrishna. I am trying to
work with my little band, all of these poor beggars like me, you have
seen them. But the Lord's works have been always done by the lowly, by
the poor. You bless me that I may have faith in my Guru, in my God, and
in myself.

The only way is love and sympathy. The only worship is love.

May He help you and yours ever and ever!

With prayers and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
