---
title: XXXV

---
<div>

[←](034_diwanji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](036_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/045_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](036_sister.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Both Sisters [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](032_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](036_sister.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](032_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](036_sister.htm)

## XXXV

*To Miss Mary Hale*

168, BRATTLE STREET,  
CAMBRIDGE,  
*8th December, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER,

I have been here three days. We had a nice lecture from Lady Henry
Somerset. I have a class every morning here on Vedanta and other topics.
Perhaps you have got the copy of *Vedantism* by this time which I left
with Mother Temple to be sent over. I went to dine with the Spaldings
another day. That day they urged me, against my repeated protests, to
criticise the Americans. I am afraid they did not relish it. It is of
course always impossible to do it. What about Mother Church and the
family at Chicago? I had no letters from them a long time. I would have
run into town to see you before this, had I time. I am kept pretty busy
the whole day. Then there is the fear of not meeting you.

If you have time, you may write, and I shall snatch the first
opportunity to see you. My time of course is always in the afternoon, so
long I shall be here, that is until the 27th or 28th of this month; I
will have to be very busy in the morning till 12 or 1.

With my love to you all,

Ever your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
