---
title: XL

---
<div>

[←](039_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](041_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/063_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/064_mrs_bull.htm)  
Addressee [»](041_friend.htm)

## XL

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

54 W. 33RD STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*24th April, 1895*.

DEAR FRIEND,

I am perfectly aware that although some truth underlies the mass of
mystical thought which has burst upon the Western world of late, it is
for the most part full of motives, unworthy, or insane. For this reason,
I have never had anything to do with these phases of religion, either in
India or elsewhere, and mystics as a class are not very favourable to
me. . . .

I quite agree with you that only the Advaita philosophy can save
mankind, whether in East or West, from "devil worship" and kindred
superstitions, giving tone and strength to the very nature of man. India
herself requires this, quite as much or even more than the West. Yet it
is hard uphill work, for we have first to create a taste, then teach,
and lastly proceed to build up the whole fabric.

Perfect sincerity, holiness, gigantic intellect, and an all-conquering
will. Let only a handful of men work with these, and the whole world
will be revolutionised. I did a good deal of platform work in this
country last year, and received plenty of applause, but found that I was
only working for myself. It is the patient upbuilding of character, the
intense struggle to *realise* the truth, which alone will tell in the
future of humanity. So this year I am hoping to work along this line —
training up to practical Advaita realisation a small band of men and
women. I do not know how far I shall succeed. The West is the field for
work if a man wants to benefit humanity, rather than his own particular
sect or country. I agree perfectly as to your idea of a magazine. But I
have no business capacity at all to do these things. I can teach and
preach, and sometimes write. But I have intense faith in Truth. The Lord
will send help and hands to work with me. Only let me be perfectly pure,
perfectly sincere, and perfectly unselfish.

"Truth alone triumphs, not untruth; through truth alone stretches the
way to the Lord" (Atharva-Veda). He who gives up the little self for the
world will find the whole universe his. . . . I am very uncertain about
coming to England. I know no one there, and here I am doing some work.
The Lord will guide, in His own time.

</div>
