---
title: XLVI

---
<div>

[←](045_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](047_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/042_kidi.htm) Chronology
[»](047_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Both Sisters [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](045_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](047_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Harriet Hale [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](045_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](047_sister.htm)

## XLVI

*To Miss Mary Hale*

54 W. 33RD STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*22nd June, 1895*.

DEAR SISTER,

The letters from India and the parcel of books reached me safe. I am so
happy to know of Mr. Sam's arrival. I am sure he is "bewaring of the
vidders" nicely. I met a friend of Mr. Sam's one day on the street. He
is an Englishman with a name ending in "ni". He was very nice. He said
he was living in the same house with Sam somewhere in Ohio.

I am going on pretty nearly in the same old fashion. Talking when I can
and silent when forced to be. I do not know whether I will go to
Greenacre this summer. I saw Miss Farmer the other day. She was in a
hurry to go away, so I had but very little talk with her. She is a
noble, noble lady.

How are you going on with your Christian Science lessons? I hope you
will go to Greenacre. There you will find quite a number of them and
also the Spiritualists, table turnings, palmists, astrologers, etc.,
etc. You will get all the "cures" and all the "isms" presided over by
Miss Farmer.

Landsberg has gone away to live in some other place, so I am left alone.
I am living mostly on nuts and fruits and milk, and find it very nice
and healthy too. I hope to lose about 30 to 40 lbs. this summer. That
will be all right for my size. I am afraid I have forgotten all about
Mrs. Adam's lessons in walking. I will have to renew them when she comes
again to N.Y. Gandhi has gone to England *en route* to India from
Boston, I suppose.

I would like to know about his "chaperon" Mrs. Howard and her present
bereaved state. I am very glad to hear that the rugs did not go down to
the bottom of the Atlantic and are at last coming.

This year I could hardly keep my head up, and I did not go about
lecturing. The three great commentaries on the Vedanta philosophy
belonging to the three great sects of dualists, qualified dualists, and
monists are being sent to me from India. Hope they will arrive safe.
Then I will have an intellectual feast indeed. I intend to write a book
this summer on the Vedanta philosophy. This world will always be a
mixture of good and evil, of happiness and misery; this wheel will ever
go up and come down; dissolution and resolution is the inevitable law.
Blessed are those who struggle to go beyond. Well, I am glad all the
babies are doing well but sorry there was no "catch" even this winter,
and every winter the chances are dwindling down. Here near my lodgings
is the Waldorf-Hotel, the rendezvous of lots of titled but penniless
Europeans on show for "Yankee" heiresses to buy. You may have any
selection here, the stock is so full and varied. There is the man who
talks no English; there are others who lisp a few words which no one can
understand; and others are there who talk nice English, but their chance
is not so great as that of the dumb ones — the girls do not think them
enough foreign who talk plain English fluently.

I read somewhere in a funny book that an American vessel was being
foundered in the sea; the men were desperate and as a last solace wanted
some religious service being done. There was "Uncle Josh" on board who
was an elder in the Presbyterian Church. They all began to entreat, "Do
something religious, Uncle Josh! We are all going to die." Uncle Joseph
took his hat in his hand and took up a collection on the spot!

That is all of religion he knew. And that is more or less characteristic
of the majority of *such people*. Collections are about all the religion
they know or will ever know. Lord bless them. Good-bye for present. I am
going to eat something; I feel very hungry. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
