---
title: XLVII

---
<div>

[←](046_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](048_sister.htm)

  

[«](046_sister.htm) Chronology [»](048_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Both Sisters [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](046_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](048_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Harriet Hale [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](046_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](048_sister.htm)

## XLVII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

C/O MISS DUTCHER,  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, N.Y.  
*26th June, 1895*.

DEAR SISTER,

Many thanks for the Indian mail. It brought a good deal of good news.
You are enjoying by this time, I hope, the articles by Prof. Max Müller
on the "Immortality of the Soul" which I sent to Mother Church. The old
man has taken in Vedanta, bones and all, and has boldly come out. I am
so glad to know the arrival of the rugs. Was there any duty to pay? If
so I will pay that, I insist on it. There will come another big packet
from the Raja of Khetri containing some shawls and brocades and
nick-nacks. I want to present them to different friends. But they are
not going to arrive before some months, I am sure.

I am asked again and again, as you will find in the letters from India,
to go over. They are getting desperate. Now if I go to Europe, I will go
as the guest of Mr. Francis Leggett of N.Y. He will travel all over
Germany, England, France, and Switzerland for six weeks. From there I
shall go to India, or I may return to America. I have a seed planted
here and wish it to grow. This winter's work in N.Y. was splendid, and
it may die if I suddenly go over to India, so I am not sure about going
to India soon.

Nothing noticeable has happened during this visit to the Thousand
Islands. The scenery is very beautiful and I have some of my friends
here with me to talk about God and soul *ad libitum*. I am eating fruits
and drinking milk and so forth, and studying huge Sanskrit books on
Vedanta which they have kindly sent me from India.

If I come to Chicago I cannot come at least within six weeks or more.
Baby needn't alter any of her plans for me. I will see you all somehow
or other before I go.

You fussed so much over my reply to Madras, but it has produced a
tremendous effect there. A late speech by the President of the Madras
Christian College, Mr. Miller, embodies a large amount of my ideas and
declares that the West is in need of Hindu ideas of God and man and
calls upon the young men to go and preach to the West. This has created
quite a furore of course amongst the Missions. What you allude to as
being published in the *Arena* I did not see a bit of it. The women did
not make any fuss over me at all in New York. Your friend must have
drawn on his imagination. They were not of the "bossing" type at all. I
hope Father Pope will go to Europe and Mother Church too. Travelling is
the best thing in life. I am afraid I shall die if made to stick to one
place for a long time. Nothing like a nomadic life!

The more the shades around deepen, the more the ends approach and the
more one understands the true meaning of life, that it is a dream; and
we begin to understand the failure of everyone to grasp it, for they
only attempted to get meaning out of the meaningless. To get reality out
of a dream is boyish enthusiasm. "Everything is evanescent, everything
is changeful" — knowing this, the sage gives up both pleasure and pain
and becomes a witness of this panorama (the universe) without attaching
himself to anything.

"They indeed have conquered Heaven even in this life whose mind has
become fixed in *sameness*. God is pure and same to all, therefore they
are said to be *in God*" (Gita, V.19). Desire, ignorance, and inequality
— this is the trinity of bondage.

Denial of the will to live, knowledge, and same-sightedness is the
trinity of liberation.

*Freedom* is the goal of the universe.

"Nor love nor hate nor pleasure nor pain nor death nor life nor religion
nor irreligion: not this, not this, not this." 

Yours ever,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
