---
title: XLVIII

---
<div>

[←](047_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](049_friend.htm)

  

[«](047_sister.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/043_alasinga.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Both Sisters [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](047_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](067_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Harriet Hale [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](047_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](067_sister.htm)

## XLVIII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

C/O MISS DUTCHER,  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, N.Y.  
*26th June, 1895*.

DEAR SISTER,

Many thanks for the Indian mail. I cannot express in words my gratitude
to you. As you have already read in Max Müller's article on Immortality
I sent Mother Church, that he thinks that those we love in this life we
must have loved in the past, so it seems I must have belonged to the
Holy Family in some past life. I am expecting some books from India. I
hope they have arrived. If so, will you kindly send them over here? If
any postage is due I shall send it as soon as I get intimation. You did
not write about the duty on the rugs; there will be another big packet
from Khetri containing carpets and shawls and some brocades and other
nick-nacks. I have written them to get the duty paid there if it is
possible through the American Consul in Bombay. If not I shall have to
pay it here. I do not think they will arrive for some months yet. I am
anxious about the books. Kindly send them as soon as they arrive.

My love to Mother and Father Pope and all the sisters. I am enjoying
this place immensely. Very little eating and good deal of thinking and
talking and study. A wonderful calmness is coming over my soul. Every
day I feel I have no duty to do; I am always in eternal rest and peace.
It is He that works. We are only the instruments. Blessed be His name!
The threefold bondage of lust and gold and fame is, as it were, fallen
from me for the time being, and once more, even here, I feel what
sometimes I felt in India, "From me all difference has fallen, all right
or wrong, all delusion and ignorance has vanished, I am walking in the
path beyond the qualities." What law I obey, what disobey? From that
height the universe looks like a mud-puddle. Hari Om Tat Sat. He exists;
nothing else does. I in Thee and Thou in me. Be Thou Lord my eternal
refuge! Peace, Peace, Peace! Ever with love and blessings, 

Your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
