---
title: IL

---
<div>

[←](048_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](050_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/067_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/068_mrs_hale.htm)  
[«](041_friend.htm) Addressee [»](050_friend.htm)

## IL

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

19 WEST 38TH ST., NEW YORK,  
*2nd August, 1895*.

DEAR FRIEND,

Your kind note received today. I am going to Paris first with a friend
and start for Europe on the 17th of August. I will however remain in
Paris only a week to see my friend married, and then I go over to
London.

Your advice about an organisation was very good indeed. And I am trying
to act on that line.

I have many strong friends here, but unfortunately they are most of them
poor. So the work here must be slow. Moreover it requires a few months
more of work in New York to carry it to some visible shape: as such I
will have to return to New York early this winter, and in summer I will
return to London again. So far as I see now I can stay only a few weeks
in London. But if the Lord wills, that small time may prove to be the
beginning of great things. From Paris I will inform you by wire when I
arrive in England.

Some Theosophists came to my classes in New York, but as soon as human
beings *perceive* the glory of the Vedanta, all abracadabras fall off of
themselves. This has been my uniform experience. Whenever mankind
attains a higher vision, the lower vision disappears of itself.
Multitude counts for nothing. A few heart-whole, sincere, and energetic
men can do more in a year than a mob in a century. If there is heat in
one body, then those others that come near it must catch it. This is the
law. So success is ours, so long as we keep up the heat, the spirit of
truth, sincerity, and love. My own life has been a very chequered one,
but I have always found the eternal words verified: "Truth alone
triumphs, not untruth. Through truth alone lies the way to God."

May the *Sat* in you be always your infallible guide! May He speedily
attain to freedom and help others to attain it! 

Ever yours in the *Sat*,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
