---
title: L

---
<div>

[←](049_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](051_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/068_mrs_hale.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/069_christina.htm)  
[«](049_friend.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/051_friend.htm)

## L

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

19, WEST 38TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*9th August, 1895*.

DEAR FRIEND,

. . . It is only just that I should try to give you a little of my
views. I fully believe that there are periodic ferments of religion in
human society, and that such a period is now sweeping over the educated
world. While each ferment, moreover, appears broken into various little
bubbles, these are all eventually similar, showing the cause or causes
behind them to be the same. That religious ferment which at present is
every day gaining a greater hold over thinking men, has this
characteristic that all the little thought-whirlpools into which it has
broken itself declare one single aim — a vision and a search after the
Unity of Being. On planes physical, ethical, and spiritual, an
ever-broadening generalisation — leading up to a concept of Unity
Eternal — is in the air; and this being so, all the movements of the
time may be taken to represent, knowingly or unknowingly, the noblest
philosophy of the unity man ever had — the Advaita Vedanta.

Again, it has always been observed that as a result of the struggles of
the various fragments of thought in a given epoch, one bubble survives.
The rest only arise to melt into it and form a single great wave, which
sweeps over society with irresistible force.

In India, America, and England (the countries I happen to know about)
hundreds of these are struggling at the present moment. In India,
dualistic formulae are already on the wane, the Advaita alone holds the
field in force. In America, many movements are struggling for the
mastery. All these represent Advaita thought more or less, and that
series, which is spreading most rapidly, approaches nearer to it than
any of the others. Now if anything was ever clear to me, it is that one
of these must survive, swallowing up all the rest, to be the power of
the future. Which is it to be?

Referring to history, we see that only that fragment which is fit will
survive, and what makes fit to survive but *character*? Advaita will be
the future religion of thinking humanity. No doubt of that. And of all
the sects, they alone shall gain the day who are able to show most
character in their lives, no matter how far they may be.

Let me tell you a little personal experience. When my Master left the
body, we were a dozen penniless and unknown young men. Against us were a
hundred powerful organisations, struggling hard to nip us in the bud.
But Ramakrishna had given us one great gift, the desire, and the
lifelong struggle not to talk alone, but to *live the life*. And today
all India knows and reverences the Master, and the truths he taught are
spreading like wild fire. Ten years ago I could not get a hundred
persons together to celebrate his birthday anniversary. Last year there
were fifty thousand.

Neither numbers nor powers nor wealth nor learning nor eloquence nor
anything else will prevail, but *purity, living the life*, in one word,
*anubhuti*, realisation. Let there be a dozen such lion-souls in each
country, lions who have broken their own bonds, who have touched the
Infinite, whose whole soul is gone to Brahman, who care neither for
wealth nor power nor fame, and these will be *enough* to shake the
world.

Here lies the secret. Says Patanjali, the father of Yoga, "When a man
rejects all the superhuman powers, then he attains to the cloud of
virtue." He sees God. He becomes God and helps others to become the
same. This is all I have to preach. Doctrines have been expounded
enough. There are books by the million. Oh, for an ounce of practice!

As to societies and organisations, these will come of themselves. Can
there be jealousy where there is nothing to be jealous of? The names of
those who will wish to injure us will be legion. But is not that the
surest sign of our having the truth? The more I have been opposed, the
more my energy has always found expression. I have been driven and
worshipped by princes. I have been slandered by priests and laymen
alike. But what of it? Bless them all! They are my very Self, and have
they not helped me by acting as a spring-board from which my energy
could take higher and higher flights?

. . . I have discovered one great secret — I have nothing to fear from
*talkers* of religion. And the great ones who realise — they become
enemies to none! Let talkers talk! They know no better! Let them have
their fill of name and fame and money and woman. Hold we on to
realisation, to being Brahman, to becoming Brahman. Let us hold on to
truth unto death, and from life to life. Let us not pay the least
attention to what others say, and if, after a lifetime's effort, one
soul, only one, can break the fetters of the world and be free, *we have
done our work*. Hari Om!

. . . One word more. Doubtless I do love India. But every day my sight
grows clearer. What is India, or England, or America to us? We are the
servants of that God who by the ignorant is called MAN. He who pours
water at the root, does he not water the whole tree?

There is but one basis of well-being, social, political or spiritual —
to know that I and my brother are *one*. This is true for all countries
and all people. And Westerners, let me say, will realise it more quickly
than Orientals, who have almost exhausted themselves in formulating the
idea and producing a few cases of individual realisation.

Let us work without desire for name or fame or rule over others. Let us
be free from the triple bonds of lust, greed of gain, and anger. And
this truth is with us! 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
