---
title: LII

---
<div>

[←](051_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](053_kali.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/078_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/079_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](044_joe.htm) Addressee [»](054_joe_joe.htm)

## LII

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM,  
READING, ENGLAND,  
*September, 1895*.

DEAR JOE JOE,

A thousand pardons for not promptly writing to you. I arrived safe in
London, found my friend, and am all right in his home. It is beautiful.
His wife is surely an angel, and his life is full of India. He has been
years there — mixing with the Sannyasins, eating their food, etc., etc.;
so you see I am very happy. I found already several retired Generals
from India; they were very civil and polite to me. That wonderful
knowledge of the Americans that identify every black man with the negro
is entirely absent here, and nobody even stares at me in the street.

I am very much more at home here than anywhere out of India. The English
people know us, we know them. The standard of education and civilisation
is very high here — that makes a great change, so does the education of
many generations.

Have the Turtle-doves returned? The Lord bless them and theirs for ever
and ever. How are the babies — Alberta and Holister? Give them my oceans
of love and know it yourself.

My friend being a Sanskrit scholar, we are busy working on the great
commentaries of Shankara etc. Nothing but philosophy and religion here,
Joe Joe. I am going to try to get up classes in October in London.

Ever affectionately with love and blessings, 

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
