---
title: LVII

---
<div>

[←](056_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](058_friend.htm)

  

[«](056_joe_joe.htm) Chronology [»](058_friend.htm)  
[«](051_friend.htm) Addressee [»](058_friend.htm)

## LVII

80 OAKLEY ST., CHELSEA,  
*31st October, 1895* (*5 p*.*m*.).

DEAR FRIEND (Mr. E. T. Sturdy),

Just now two young gentlemen, Mr. Silverlock and his friend, left. Miss
Müller also came this afternoon and left just when these gentlemen came
in.

One is an Engineer and the other is in the grain trade. They have read a
good deal of modern philosophy and science and have been much struck by
the similarity with the latest conclusions of both with the ancient
Hindu thought. They are very fine, intelligent, and educated men. One
has given up the Church, the other asked me whether he should or not.
Now, two things struck me after this interview. First, we must hurry the
book through. We will touch a class thereby who are philosophically
religious without the least mystery-mongering. Second, both of them want
to know the rituals of my creed! This opened my eyes. The world in
general must have some form. In fact, in the ordinary sense religion is
philosophy concretised through rituals and symbols.

It is absolutely necessary to form some ritual and have a Church. That
is to say, we must fix on some ritual as fast as we can. If you can come
Saturday morning or sooner, we shall go to the Asiatic Society library
or you can procure for me a book which is called *Hemâdri Kosha*, from
which we can get what we want, and kindly bring the Upanishads. We will
fix something grand, from birth to death of a man. A mere loose system
of philosophy gets no hold on mankind.

If we can get it through, before we have finished the classes, and
publish it by publicly holding a service or two under it, it will go on.
They want to form a congregation, and they want ritual; that is one of
the causes why — will never have a hold on Western people.

The Ethical Society has sent me another letter thanking me for the
acceptance of this offer. Also a copy of their forms. They want me to
bring with me a book from which to read for ten minutes. Will you bring
the Gita (translation) and the Buddhist Jâtaka (translation) with you?

I would not do anything in this matter without seeing you first. 

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
