---
title: LXVII

---
<div>

[←](066_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](068_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/081_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/056_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Both Sisters [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](048_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/056_sister.htm)  
[«](042_babies.htm) Harriet Hale [»](073_sisters.htm)  
[«](048_sister.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/056_sister.htm)

## LXVII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

NEW YORK,  
*6th January, 1896*.

DEAR SISTER,

Many thanks for your kind New Year's greetings. I am glad to learn you
enjoyed your six weeks with the Esq. although they be only golf playing.
I have been in the midst of the genuine article in England. The English
people received me with open arms, and I have very much toned down my
ideas about the English race. First of all, I found that those fellows
as Lund etc. who came over from England to attack me were nowhere. Their
existence is simply ignored by the English people. None but a person
belonging to the English Church is thought to be *genteel*. Again, some
of the best men of England belonging to the English Church and some of
the highest in position and fame became my truest friends. This was
quite another sort of experience from what I met in America, was it not?

The English people laughed and laughed when I told them about my
experience with the Presbyterians and other fanatics here and my
reception in hotels etc. I also found at once the difference in culture
and breeding between the two countries and came to understand why
American girls go in shoals to be married to Europeans. Everyone was
kind to me there, and I have left many noble friends of both sexes
anxiously waiting my return in the spring.

As to my work there, the Vedantic thought has already permeated the
higher classes of England. Many people of education and rank, and
amongst them not a few clergymen, told me that the conquest of Rome by
Greece was being re-enacted in England.

There are two sorts of Englishmen who have lived in India. One
consisting of those who hate everything Indian, but they are uneducated.
The other, to whom India is the holy land, its very air is holy. And
they try to out-Herod Herod in their Hinduism. They are awful
vegetarians, and they want to form a caste in England. Of course, the
majority of the English people are firm believers in caste. I had eight
classes a week apart from public lectures, and they were so crowded that
a good many people, even ladies of high rank, sat on the floor and did
not think anything of it. In England I find strong-minded men and women
to take up the work and carry it forward with the peculiar English grip
and energy. This year my work in New York is going on splendidly. Mr.
Leggett is a very rich man of New York and very much interested in me.
The New Yorker has more steadiness than any other people in this
country, so I have determined to make my centre here. In this country my
teachings are thought to be queer by the "Methodist" and "Presbyterian"
aristocracy. In England it is the highest philosophy to the English
Church aristocracy.

Moreover those talks and gossips, so characteristic of the American
woman, are almost unknown in England. The English woman is slow; but
when she works up to an idea, she will have a hold on it sure; and they
are regularly carrying on my work there and sending every week a report
— think of that! Here is I go away for a week, everything falls to
pieces. My love to all — to Sam and to yourself. May the Lord bless you
ever and ever! 

Your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
