---
title: LXXV

---
<div>

[←](074_sturdy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](076_mary.htm)

  

[«](074_sturdy.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/091_christina.htm)  
[«](073_sisters.htm) Both Sisters [»](077_babies.htm)  
[«](073_sisters.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](076_mary.htm)  
[«](073_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale [»](077_babies.htm)  
[«](073_sisters.htm) Mary Hale [»](076_mary.htm)

## LXXV

*To the Hale sisters*

HIGH VIEW, READING,  
*20th April, 1896*.

DEAR SISTERS,

Greetings to you from the other shore. The voyage has been pleasant and
no sickness this time. I gave myself treatment to avoid it. I made quite
a little run through Ireland and some of the Old English towns and now
am once more in Reading amidst Brahma and Maya and Jiva, the individual
and the universal soul, etc. The other monk is here; he is one of the
nicest of men I see, and is quite a learned monk too. We are busy
editing books now. Nothing of importance happened on the way. It was
dull, monotonous, and prosaic as my life. I love America more when I am
out of it. And, after all, those years there have been some of the best
I have yet seen.

Are you trying to get some subscribers for the *Brahmavadin*? Give my
best love and kindest remembrance to Mrs. Adams and Mrs. Conger. Write
me as soon as is convenient all about yourselves, and what you are
doing, what breaks the monotony of eating, drinking, and cycling. I am
in a hurry just now, shall write a bigger letter later; so good-bye and
may you be always happy. 

Your ever affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I will write to Mother Church as soon as I get time. Give my love to
Sam and sister Locke. 

V.

</div>
