---
title: LXXVII

---
<div>

[←](076_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](078_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/094_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/095_mother.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/116_sisters.htm)  
[«](076_mary.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](085_sister.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/108_sister.htm)  
[«](076_mary.htm) Mary Hale [»](085_sister.htm)

## LXXVII

*To the Hale sisters*

LONDON,  
*7th July, 1896*.

DEAR BABIES,

The work here progressed wonderfully. I had one monk here from India. I
have sent him to the U.S.A. and sent for another from India. The season
is closed; the classes, therefore, and the Sunday lectures are to be
closed on the 16th next. And on the 19th I go for a month or so for
quiet and rest in the Swiss Mountains to return next autumn to London
and begin again. The work here has been very satisfactory. By rousing
interest here I really do more for India than in India. Mother wrote to
me that if you could rent your flat, she would be glad to take you with
her to see Egypt. I am going with three English friends to the Swiss
Hills. Later on, towards the end of winter, I expect to go to India with
some English friends who are going to live in my monastery there, which,
by the by, is in the air yet. It is struggling to materialise somewhere
in the Himalayas.

Where are You? Now the summer is in full swing, even London is getting
very hot. Kindly give my best love to Mrs. Adams, Mrs. Conger, and all
the rest of my friends in Chicago. 

Your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
