---
title: LXXX

---
<div>

[←](079_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](081_goodwin.htm)

  

[«](079_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/105_sahji.htm)  
[«](027_leon.htm) Addressee

## LXXX

*To Kripananda*

SWITZERLAND,  
*August, 1896*.

DEAR—,

Be you holy and, above all, sincere; and do not for a moment give up
your trust in the Lord, and you will see the light. Whatever is truth
will remain for ever; whatever is not, none can preserve. We are helped
in being born in a time when everything is quickly searched out.
Whatever others think or do, lower not your standard of purity,
morality, and love of God; above all, beware of all secret
organisations. No one who loves God need fear any jugglery. Holiness is
the highest and divinest power in earth and in heaven. "Truth alone
triumphs, not untruth. Through truth alone is opened the way to God"
(Mundaka, III. i. 6). Do not care for a moment who joins hands with you
or not, be sure that you touch the hand of the Lord. That is enough. . .
.

I went to the glacier of Monte Rosa yesterday and gathered a few hardy
flowers growing almost in the midst of eternal snow. I send you one in
this letter hoping that you will attain to a similar spiritual hardihood
amidst all the snow and ice of this earthly life. . . .

Your dream was very, very beautiful. In dream our souls read a layer of
our mind which we do not read in our waking hours, and however
unsubstantial imagination may be, it is behind the imagination that all
unknown psychic truths lie. Take heart. We will try to do what we can
for the good of humanity — the rest depends upon the Lord. . . .

Well, do not be anxious, do not be in a hurry. Slow, persistent and
silent work does everything. The Lord is great. We will succeed, my boy.
We must. Blessed be His name! . . .

Here in America are no Ashramas. Would there was one! How would I like
it and what an amount of good it would do to this country!

</div>
