---
title: LXXXV

---
<div>

[←](084_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](086_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/108_sister.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/067_alasinga.htm)  
[«](077_babies.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/116_sisters.htm)  
[«](077_babies.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/108_sister.htm)  
[«](077_babies.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/108_sister.htm)  
[«](077_babies.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/112_mary.htm)

## LXXXV

*To Miss Mary Hale*

AIRLIE LODGE, RIDGEWAY GARDENS,  
WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND,  
*17th September, 1896*.

DEAR SISTER,

Today I reached London, after my two months of climbing and walking and
glacier seeing in Switzerland. One good it has done me — a few pounds of
unnecessary adipose tissue have returned back to the gaseous state.
Well, there is no safety even in that, for the solid body of this birth
has taken a fancy to outstrip the mind towards infinite expansion. If it
goes on this way, I would have soon to lose all personal identity even
in the flesh — at least to all the rest of the world.

It is impossible to express my joy in words at the good news contained
in Harriet's letter. I have written to her today. I am sorry I cannot
come over to see her married, but I will be present in "fine body" with
all good wishes and blessings. Well, I am expecting such news from you
and other sisters to make my joy complete. Now, my dear Mary, I will
tell you a great lesson I have learnt in this life. It is this: "The
higher is your ideal, the more miserable you are"; for such a thing as
an ideal *cannot* be attained *in the world*, or in this life even. He
who wants perfection in the world is a madman, for it cannot be.

How can you find the Infinite in the finite? Therefore I tell you,
Harriet will have a most blessed and happy life, because she is not so
imaginative and sentimental as to make a fool of herself. She has enough
of sentiment as to make life sweet, and enough of common sense and
gentleness as to soften the hard points in life which must come to
everyone. So has Harriet McKindley in a still higher degree. She is just
the girl to make the best of wives, only this world is so full of idiots
that very few can penetrate beyond the flesh! As for you and Isabelle, I
will tell you the truth, and my "language is plain".

You, Mary, are like a mettlesome Arab — grand, splendid. You will make a
splendid queen — physically, mentally. You will shine alongside of a
dashing, bold, adventurous, heroic husband; but, my dear sister, you
will make one of the worst of wives. You will take the life out of our
easy-going, practical, plodding husbands of the everyday world. Mind, my
sister, although it is true that there is more romance in actual life
than in any novel, yet it is few and far between. Therefore my advice to
you is that until you bring down your ideals to a more practical level,
you ought not to marry. If you do, the result will be misery for both of
you. In a few months you will lose all regard for a commonplace, good,
nice, young man, and then life will become insipid. As to sister
Isabelle, she has the same temperament as you; only this kindergarten
has taught her a good lesson of patience and forbearance. Perhaps she
will make a good wife.

There are two sorts of persons in the world. The one — strong-nerved,
quiet, yielding to nature, not given to much imagination, yet good,
kind, sweet, etc. For such is this world; they alone are born to be
happy. There are others again with high-strung nerves, tremendously
imaginative, with intense feeling, always going high one moment and
coming down the next. For them there is no happiness. The first class
will have almost an even tenor of happiness; the last will have to run
between ecstasy and misery. But of these alone what we call geniuses are
made. There is some truth in the recent theory that "genius is a sort
madness".

Now, persons of this class if they want to be great, they must fight to
finish — clear out the deck for battle. No encumbrance — no marriage, no
children, no undue attachment to anything except the one *idea*, and
live and die for that. I am a person of this sort. I have taken up the
one idea of "Vedanta" and I have "cleared the deck for action". You and
Isabelle are made of this metal; but let me tell you, though it is hard,
*you are spoiling your lives in vain*. Either take up one *idea*, clear
the deck, and to it dedicate the life; or be contented and practical;
lower the ideal, marry, and have a *happy life*. Either "Bhoga" or
"Yoga" — either enjoy this life, or give up and be a Yogi; *none can
have both in one*. Now or never, select quick. "He who is very
particular gets nothing", says the proverb. Now sincerely and really and
for ever determine to "clear the deck for fight", take up anything,
philosophy or science or religion or literature, and let that be your
God for the rest of your life. Achieve happiness or achieve greatness. I
have no sympathy with you and Isabelle; you are neither for this nor for
that. I wish to see you happy, as Harriet has well chosen, or *great*.
Eating, drinking, dressing, and society nonsense are not things to throw
a life upon — especially you, Mary. You are rusting away a splendid
brain and abilities, for which there is not the least excuse. You must
have ambition to be great. I know you will take these rather harsh
remarks from me in the right spirit knowing I like you really as much or
more than what I call you, my sisters. I had long had a mind to tell you
this, and as experience is gathering I feel like telling you. The joyful
news from Harriet urged me to tell you this. I will be overjoyed to hear
that you are married also and happy, so far as happiness can be had
here, or would like to hear of you as doing great deeds.

I had a pleasant visit with Prof. Deussen in Germany. I am sure you have
heard of him as the greatest living German philosopher. He and I
travelled together to England and today came together to see my friend
here with whom I am to stop for the rest of my stay in England. He
(Deussen) is very fond of talking Sanskrit and is the only Sanskrit
scholar in the West who can talk in it. As he wants to get a practice,
he never talks to me in any other language but Sanskrit.

I have come over here amongst my friends, shall work for a few weeks,
and then go back to India in the winter. 

Ever your loving brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
