---
title: LXXXVI

---
<div>

[←](085_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](087_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/117_alberta.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/101_miss_noble.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/109_joe_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](097_joe_joe.htm)

## LXXXVI

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

GREY COAT GARDENS,  
WESTMINSTER, S.W.,  
LONDON,  
*3rd December, 1896*.

DEAR JOE,

Many, many thanks, dear Joe Joe, for your kind invitation; but the Dear
God has disposed it this way, viz I am to start for India on the 16th
with Captain and Mrs. Sevier and Mr. Goodwin. The Seviers and myself
take steamer at Naples. And as there will be four days at Rome, I will
look in to say good-bye to Alberta.

Things are in a "hum" here just now; the big hall for the class, 39
Victoria, is full and yet more are coming.

Well, the good old country now calls me; I must go. So good-bye to all
projects of visiting Russia this April.

I just set things a-going a little in India and am off again for the
ever beautiful U.S. and England etc.

So very kind of you to send Mabel's letter — good news indeed. Only I am
a little sorry for poor Fox. However, Mabel escaped him; that is better.

You did not write anything about how things are going on in New York. I
hope it is all well there. Poor Cola! is he able now to make a living?

The coming of Goodwin was very opportune, as it captured the lectures
here which are being published in a periodical form. Already there have
been subscribers enough to cover the expenses.

Three lectures next week, and my London work is finished for this
season. Of course, everybody here thinks it foolish to give it up just
now the "boom" is on, but the Dear Lord says, "Start for Old India". I
obey.

To Frankincense, to Mother, to Holister and everyone else my eternal
love and blessings, and with the same for you, 

Yours ever sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
