---
title: XCI

---
<div>

[←](090_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](092_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/39_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](092_rakhal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/108_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/126_miss_noble.htm)

## XCI

*To Sister Nivedita*

ALAMBAZAR MATH,  
CALCUTTA,  
*5th May, 1897*.

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

Your very very kind, loving, and encouraging letter gave me more
strength than you think of.

There are moments when one feels entirely despondent, no doubt —
especially when one has worked towards an ideal during a whole life's
time and just when there is a bit of hope of seeing it partially
accomplished, there comes a tremendous thwarting blow. I do not care for
the disease, but what depresses me is that my ideals have not had yet
the least opportunity of being worked out. And you know, the difficulty
is money.

The Hindus are making processions and all that, but they cannot give
money. The only help I got in the world was in England, from Miss
Müller, and Mr. Sevier. I thought there that a thousand pounds was
sufficient to start at least the principal centre in Calcutta, but my
calculation was from the experience of Calcutta ten or twelve years ago.
Since then the prices have gone up three or four times.

The work has been started anyhow. A rickety old little house has been
rented for six or seven shillings, where about twenty-four young men are
being trained. I had to go to Darjeeling for a month to recover my
health, and I am glad to tell you I am very much better, and would you
believe it, without taking any medicine, only by the exercise of mental
healing! I am going again to another hill station tomorrow, as it is
very hot in the plains. Your society is still living, I am sure. I will
send you a report, as least every month, of the work done here. The
London work is not doing well at all, I hear, and that was the main
reason why I would not come to England just now — although some of our
Rajas going for the Jubilee tried their best to get me with them — as I
would have to work hard again to revive the interest in Vedanta. And
that would mean a good deal more trouble physically.

I may come over for a month or so very soon however. Only if I could see
my work started here, how gladly and freely would I travel about!

So far about work. Now about you personally. Such love and faith and
devotion and appreciation like yours, dear Miss Noble, repays a hundred
times over any amount of labour one undergoes in this life. May all
blessings be yours. My whole life is at your service, as we may say in
our mother tongue.

It never was and never will be anything but very very welcome, any
letters from you and other friends in England. Mr. and Mrs. Hammond
wrote two very kind and nice letters and Mr. Hammond a beautiful poem in
*The Brahmavadin*, although I did not deserve it a bit. I will write to
you again from the Himalayas, where thought will be clear in sight of
the snows and the nerves more settled than in this burning plains. Miss
Müller is already in Almora. Mr. and Mrs. Sevier go to Simla. They have
been in Darjeeling so long. So things come and go, dear friend. Only the
Lord is unchangeable and He is Love. May He make our heart His eternal
habitation is the constant prayer of,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
