---
title: XCIV

---
<div>

[←](093_sudhir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](095_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/125_shuddhananda.htm)
Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/126_miss_noble.htm)  
Addressee [»](099_marie.htm)

## XCIV

*To Marie Halboister*

ALMORA,  
*2nd June, 1897*.

DEAR MARIE,

I begin here my promised big chatty letter with the best intention as to
its growth, and if it fails, it will be owing to your own Karma. I am
sure you are enjoying splendid health. I have been very, very bad
indeed; now recovering a bit — hope to recover very soon.

What about the work in London? I am afraid it is going to pieces. Do you
now and then visit London? Hasn't Sturdy got a new baby?

The plains of India are blazing now. I cannot bear it. So I am here in
this hill station — a bit cooler than the plains.

I am living in a beautiful garden belonging to a merchant of Almora — a
garden abutting several miles of mountains and forests. Night before
last a leopard came here and took away a goat from the flock kept in
this garden. It was a frightful din the servants made and the barking of
the big Tibet watchdogs. These dogs are kept chained at a distance all
night since I am here, so that they may not disturb my sleep with their
deep barks. The leopard thus found his opportunity and got a decent
meal, perhaps, after weeks. May it do much good to him!

Do you remember Miss Müller? She has come here for a few days and was
rather frightened when she heard of the leopard incident. The demand for
tanned skins in London seems very great, and that is playing havoc with
our leopards and tigers more than anything else.

As I am writing to you, before me, reflecting the afternoon's flow,
stand long, long lines of huge snow peaks. They are about twenty miles
as the crow flies from here, and forty through the circuitous mountain
roads.

I hope your translations have been well received in the Countess's
paper. I had a great mind and very good opportunity of coming over to
England this Jubilee season with some of our Princes, but my physicians
would not allow me to venture into work so soon. For going to Europe
means work, isn't it? No work, no bread.

Here the yellow cloth is sufficient, and I would have food enough.
Anyhow I am taking a much desired rest, hope it will do me good.

How are you going on with your work? With joy or sorrow? Don't you like
to have a good rest, say for some years, and no work? Sleep, eat, and
exercise; exercise, eat, and sleep — that is what I am going to do some
months yet. Mr. Goodwin is with me. You ought to have seen him in his
Indian clothes. I am very soon going to shave his head and make a
full-blown monk of him.

Are you still practising some of the Yogas? Do you find any benefit from
them? I learn that Mr. Martin is dead. How is Mrs. Martin — do you see
her now and then?

Do you know Miss Noble? Do you ever see her? Here my letter comes to an
end, as a huge dust storm is blowing over me, and it is impossible to
write. It is all your Karma, dear Marie, for I intended to write so many
wonderful things and tell you such fine stories; but I will have to keep
them for the future, and you will have to wait.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
