---
title: XCVI

---
<div>

[←](095_miss_noble.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](097_joe_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/077_sharat_chandra.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/078_sister.htm)  
[«](095_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/41_miss_noble.htm)

## XCVI

*To Sister Nivedita*

ALMORA,  
*4th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

I am being played upon curiously by both good and evil influences from
London these times here. . . . On the other hand, your letters are full
of life and sunshine, and bring strength and hope to my spirits, and
they sadly want these now. God knows.

Although I am still in the Himalayas, and shall be here for at least a
month more, I started the work in Calcutta before I came, and they write
progress every week.

Just now I am very busy with the famine, and except for training a
number of young men for future work, have not been able to put more
energy into the teaching work. The "feeding work" is absorbing all my
energy and means. Although we can work only on a very small scale as
yet, the effect is marvellous. For the first time since the days of
Buddha, Brahmin boys are found nursing by the bed-side of
cholera-stricken pariahs.

In India, lectures and teaching cannot do any good. What we want is
Dynamic Religion. And that, "God willing", as the Mohammedans say, I am
determined to show. . . . I entirely agree with the prospectus of your
Society, and you may take for granted my agreement with everything you
will do in the future. I have entire faith in your ability and sympathy.
I already owe you an immense debt, and you are laying me every day under
infinite obligations. My only consolation is that it is for the good of
others. Else I do not deserve in the least the wonderful kindness shown
to me by the Wimbledon friends. You good, steady, genuine English
people, may the Lord always bless you. I appreciate you every day more
and more from a distance. Kindly convey my love everlasting to \_\_  and
all the rest of our friends there.

With all love, yours ever in the Truth,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
