---
title: XCVII

---
<div>

[←](096_miss_noble.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](098_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/130_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/40_shuddhananda.htm)  
[«](086_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/080_joe.htm)

## XCVII

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

ALMORA,  
*10th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR JOE JOE,

I am glad to learn that you have at last found out that I have time to
read your letters.

I have taken to the Himalayas, tired of lecturing and orating. I am so
sorry the doctors would not allow my going over with the Raja of Khetri
to England, and that has made Sturdy mad.

The Seviers are at Simla and Miss Müller here in Almora.

The plague has subsided, but the famine is still here, and as it looks
(on account of no rain as yet), it may wear yet a terrible aspect.

I am very busy from here directing work by my boys in some of the famine
districts.

Do come by all means; only you must remember this. The Europeans and the
Hindus (called "Natives" by the Europeans) live as oil and water. Mixing
with Natives is damning to the Europeans.

There are no good hotels to speak of even at the capitals. You will have
to travel with a number of servants about you (cost cheaper than
hotels). You will have to bear with people who wear only a loin cloth;
you will see me with only a loin cloth about me. Dirt and filth
everywhere, and brown people. But you will have plenty of men to talk to
you philosophy. If you mix with the English much here, you will have
more comforts but see nothing of the Hindus as they are. Possibly I will
not be able to eat with you, but I promise that I will travel to good
many places with you and do everything in my power to make your journey
pleasant. These are what you expect; if anything good comes, so much the
better. Perhaps Mary Hale may come over with you. There is a young lady,
Miss Campbell, Orchard Lake, Orchard Island, Michigan, who is a great
worshipper of Krishna and lives alone in that Island, fasting and
praying. She will give anything to be able to see India once, but she is
awfully poor. If you bring her with you, I will anyhow manage to pay her
expenses. If Mrs. Bull brings old Landsberg with her, that will be
saving that fool's life as it were.

Most probably I may accompany you back to America. Kiss Holister for me
and the baby. My love to Alberta, to the Leggetts, and to Mabel. What is
Fox doing? Give him my love when you see him. To Mrs. Bull and S.
Saradananda my love. I am as strong as ever, but it all depends upon
leading a quiet life ever afterwards. No hurly-burly any more.

I had a great mind to go to Tibet this year; but they would not allow
me, as the road is dreadfully fatiguing. However, I content myself with
galloping hard over precipices on mountain ponies. (This is more
exciting than your bicycle even, although I had an experience of that at
Wimbledon.) Miles and miles of uphill and miles and miles of downhill,
the road a few feet broad hanging over sheer precipices several thousand
feet deep below. 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. The best time to come is to arrive in India by October or beginning
of November. December, January, and February you see things all over and
then start by the end of February. From March it begins to get hot.
Southern India is *always hot*. 

V.

  
Goodwin has gone to work in Madras on a paper to be started there soon. 

V.

</div>
