---
title: XCVIII

---
<div>

[←](097_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](099_marie.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/40_shuddhananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/41_miss_noble.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/130_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](102_rakhal.htm)

## XCVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7355e8098.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

DEULDHAR, ALMORA,  
*13th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Going to Almora from here I made special efforts for Yogen. But he left
for the plains as soon as he had recovered a little. From Subhala valley
he will write to me of his safe arrival there. As it is impossible to
procure a Dandi (a carrying chair) or any other conveyance, Latu could
not go. Achyut and myself have again come back to this place. Today my
health is a little bad owing to this riding on horseback at breakneck
speed in the sun. I took Shashi Babu's medicine for two weeks — I find
no special benefit. . . . The pain in the liver is gone, and owing to
plenty of exercise my hands and legs have become muscular, but the
abdomen is distending very much. I feel suffocated while getting up or
sitting down. Perhaps this is due to the taking of milk. Ask Shashi if I
can give up milk. Previously I suffered from two attacks of sunstroke.
From that time, my eyes become red if I expose myself to the sun, and
the health continues to be bad for two or three days at a stretch.

I was very pleased to get all the news from the Math, and I also heard
that the famine relief work is going on well. Please let me know if any
money has been received from the office of the *Brahmavadin* for famine
relief. Some money will be sent soon from here also. There is famine in
many other places as well, so it is not necessary to stay so long in one
place. Tell them to move to other localities and write to each man to go
to a separate place. All such work is real work. If the field is made
ready in this way, the seeds of spiritual knowledge can be sown.
Remember this always — that the only answer to those conservative
fanatics who abuse us is such work. I have no objection to getting the
thing printed as Shashi and Sarada have suggested.

You yourselves come to a decision as to what the name of the Math should
be. . . . The money will come within seven weeks; but I have no further
news about the land. In this matter it seems to me that it will be good
if we can get the garden of Kristo Gopal in Cossipore. (Where Shri
Ramakrishna passed his last days.) What do you say? In future great
works will be accomplished. If you agree with me, don't let this matter
out to anybody either within the Math or outside, but quietly make
inquiries. The work is spoiled if plans are not kept secret. If it can
be bought with fifteen or sixteen thousand, then buy at once — of
course, only if you think it good. If something more is demanded, make
some advance payment and wait for those seven weeks. My view is that for
the present it is better to buy it. Everything else will come by and by.
All our associations centre round that garden. In reality that is our
first Math. Let the thing be done very privately.

A work can be judged by its results only, just as one can infer the
nature of previous mental tendencies by their resultant in present
behaviour. . . .

Undoubtedly the price of the land of the garden at Cossipore has
increased; but our purse has, on the other hand, dwindled. Do something
or other, but do it quickly. All work is spoilt by dilatoriness. This
garden also has to be acquired — if not today, tomorrow — however big
the Math on the banks of the Ganga may be. It will be still better if
you can broach the subject through a proxy. If they hear that we are
willing to buy, they will bid high. Do the work very confidentially. Be
fearless; Shri Ramakrishna is our helper, what fear? Give my love to
all. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. (on the cover): . . . Make special efforts for Cossipore. . . . Give
up the land at Belur. Should the poor (The famine-stricken people for
whom the Mahabodhi Society agreed to pay, on condition that the work
would be done in its name.) die of starvation while you people at the
top are indulging in controversy regarding to whom the credit should go?
If "Mahabodhi" takes all the credit, let it. Let the poor be benefited.
That the work is going on well is good news. Work on with greater
energy. I am beginning to send articles. The saccharine and lime have
reached. 

V.

</div>
