---
title: C

---
<div>

[←](099_marie.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](101_shashi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/42_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/132_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](090_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](101_shashi.htm)

## C

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7361e8100.pdf)* )

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

ALMORA,  
*29th July, 1897*.

DEAR SHASHI,

I got information that your work there is going on very well. Get a
thorough mastery of the three Bhâshyas (commentaries), and also study
well European philosophy and allied subjects — see to it without fail.
To fight with others one requires sword and shield — this fact should
never be forgotten. I hope Sukul has now reached there and is attending
on you all right. If Sadananda does not like to stay there, send him to
Calcutta. Don't forget to send to the Math every week a report of the
work including income and expenditure and other information.

Alasinga's sister's husband borrowed four hundred rupees from Badridas
here, promising to send it back as soon as he reached Madras; inquire
from Alasinga and tell him to send it quickly. For I am leaving this
place the day after tomorrow — whether for Mussoorie Hills or somewhere
else I shall decide later.

Yesterday I delivered a lecture in the circle of the local English
people, and all were highly pleased with it. But I was very much pleased
with the lecture in Hindi that I delivered the previous day — I did not
know before that I could be oratorical in Hindi.

Are there any new boys joining the Math? If so, then carry on the work
in the same manner as it is being done in Calcutta. At present don't use
up your wisdom too much, lest it should become completely exhausted —
you can do that later on.

Pay particular attention to your health, but too much coddling of the
body will, on the contrary, also spoil the health. If there is not the
strength of knowledge, nobody would care twopence for your ringing of
the bell — this is certain; and knowing this for certain equip yourself
accordingly. My heart's love and blessings to you and to Goodwin and
others.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
