---
title: CIII

---
<div>

[←](102_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](104_shuddhananda.htm)

  

[«](102_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](104_shuddhananda.htm)  
[«](102_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](107_rakhal.htm)

## CIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7367e8103.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

C/O RISHIBAR MUKHOPADHYAYA,  
CHIEF JUSTICE,  
SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*13th September, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Now Kashmir. The excellent accounts you heard of this place are all
true. There is no place so beautiful as this; and the people also are
fair and good-looking, though their eyes are not beautiful. But I have
also never seen elsewhere villages and towns so horribly dirty. In
Srinagar I am now putting up at the house of Rishibar Babu. He is very
hospitable and kind. Send all my letters to his address. In a few days I
shall go out somewhere else on excursions; but while returning, I shall
come by way of Srinagar, and so shall get the letters also. I have read
the letter that you sent regarding Gangadhar. Write to him that there
are many orphans in Central India and in Gorakhpur. From there the
Punjabis are getting many children. You must persuade Mahendra Babu and
get up an agitation about this matter, so that the people of Calcutta
are induced to take up the charge of these orphans — such a movement is
very desirable. Especially a memorial should be sent to the Government
requesting it to see that orphans taken over by the missionaries are
returned to the Hindus. Tell Gangadhar to come over; and on behalf of
the Ramakrishna Society a tearing campaign should be made. Gird up your
loins, and go to every house to carry on the campaign. Hold mass
meetings etc. Whether you succeed or not, start a furious agitation. Get
all the facts from the important Bengali friends at Gorakhpur by writing
to them, and let there be a countrywide agitation over this. Let the
Ramakrishna Society be fully established. The secret of the whole thing
is to agitate and agitate without respite. I am much pleased to see the
orderliness of Sarada's work. Gangadhar and Sarada should not rest
satisfied until they have succeeded in creating a centre in every place
they visit.

Just now I received a letter from Gangadhar. It is good news that he is
determined to start a centre in that district. Write to him saying that
his friend, the Magistrate, has sent an excellent reply to my letter. As
soon as we come down to the plains from Kashmir, I shall send back Latu,
Niranjan, Dinu, and Khoka. For there is no suitable work for them here
any more; also within three to four weeks send Shuddhananda, Sushil, and
one other to me. Send them to the house of Mr. Shyamacharan
Mukhopadhyaya, Medical Hall, Cantonment, Ambala. From there I shall go
to Lahore. They should have each two thick gerua-coloured jerseys, and
two blankets for bedding. I shall buy them woollen *chaddars*, and other
woollen necessities in Lahore. If the translation of *Râja-Yoga* has
been completed, get it published bearing all the cost. . . . Where the
language is obscure, make it very simple and clear, and let Tulsi make a
Hindi translation of it if he can. If these books are published, they
will help the Math very greatly.

I hope your health is now quite all right. Since reaching Dharamsala I
have been all right. I like the cold places; there the body keeps well.
I have a desire either to visit a few places in Kashmir and then choose
an excellent site and live a quiet life there, or to go on floating on
the water. I shall do what the doctor advises. The Raja is not here now.
His brother, the one just next to him in age, is the Commander-in-Chief.
Efforts are being made to arrange a lecture under his chairmanship. I
shall write all about this afterwards. If the meeting for the lecture is
held in a day or two, I shall stay back, otherwise I go out again on my
travels. Sevier is still at Murree. His health is very bad — going about
in the jolting *tongas* and *jutkas*. The Bengali gentlemen of Murree
are very good and courteous. Give my respects to G. C. Ghosh, Atul,
Master Mahashay, and others, and keep up the spirits of everybody. What
is the news about the house which Yogen suggested we should buy? In
October I shall go down from here and shall deliver a few lectures in
the Punjab. After that I may go via Sind to Cutch, Bhuj, and Kathiawar —
even down to Poona if circumstances are favourable; otherwise I go to
Rajputana via Baroda. From Rajputana I go to the North-Western Province,
(In those days this was made up of Uttar Pradesh and part of the
Punjab.) then Nepal, and finally Calcutta — this is my present
programme. Everything, however, is in God's hands. My love and greetings
to all.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
