---
title: CIV

---
<div>

[←](103_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](105_haripada.htm)

  

[«](103_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](105_haripada.htm)  
[«](093_sudhir.htm) Addressee

## CIV

*To Swami Shuddhananda*

C/O RISHIBAR MUKHOPADHYAYA,  
CHIEF JUSTICE,  
SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*15th September, 1897*.

MY DEAR SHUDDHANANDA,

We are in Kashmir at last. I need not tell you of all the beauties of
the place. It is the one land fit for Yogis, to my mind. But the land is
now inhabited by a race who though possessing great physical beauty are
extremely dirty. I am going to travel by water for a month seeing the
sights and getting strong. But the city is very malarious just now, and
Sadananda and Kristolal have got fever. Sadananda is all right today,
but Kristolal has fever yet. The doctor came today and gave him a
purgative. He will be all right by tomorrow, we hope; and we start also
tomorrow. The State has lent me one of its barges, and it is fine and
quite comfortable. They have also sent orders to the Tahsildars of
different districts. The people here are crowding in banks to see us and
are doing everything they can to make us comfortable.

A clipping from *The Indian Mirror*, quoting passages from an article
written by Dr. Barrows in an American paper, has been sent over to me by
somebody without a name and asking me what reply to give. I send back
the cutting to Brahmananda with my answer to the passages which are
damned lies!

I am glad to learn you are doing well there and going on with your usual
work. I also had a letter from Shivananda giving the details of work
there.

After a month I go back to the Punjab, and I will expect three of you at
Ambala. In case a centre is founded, one of you will be left in charge.
Niranjan, Latu, and Kristolal will be sent back.

I intend to make a rapid march through the Punjab and Sind via Kathiawar
and Baroda, back to Rajputana, and thence to Nepal and last Calcutta.

Write to me C/o Rishibar Babu at Srinagar. I will get the letter on my
way back.

With love to all and blessings,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
