---
title: CVIII

---
<div>

[←](107_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](109_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](107_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](109_rakhal.htm)  
[«](101_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](122_shashi.htm)

## CVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7371e8108.pdf)* )

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*30th September, 1897*

MY DEAR SHASHI,

Now I am returning from a visit to places in Kashmir. In a day or two I
shall leave for the Punjab. As my health is now much better, I have
decided to tour again in the same way as before. Not too much lecturing
— one or two lectures, perhaps, in the Punjab, otherwise none. The
people of our country have not yet offered me even as much as a pice for
my travelling expenses — and to cap it all, to take with you a whole
party, well, you can easily understand how troublesome it all is. It is
also a matter of shame to have to draw upon only the English disciples.
So, as before, I start out "with only a blanket". In this place there is
no need for any person like Goodwin, as you can see.

A monk from Ceylon, P. C. Jinawar Vamar by name, has written to me among
other things that he wants to visit India. Perhaps he is the same monk
who comes of the Siamese royal family. His address is Wellawatta,
Ceylon. If convenient, invite him to Madras. He believes in the Vedanta.
It will not be so difficult to send him to other places from Madras. It
is also good to have such a person in the Order. My love and blessings
to you and all others. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. The Maharaja of Khetri is reaching Bombay on the 10th October. Don't
forget to present him an address of welcome. 

V.

</div>
