---
title: CXVII

---
<div>

[←](116_baburam.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](118_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](116_baburam.htm) Chronology [»](118_rakhal.htm)  
[«](115_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](118_rakhal.htm)

## CXVII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8390e8117.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

DELHI,  
*30th November, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Part of the money that Miss Müller promised has reached Calcutta. The
balance will come afterwards in a short while. We have also some amount.
Miss Müller will deposit the money in your name as well as mine with
Messrs. Grindlay & Co. As you have got the power of attorney, you alone
can draw all the money. As soon as the money is deposited, you yourself
with Hari go to Patna and meet that gentleman and by some means or other
influence him; and if the price of the land is reasonable, buy it. If it
cannot be had, try for some other plot of ground. I am trying to get
some money in these parts too. We must hold the big festival on our own
plot of ground — remember this must be your first and foremost work,
come what may.

You have shown great pluck; the work you have done these last eight or
nine months does you great credit. Now you must see to it that a Math
and a centre in Calcutta are steadily established before everything
else. Work hard to this end but quietly and in secret. Get information
about the Cossipore house also. Tomorrow I am going to Khetri via Alwar.
My health is good, even though I have caught a cold. Send all letters to
Khetri. My love to all.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. What about the will I asked you to make in favour of Sharat and
Hari? Or will you buy the land and other things in my name, and I shall
make a will?

V.

</div>
