---
title: CXXIII

---
<div>

[←](122_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](124_shashi.htm)

  

[«](122_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/118_christina.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/078_sister.htm) Addressee
[»](132_mary.htm)

## CXXIII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DISTRICT,  
BENGAL, INDIA,  
*2nd March, 1898*.

MY DEAR MARY,

You have news of me already, I hope, through the letter I wrote to
Mother Church. You are all so kind, the whole family, to me, I must have
belonged to you in the past, as we Hindus say. My only regret is that
the millionaires do not materialise: and I want them so badly just now
that I am growing decrepit and old and hot in the midst of building and
organising. Though Harriet has got one of a million virtues, a few
millions of cash virtue would have made it more shining, I am sure; so
you do not commit the same mistake.

A certain young couple had everything favourable to make them man and
wife except that the bride's father was determined not to give his
daughter to anyone who had not a million. The young people were in
despair when a clever matchmaker came to the rescue. He asked the
bridegroom whether he was willing to part with his nose on payment of a
million — which he refused. The matchmaker then swore before the bride's
father that the bridegroom had in store goods worth several millions,
and the match was completed. Don't you take like millions.

Well, well, you could not get the millionaire, so I could not get the
money; so I had to worry a good deal and work hard to no purpose; so I
got the disease. It requires brains like mine to find out the true cause
— I am charmed with myself!

Well, it was in Southern India, when I came from London and when the
people were feting and feasting and pumping all the work out of me, that
an old hereditary disease made its appearance. The tendency was always
there, and excess of mental work made it "express" itself. Total
collapse and extreme prostration followed, and I had to leave Madras
immediately for the cooler North; a day's delay meant waiting for a week
in that awful heat for another steamer. By the by, I learnt afterwards
that Mr. Barrows arrived in Madras next day and was very much chagrined
at not finding me as he expected, though I helped getting up an address
for him and arranged for his reception. Poor man, he little knew I was
at death's door then.

I have been travelling in the Himalayas all through last summer; and a
cold climate, I found immediately, brought me round; but as soon as I
come into the heat of the plains I am down again. From today the heat in
Calcutta is becoming intense, and I will soon have to fly. This time to
cool America as Mrs. Bull and Miss MacLeod are here. I have bought a
piece of land for the institution on the river Ganga near Calcutta, on
which is a little house where they are living now; within a stone's
throw is the house where the Math is situated at present in which we
live.

So I see them every day and they are enjoying it immensely *à L'Inde*.
They intend making a trip to Kashmir in a month, and I am going with
them as a guide and friend and philosopher perhaps, if they are willing.
After that we all sail for the land of freedom and scandal.

You need not be alarmed with me as the disease will take two or three
years at worst to carry me off. At best it may remain a harmless
companion. I am content. Only I am working hard to set things all right
and always so that the machine moves forward when I am off the stage.
Death I have conquered long ago when I gave up life. My only anxiety is
the *work*, and even that to the Lord I dedicate, and He knows best.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
