---
title: CXXVII

---
<div>

[←](126_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](128_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](126_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/141_margot.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/122_miss_macleod.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/124_miss_macleod_mrs_bull.htm)

## CXXVII

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

DARJEELING,  
*29th April, 1898*.

MY DEAR JOE JOE,

I have had several attacks of fever, the last being influenza.

It has left me now, only I am very weak yet. As soon as I gather
strength enough to undertake the journey, I come down to Calcutta.

On Sunday I leave Darjeeling, probably stopping for a day or two at
Kurseong, then direct to Calcutta. Calcutta must be very hot just now.
Never mind, it is all the better for influenza. In case the plague
breaks out in Calcutta, I must not go anywhere; and you start for
Kashmir with Sadananda. How did you like the old gentleman, Devendra
Nath Tagore? Not as stylish as "Hans Baba" with Moon God and Sun God of
course. What enlightens your insides on a dark night when the Fire God,
Sun God, Moon God, and Star Goddesses have gone to sleep? It is hunger
that keeps my consciousness up, I have discovered. Oh, the great
doctrine of correspondence of light! Think how dark the world has been
all these ages without it! And all this knowledge and love and work and
all the Buddhas and Krishnas and Christs — vain, vain have been their
lives and work, for they did not discover *that* "which keeps the inner
light when the Sun and Moon were gone to the limbo" for the night!
Delicious, isn't it?

If the plague comes to my native city, I am determined to make myself a
sacrifice; and that I am sure is a "Darn sight, better way to Nirvâna"
than pouring oblations to all that ever twinkled.

I have had a good deal of correspondence with Madras with the result
that I need not send them any help just now. On the other hand I am
going to start a paper in Calcutta. I will be ever so much obliged if
you help me starting that. As always with undying love,

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
