---
title: CXXX

---
<div>

[←](129_sturdy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](131_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](129_sturdy.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/124_miss_macleod_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](128_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](131_rakhal.htm)

## CXXX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8407e8130.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

SRINAGAR,  
*17th July, 1898*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I got all the news from your letter. . . . My opinion regarding what you
have written about Sarada is only that it is difficult to make a
magazine in Bengali paying; but if all of you together canvass
subscribers from door to door, it may be possible. In this matter do as
you all decide. Poor Sarada has already been disappointed once. What
harm is there if we lose a thousand rupees by supporting such an
unselfish and very hardworking person? What about the printing of
*Raja-Yoga*? As a last resort, you may give it to Upen on certain terms
of sharing the profit in the sales. . . . About money matters, the
advice given previously is final. Henceforward do what you consider best
regarding expenditure and other things. I see very well that my policy
is wrong, and yours is correct, regarding helping others; that is to
say, if you help with money too much at a time, people instead of
feeling grateful remark on the contrary that they have got a simpleton
to bank upon. I always lost sight of the demoralising influence of
charity on the receiver. Secondly, we have no right to deviate even
slightly from the purposes for which we collect the donations. Mrs. Bull
will get her rosary all right if you send it care of Chief Justice
Rishibar Mukhopadhyaya, Kashmir. Mr. Mitra and the Chief Justice are
taking every care of them. We could not get a plot of ground in Kashmir
yet, but there is a chance that we shall do so soon. If you can spend a
winter here, you are sure to recoup your health. If the house is a good
one and if you have enough fuel and warm clothing, then life in a land
of snow is nothing but enjoyable. Also for stomach troubles a cold
climate is an unfailing remedy. Bring Yogen with you; for the earth here
is not stony, it is clay like that of Bengal.

If the paper is brought out in Almora, the work will progress much; for
poor Sevier will have something to do, and the local people also will
get some work. Skilful management lies in giving every man work after
his own heart. By all the means in our power the Nivedita Girls' School
in Calcutta should be put on a firm footing. To bring Master Mahashay to
Kashmir is still a far cry, for it will be long before a college is
established here. But he has written that it is possible to start a
college in Calcutta, with him as the principal, at an initial expense of
a thousand rupees. I hear that you all also favour this proposal. In
this matter do what you all consider best. My health is all right. I
have to get up seldom at night, even though I take twice a day rice and
potatoes, sugar, or whatever I get. Medicine is useless — it has no
action on the system of a Knower of Brahman! Everything will be digested
— don't be afraid.

The ladies are doing well, and they send you their greetings. Two
letters from Shivananda have come. I have also received a letter from
his Australian disciple. I hear that the outbreak of plague in Calcutta
has completely subsided.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
