---
title: CXXXI

---
<div>

[←](130_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](132_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/124_miss_macleod_mrs_bull.htm)
Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/126_your_highness.htm)  
[«](130_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/133_raja.htm)

## CXXXI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8408e8131.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

SRINAGAR,  
*1st August, 1898*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

You are always under a delusion, and it does not leave you because of
the strong influence, good or bad, of other brains. It is this: whenever
I write to you about accounts, you feel that I have no confidence in
you. . . . My great anxiety is this: the work has somehow been started,
but it should go on and progress even when we are not here; such
thoughts worry me day and night. Any amount of theoretical knowledge one
may have; but unless one does the thing actually, nothing is learnt. I
refer repeatedly to election, accounts, and discussion so that everybody
may be prepared to shoulder the work. If one man dies, another — why
another only, ten if necessary — should be ready to take it up.
Secondly, if a man's interest in a thing is not roused, he will not work
whole-heartedly; all should be made to understand that everyone has a
share in the work and property, and a voice in the management. This
should be done while there is yet time. Give a responsible position to
everyone alternately, but keep a watchful eye so that you can control
when necessary; thus only can men be trained for the work. Set up such a
machine as will go on automatically, no matter who dies or lives. We
Indians suffer from a great defect, viz we cannot make a permanent
organisation — and the reason is that we never like to share power with
others and never think of what will come after we are gone.

I have already written everything regarding the plague. Mrs. Bull and
Miss Müller and others are of opinion that it is not desirable to spend
money uselessly when hospitals have been started in every Ward. We lend
our services as nurses and the like. Those that pay the piper must
command the tune.

The Maharaja of Kashmir has agreed to give us a plot of land. I have
also visited the site. Now the matter will be finalised in a few days,
if the Lord wills. Right now, before leaving, I hope to build a small
house here. I shall leave it in the charge of Justice Mukherjee when
departing. Why not come here with somebody else and spend the winter?
Your health will improve, and a need, too, will be fulfilled. The money
I have set apart for the press will be sufficient for the purpose, but
all will be as you decide. This time I shall surely get some money from
N.W.P., Rajputana, and other places. Well, give as directed . . . money
to a few persons. I am borrowing this amount from the Math and will pay
it back to you with interest.

My health is all right in a way. It is good news that the building work
has begun. My love to all.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
