---
title: CXXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](137_sturdy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](139_marie.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/142_sister_christine.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/143_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/139_miss_macleod.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/163_joe.htm)

## CXXXVIII

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

THE LYMES,  
WOODSIDES, WIMBLEDON,  
*3rd August, 1899*.

MY DEAR JOE,

We are in at last. Turiyananda and I have beautiful lodgings here.
Saradananda's brother is with Miss Noble and starts Monday next.

I have recovered quite a bit by the voyage. It was brought about by the
exercise on the dumb-bells and monsoon storms tumbling the steamer about
the waves. Queer, isn't it? Hope it will remain. Where is our Mother,
the Worshipful Brahmini cow of India? She is with you in New York, I
think.

Sturdy is away, Mrs. Johnson and everybody. Margo is rather worried at
that. She cannot come to U.S. till next month. Already I have come to
love the sea. The fish Avatâra is on me, I am afraid — good deal of him
in me, I am sure, a Bengali.

How is Alberta, . . . the old folks and the rest of them? I had a
beautiful letter from dear Mrs. Brer Rabbit; she could not meet us in
London; she started before we arrived.

It is nice and warm here; rather too much they say. I have become for
the present a Shunyavâdi, a believer in nothingness, or void. No plans,
no afterthought, no attempt, for anything, *laissez faire* to the
fullest. Well, Joe, Margo would always take your side on board the
steamer, whenever I criticised you or the Divine cow. Poor child, she
knows so little! The upshot of the whole is, Joe, that there cannot be
any work in London, because you are not here. You seem to be my fate!
Grind on, old lady; it is Karma and none can avoid. Say, I look several
years younger by this voyage. Only when the heart gives a lurch, I feel
my age. What is this osteopathy, anyway? Will they cut off a rib or two
to cure me? Not I, no manufacturing of . . . from my ribs, sure.
Whatever it be, it will be hard work for him to find my bones. My bones
are destined to make corals in the Ganga. Now I am going to study French
if you give me a lesson every day; but no grammar business — only I will
read and you explain in English. Kindly give my love to Abhedananda, and
ask him to get ready for Turiyananda. I will leave with him. Write soon.

With all love etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
