---
title: CXLII

---
<div>

[←](141_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](143_mary.htm)

  

[«](141_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/145_christina.htm)  
[«](137_sturdy.htm) Addressee [»](146_sturdy.htm)

## CXLII

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

RIDGELY MANOR,  
*14th September, 1899*.

MY DEAR STURDY,

I have simply been taking rest at the Leggetts' and doing nothing.
Abhedananda is here. He has been working hard.

He goes in a day or two to resume his work in different places for a
month. After that he comes to New York to work.

I am trying to do something in the line you suggested, but don't know
how far an account of the Hindus will be appreciated by the Western
public when it comes from a Hindu. . . .

Mrs. Johnson is of opinion that no spiritual person ought to be ill. It
also seems to her now that my smoking is sinful etc., etc. That was Miss
Müller's reason for leaving me, my illness. They may be perfectly right,
for aught I know — and you too — but I am what I am. In India, the same
defects plus eating with Europeans have been taken exception to by many.
I was driven out of a private temple by the owners for eating with
Europeans. I wish I were malleable enough to be moulded into whatever
one desired, but unfortunately I never saw a man who could satisfy
everyone. Nor can anyone who has to go to different places possibly
satisfy all.

When I first came to America, they ill-treated me if I had not trousers
on. Next I was forced to wear cuffs and collars, else they would not
touch me etc., etc. They thought me awfully funny if I did not eat what
they offered etc., etc. . . .

In India the moment I landed they made me shave my head and wear
"Kaupin" (loin cloth), with the result that I got diabetes etc.
Saradananda never gave up his underwear — this saved his life, with just
a touch of rheumatism and much comment from our people.

Of course, it is my Karma, and I am glad that it is so. For, though it
smarts for the time, it is another great experience of life, which will
be useful, either in this or in the next. . . .

As for me, I am always in the midst of ebbs and flows. I knew it always
and preached always that every bit of pleasure will bring its quota of
pain, if not with compound interest. I have a good deal of love given to
me by the world; I deserve a good deal of hatred therefore. I am glad it
is so — as it proves my theory of "every wave having its corresponding
dip" on my own person.

As for me, I stick to my nature and principle — once a friend, always a
friend — also the true Indian principle of looking subjectively for the
cause of the objective.

I am sure that the fault is mine, and mine only, for every wave of
dislike and hatred that I get. It could not be otherwise. Thanking you
and Mrs. Johnson for thus calling me once more to the internal, 

I remain as ever with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
