+++
title = "On Triptolemus And Demeter, Soma And The Sacral Rites Of Life Andxa0Land"
date = "June 29, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/41e8b547b18dc50bfe81531f5d06eaa5.jpg?w=450)

A foundational principle of Indo-European ritual is succinctly expressed
in the Latin maxim – ‘Do Ut Des’ : “I Give So That You Might Give”. The
Tale of Triptolemus might be thought to similarlysimply express the
truth of this utterance – although upon closer examination, its
resonancies are anything but “simple”, especially when considered in the
proper comparativeIndo-European light!

For those unaware, Triptolemus is a figure closely associated with both
grain and the Goddess Demeter. There are varying accounts of
Triptolemus’ origins and parentage, which – while interesting – we shall
not concern ourselves with here. For now, it is enough to know that in
most versions of the myth, Demeter is hospitably received and this leads
to a boon being bestowed to Triptolemus.

Straightaway, we can see another frequently encountered concept of
Indo-European religion – that of the God as Guest, and invited and
thence treated (in the archaic sense also – of offering something to,
particularly sustenance) as such.

The manner of the boon’s administration vary dependent upon the form of
the myth being looked at. The Second Homeric Hymn to Demeter presents
the occasion as Demeter wandering ‘dark-cloaked’ in the disguised form
of an old woman following the loss of Persephone, calling Herself ‘Doso’
(Δωσὼ – that is to say ‘I Shall Give’), teaching Her Rites and
“Mysteries” to Triptolemos – there regarded as a chief of the land in
question (other recountings have Triptolemos as a child, a son of the
couple who take Her in; Ovid specifies a ‘feast’ of milk (with dissolved
curd), apples, and honey); whilst a young infant, Demophon, is fed on
Her divine breastmilk, anointed with Ambrosia, breathed upon by Her (in
at least one telling – that of Ovid, who appears to conflate Demophon
and Triptolemus in this regard – there are ‘spells’ spoken thrice as
well, that are beyond the ability of a mortal to utter; part of a series
of actions beginning with Divine Breath, then the milk, then stroking
the infant thrice, then the ‘Spells’, and then the Fire), and begins to
become closer to divinity himself in consequence. Unfortunately,
Demophon’s mother catches sight of the *other* part to Demeter’s
child-care approach .. that of placing Demophon within a fire
(interestingly referred to as the ‘Menos’ of Fire – ‘Menos’ being
‘(Active) Spirit’, ‘Passion/Desire’, ‘Power’, or ‘Violence’, etc.;
therefore suggesting that this is ‘Alive Fire’ rather than mere mundane
inflammation – in the manner of the PIE distinction between ‘animate’
and ‘inanimate’ fire with the former being divinely connected and
underpinning ‘Agni’ etc.), and in her shock at seeing this raises vocal
objection – thus causing Demeter to drop the child, with perhaps
predictable results.

However, all is not lost – and Demeter then states that She is going to
teach Her Rites to the people; then re-assuming Her Divine Form.

These Rites plausibly pertain to a few things – but in particular
amongst them should seem to be the fertility of the land. For that is
where the Homeric Hymn then proceeds. Demeter is wandering having lost
Persephone, and so the lands are cursed with barrenness in Her Immense
Grief.

We are therefore unsurprised to find that in various other forms of the
myth, Triptolemus is hailed as having Demeter’s Blessing, in the
specific forms of a serpentine/dragon-drawn chariot, and the ability to
sow seeds which shall germinate and restore vegetation’s abundance to
the world. Whether this is due to a chieftain or noble figure having
been taught the priestly aptitudes in question – or whether it is due
to, as other tellings have it, Triptolemos being in effect adopted as a
foster-son of the Goddess, the impact is the same.

And now for the comparanda which unlocks the archaic Indo-European
underpinnings of this myth.

Triptolemos is an intriguing term in terms of its etymology. There are
two broad proposals – either it means Three War\[riors\]\[Ptolemos –
πτόλεμος\], or it means Beater of Rinds/Husks \[“Tripto(s) + Lemma
\[λέμμᾰ\]”\]. I am not sure that these terms are intended mutually
exclusively, as we may see in process.

The curious thing about the former proposal is that Ptolemos plausibly
is from a Proto-Indo-European term – Pel – which has as its ambit of
meaning, ‘push’, ‘press’, ‘pound’. Triptolemos, therefore, *should* mean
something of the order of ‘Triple Press\[er\]’. Why is this pertinent?
Because the etymology for the Vedic ‘Soma’ and Old Norse ‘Kvasir’ –
effectively mean ‘That Which Is Crushed’, ‘That Which Is Pressed’.
Indeed, Soma is produced via the application of the ‘Press-Stones’ to
crush the stalks of the plant in question. This occurs in triple format
– there are three daily Soma pressings/offerings; and likewise, we have
three vessels for the Mead of Poetry produced of Kvasir. This would not
appear to be coincidental.

So, Triptolemos, therefore, would be the figure carrying out just such a
triple-pressing. Which would plausibly form part of those Rites and
Mysteries taught to Him by Demeter. Those rites which bring about life –
and which may also underpin significant empowerment for the imbiber of
an elixir, a milky elixir, made with honey, likewise. I specify ‘milk’
and ‘honey’ for we have met just such a brew repeatedly aforehand –
bestowed by the Meliai \[‘Ash-Nymphs’ – yet also with ‘Meli’ as in Honey
as part of the designation\] to nourish the infant Zeus, or the Etruscan
presentation of Hercle (Hercules / Herakles) being ‘adopted’ by Uni
(Juno – the Wife of the Sky Father), and nourished to the point of
implicit effective apotheosis via Her Divine Breastmilk; or, of course,
the attestations both numinous and numerous in the Vedas for Vak Aditi
Saraswati, hailed as the Mother Cow, providing streams of milk (which
are, intriguingly, correlate also with Speech Themselves, or perhaps
‘Awareness’; three that are found within our worlds, and a fourth which
is beyond comprehension – perhaps not unlike the
unintelligible/unrepeatable ‘Spells’ made use of by Demeter when
bestowing milk which empowers Triptolemus), which resonate rather
strongly with the Soma.

This is exactly as we should expect, given the vitally important role of
a romantic partner of the Sky Father deific in the production of Soma /
the Mead of Poetry – Vak Saraswati in the Vedic understanding
(co-operating with the Asvins, c.f WYV XIX 12), Gunnlod (a name itself
derived from a ‘Crushing’ term in PIE, as we reviewed in ‘The Way of the
Gun’ recently; the other half meaning ‘Hospitality’) in the Eddic.

In terms of a proper comparanda, we can quite easily situate Demeter
with relation to Vak – I have addressed this at some length in various
of my other works, so shall not repeat it in great depth nor detail
here. Instead, there is one particular portion of the Shatapatha
Brahmana which sprang instantly to mind of obvious saliency for these
mat(t)ers –

SB IV 6 9:

“16 They sit down by their several dhishnya-hearths. Now, once on a
time, the pith of Vâk (speech) wished to desert the gods who had won it;
it tried to creep away along this earth, for Vâk is this earth: her pith
are these plants and trees. By means of this Sâman they overtook it,
and, thus overtaken, it returned to them. Hence upwards on this earth
grow the plants, and upwards the trees. And in like manner does the pith
of Vâk wish to desert these (sacrificers) who have won it, and tries to
creep away along this earth,–for Vâk is this earth: her pith are these
plants and trees. By means of this Sâman they overtake it, and, thus
overtaken, it returns to them. Hence upwards on this earth grow the
plants, and upwards the trees.

17 They chant verses of the queen of serpents; for the queen of serpents
is this earth: through her they thus obtain everything. The prelude is
performed by (the Udgâtri) himself, and the chant is not joined in (by
the choristers), lest some one else overhear it. For he would cause (the
performance) to be in excess were another to chant; he would cause an
excess, were another to join in it; he would cause an excess, were
another to overhear it: therefore the prelude is performed by (the
Udgâtri) himself, and the chant is not joined in.”

As we have again previously addressed quite voluminously, in a
substantive piece of similar naming to the figure – the Indo-European
Mother Goddess has a Serpentine form. This is frequently associated with
Vengeance (i.e. the restoration of Cosmic Order – She is the Active
Enforcement Clause to the Divine Law, we may say; particularly when in
Black, Furious format – as seen with Demeter Erinyes (the raging in a
state of ‘Menis’ (‘Furor’, etymologically cognate with Sanskrit ‘Manyu’,
upon Whom we have written quite extensively; also the term used to
present the ‘Rage of Achilles’ in the Iliad) ‘dark’ form taken by Her
following the abduction of Persephone – i.e. the period wherein the
Triptolemus encounter occurs, perhaps explaining the pointed
‘Dark-Cloaked’/Shrouded descriptors in the relevant Homeric Hymnal),
Devi as Kali, and Skadi (Wife of Odin, with a name suggesting ‘Shade’)
making use of a serpent to punish Loki); however it is *also* pointedly
associated with fertility of the land. Indeed, as applies the more
general typological elements here – that of the upholding of the Divine
Order (through righteous violence), and the restoration of life to the
land … in Hindu understanding, we can find these as one and the same
when we consider the example of Devi as Shakambhari – where She both
conquers a demon army (irrigating the desiccated earth with rivers of
their blood) and *also* restores the knowledge of the Rites to mankind,
providing them with fruits and other vegetable matter that they may
offer up as part of these, thus enabling the ‘gifting cycle’ upon which
the rhythm of the cosmos depends, to resume and (demonic-disruption of
same caused) drought and famine to come to an end.

However, to address the Shatapatha Brahmana verses above – what we find
is, again, quite clear in its resonancy with Greek myth pertaining to
Demeter. There, too, we have Demeter engaged in a wandering away from
Her Station with “the Deathless Gods” (this is repeatedly stated in the
aforementioned Homeric Hymn), and there to do we have an ophidian
association for the restoration of fertility to the land following a
Divine assuagement/persuasion for Her to return to Them. However, rather
than the actual serpentine form of Demeter which we find attested
elsewhere in Greek myth, in the tale of Triptolemos it is the
Dragon-drawn Chariot of Demeter which is relevant; bestowed to
Triptolemos by Demeter that Triptolemus might fly forth across the land
sowing grain and restoring abundance to the otherwise-barren earth. The
relevant ‘Verses of the Queen of Serpents’ mentioned in the Shatapatha
Brahmana there, pertain to a RigVedic Hymnal – RV X 189 – that is
attributed to Vak, and likewise feature the empowerment of a figure to
fly through the air rendering the world habitable again; in that case,
with a particularly Solar saliency, correlated with the ritual fires of
sacrifice, a (male) bovine, and the empowerment with Speech of a Bird …
the animals in question, other than the Goddess as Cow, likely connoting
the Sky Father deific. It is quite also apparent that the enaction of
the relevant rites to Demeter, the construction of Her Temple in Eleusis
similarly presage the (eventual) restoration of fertility to the land
(albeit with this occurring in the Homeric Hymn following the
restoration of Persephone to Her Mother; and with other sources placing
this a-priori to Triptolemus being granted the Boons for Mankind in
consequence).

It almost goes without saying that there is quite a lot more we could
feasibly suggest about just about all of the above, and at far greater
length than we have already extolled. But there is another – perhaps
brief – point I feel I should make.

Porphyry, a Neoplatonic and noted advocate for vegetarianism, includes
the following passage in his ‘On Abstinence From Animal Food’ IV:

“We learn, therefore, that Triptolemus was the most ancient of the
Athenian legislators; of whom Hermippus, in the second book of his
treatise on Legislators, writes as follows: “It is said, that
Triptolemus established laws for the Athenians. And the philosopher
Xenocrates asserts, that three of his laws still remain in Eleusis,
which are these, Honour your parents; Sacrifice to the Gods from the
fruits of the earth; Injure not animals.” Two of these, therefore, he
says, are properly instituted. For it is necessary that we should as
much as possible recompense our parents for the benefits which they have
conferred on us; and that we should offer to the Gods the first-fruits
of the things useful to our life, which they have imparted to us. But
with respect to the third law, he is dubious as to the intention of
Triptolemus, in ordering the Athenians to abstain from animals. Was it,
says he, because he thought it was a dire thing to slay kindred natures,
or because he perceived it would happen, that the most useful animals
would be destroyed by men for food? Wishing, therefore to make our life
as mild as possible, he endeavoured to preserve those animals that
associate with men, and which are especially tame. Unless, indeed,
because having ordained that men should honour the Gods by offering to
them first-fruits, he therefore added this third law, conceiving that
this mode of worship would continue for a longer time, if sacrifices
through animals were not made to the Gods. But as many other causes,
though not very accurate, of the promulgation of these laws, are
assigned by Xenocrates, thus much from what has been said is sufficient
for our purpose, that abstinence from animals was one of the legal
institutes of Triptolemus. Hence, those who afterwards violated this
law, being compelled by great necessity, and involuntary errors, fell,
as we have shown, into this custom of slaughtering and eating animals.
The following, also, is mentioned as a law of Draco: “Let this be an
eternal sacred law to the inhabitants of Attica, and let its authority
be predominant for ever; viz. that the Gods, and indigenous Heroes, be
worshipped publicly, conformably to the laws of the country, delivered
by our ancestors; and also, that they be worshipped privately, according
to the ability of each individual, in conjunction with auspicious words,
the firstlings of fruits, and annual cakes. So that this law ordains,
that divinity should be venerated by the first offerings of fruit which
are used by men, and cakes, made of the fine flour of wheat.”

It would be tempting to simply write this off as a very late (circa 3rd
century A.D.) philosopher with an agenda putting words in the mouths of
far more ancient figures in a bid to claim legitimacy for his
preferential provisions. Yet I am not entirely sure if that is the case.
For other than the potential that the remarks of other authorities of
antiquity upon this subject are as he suggests them to be, there is a
curious resonancy with the ritual substitution formulas found in the
Shatapatha Brahmana. These would date from at least a millennium prior
to when Porphyry was writing in their codification (and various elements
in said text are demonstrably of far greater – indeed, PIE Urheimat –
antiquity, as we have covered elsewhere), and set out a schema whereby
animal (or, for that matter, human) sacrifice can be substituted for
with alternative edible offerings. It is partially upon this basis that
we today, as Hindus, are fine in offering baked goods and fruits. Part
of the implicit logic for this form of offering in the Brahmana itself,
is that the ‘energy’ of sacrifice has grown up in the form of crops and
may therefore be re-offered to continue on the next phase of the cycle –
it is energy which has ‘gone into the earth’, and which has come back up
again via “digging” which produces the aforementioned crops in question.
In other words – it is of specific importance as applies ensuring the
fertility of the land and natural abundance of consumable vegetation.

The supposition that this may, therefore, preserve an archaic PIE
traditional understanding is likely to run into the immediate objection
that so far as we know the Proto-Indo-Europeans were not large-scale
plantation farmers. Which is often misinterpreted by many as the archaic
Indo-Europeans not being farmers at all – presumably because this does
not fit comfortably with a reductionist ‘headcanon’ about steppe
pastoralists as a sort of raiding, hunting, and assumedly
barely-even-omnivorous “barbarian” pastiche. While some of the (later)
Classical corpus of texts around Triptolemos make an interesting point
about his boon of agriculture being unavailable to the Scythians (and/or
potentially Thrace) due to an incident in which Triptolemus or one of
the Dragons drawing the chariot was attacked by a barbarian king … this
contrasts rather heavily with the evidence available to us that
Scythians did, in fact, know how to farm, consumed cereals, and were
even exporting significant quantities of grain to Greece many centuries
before these later texts had been written (which, when placed alongside
the name of the supposed Scythian king in question, leads me to suspect
that at best this is a symbolic representation for something else, that
has become misunderstood, misinterpreted, and therefore misapplied).
Further, the fact that we have an array of Proto-Indo-European terms
shared among both East and West branches of its descent for not only
various agriculturally derived edibles (including quite specifically
grains and cereals) but also the actual mechanics entailed in their
production (featuring sowing, ploughing, threshing, chaff, etc.) … would
appear to rather strongly suggest at least some active facility with
agriculture (notwithstanding the saliency for non-IE substrate
contributions about particular elements where these later-encountered
non-IE populations may have held competitive advantage – for example,
the potentially BMAC-origin terms for ‘irrigation channels’ encountered
in Indo-Iranian and Tocharian) ; and there is also the again
demonstrable fact that we have mythic/religious concordancies in
multiple Indo-European descendant populations for ritual and mythic
occurrences of significant import for agriculture. Even if agriculture
were left largely out of the equation, I see no reason to suspect that
the earthy abundance of consumable foodstuffs sourced from plants should
have no space within the archaic Indo-European world view – nor,
therefore, their devotional framework of tangible applications.

To bring things back to the aforementioned Shatapatha Brahmana ritual
understanding – the specific place where it is given tangible expression
to which I am referring (SB I 2 3), has it immediately after a rite of
penitence for the act of Brahmanicide carried out by Lord Indra and
Trita Aptya (Who actually does the deed, upon Indra’s behalf), that
being the killing of Trisiras (the Three Headed – see various of my
previous works for more details, in particular the “On The Indo-European
Typology Of Iolaus – Third Dragon-Slayer”). I mention this in part due
to the fact that the Brahmanicide (Brahmahatya) – as a direct offence
against the immanency and saliency of Rta (Cosmic Order) here within
this universe of ours – is accompanied by a terrifying female
personification, black in visage, rising up out of the Earth to pursue
the perpetrator and drive them to quaking madness in the manner of a
Greek Erinyes; hence the necessity of the expiation rites to remove the
imprecation of this most grievous Sin. Demeter Erinyes, Whom we have
implicitly previously met earlier in this piece when She is out
wandering in ‘dark-cloaked’ and Menis \[‘Fury’\] visage following Her
circumstances viz. Persephone – is quite strongly resonant with this
understanding for reasons which ought be obvious (and which I had
earlier examined in ‘The Queen of Serpents – The Serpentine Figure of
the Indo-European Earth Mother’ … inter several alia). It may therefore
be less than coincidental that we find a resonancy between ritual
elements involved in propitiating the fearsome Black Avenging Form and
turning the emanation of ‘Death’ (back) to ‘Life’ in each of these
Indo-European mytho-religious spheres. Certainly, it is not hard to see
how Trita Aptya \[‘Third, Son of the Waters’; with the ‘Third’ in
question potentially being the ‘Third Pressing’ of the daily rites\]
might possibly have some shared derivation with relation to Triptolemos,
the Son of Oceanus \[a parentage attested in a number of Classical
sources – in amidst, to be sure, others\], particularly given the role
of both figures as Priest(s). However, these potential linkages are
somewhat tangential, and I do not wish for them to obscure the far more
substantive coterminities which underpin the actual major thrust of my
analysis viz. Triptolemus in proper (broader) Indo-European situation.

To return to that, then – what can be quite safely stated is that the
mythology around Triptolemos presents us with a number of elements
easily recognizable through the lenses of Vedic comparanda to therefore
(due to their co-occurrence amidst the Greeks and Romans) be of archaic,
even Proto- Indo-European origination. A situation perhaps surprisingly
unimpeded by the somewhat mutually internally contradictory details of
the various Classical accounts of the figure – they agree enough, about
enough, that a typology is evident built around a few core details; and
even those points they do *not* agree upon, various of the more
prominent ones we can likely connect either to each other or to, again,
broader Indo-European understandings.

As we have seen – the very name of ‘Triptolemos’ itself connotes
something resonant: ‘Three-Press\[ing\]’ , ‘Third-Press\[ing\]’ – as
akin to the other understandings in amidst the Vedic and Eddic
Indo-European contexts, where three is the number for ‘That Which Is
Pressed’ (Soma / Kvasir) with remarkable consistency. As we have also
seen, the utilization of the Divine Milk of the Mother Goddess (in
symbolic ‘Cow’ form or otherwise) in the course of nourishment and
empowerment of a person (with this ’empowerment’ potentially also
entailing the faculty of speech or specific facility with a pious,
operationalizable form of sacred speech) should be likewise regarded as
indelibly Indo-European, particularly given its strongly evident
conceptual overlap with the ‘milk and honey’ understanding for the more
‘manufactured’ ’empowering elixir’ produced via the ‘pressed’ stalks of
the certain plant. We have also observed that the Mother Goddess may
bestow not only Her Milk, or the secrets to the provision of potions
remarkably similar to same, but also broader ritual understandings and
operational procedures – make a man a Priest, in effect \[and certainly,
there is at least one – vitally important – line of Shruti where this is
directly stated to be the case). With these ritual operationalizations
plausibly including those intended to placate the Goddess (encouraging
Her to return Home) and facilitate the re-fertility of the
formerly-teemingly-abundant earth with vegetative growth, featuring a
certain ‘draconic/serpentine’ association for said Mother Goddess in
this specific context as well, likewise.

Even despite the … multifaceted state of the Classical corpus when
presenting the myth of Triptolemus , it is difficult to deny the overt
unity of essence on show here in broader Indo-European terms.

Hail Triptolemos ; Hail Demeter

Jai Vak Devi !
