+++
title = "On The Rudraksha – Tears ofxa0Rudra"
date = "June 8, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/img_07631.jpg?w=768)

Worn about my wrist upon many occasions are three things – two are
bandhs from a Priest; one from my RudraAbhishek, some five and a half
years ago, the other from an occasion where I had assisted that same
Pandit in another matter. But the third … they are a Mala \[akin to
‘prayer-beads’\] of Rudraksha – the Tears of Rudra. Given to me by my
older sister, and of Nepali origin. But what is meant by these? What are
these ‘Tears of Rudra’?

Well, first let us take some glances at the etymology. Aksha – it can be
translated as Eye, but also as Tear. Rudra, meanwhile …

It is perhaps interesting to note that the PIE which underpins ‘Rudra’ –
‘Hrewdh’ – is strongly linked to the act of weeping, expression of
powerful lamenting emotion. c.f Old English ‘Reotan’ – although there,
too, the sense of ‘howling’ or ‘thunder’s roar’ is possible

I am generally rather … cautious of, as somebody once said of some of my
work, “linguistics as theology”. The Arya Samaj flagrant misuse of
Yaska’s Nirkuta is a good example of why. ButIf we accept that Vedic
Sanskrit is the ‘language of the universe’ , then ‘nominative
determinism’, wherein the essence of a thing is at least partially
expressed via the naming of the thing, is an entirely rational belief to
hold. And even if one did not – then it still makes sense that labelling
take place with regard to observed characteristics of the thing.

However, it is the *nuances* between different terms which are vitally
important – and also the ‘gravitational’ \[well, gravitas/graha\] impact
these labellings may have upon the subject as a result of being declared
thus.

As applies Rudra – apart from the obvious point, wherein the Manyu
\[‘strong emotion’ as part translation\] of Prajapati is indeed
expressed through tears and crying in the context of SB IX 1 1 6 -“And
as to why he performs the Satarudriya offering. When Prajapati had
become disjointed, the deities departed from him. Only one god did not
leave Him, to wit, Manyu (“Wrath”): extended He remained within. He
(Prajapati) cried, and the Tears of Him that fell down settled on Manyu.
He became the hundred-headed, thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra. And
the other drops that fell down, spread over these worlds in countless
numbers, by thousands; and inasmuch as They originated from crying
(Rud), they were called Rudras (Roarers). That hundred-headed,
thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra, with His bow strung, and His
arrow fitted to the string, was inspiring fear, being in quest of food.
The Gods were afraid of Him.”

As a brief point of interest, this Emanation of The Manyu, contains a
suite of direct one-for-one parallels for the Classical accounting of
the Birth of Athena / Minerva – but we have explored that in far grander
depth of detail elsewhere. And I digress ..

It has often seemed to me that an essence-tial element of the Roudran
mythic cycles is one of grief, of sadness and of lamentation.

We focus – justifiably and understandably – upon the War-Cry, the Roar ;
less often do we find the Howl of grief and pain referenced.

We find mentioned within the scriptural canon, exemplar-instances
wherein it is an empathy which moves the Tears of Rudra \[Shiva Purana,
1 25\], and the correlation of these with the long eyes open meditation
prior to Aghora deployment against Tripurasura \[Srimad Devi Bhagavatam
XI 4\].

Yet for me, the major association of Rudra with Tears and Wailing must
surely be that occurrence following the ill-fated fete of the
Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha. It is one detail, and some might suggest
easily eclipsed by so much else of the mythology –

But it is an irreducibly important one. For after all, without the loss
of Sati, we would have no Shakti Peetha sites comprised of the
dismembered parts to Her \[following Vishnu’s “intervention” and
sudarshana ‘grief-counselling’\] ; nor the eventual re-cycle of the
NavaDurgas.

There are quite literal litanies of occurrences which are keyed to this
ultimate event, as I hardly need to say \[including the burning of Kama
.. and also, interestingly, the fating of Tarakasura – the father of the
Tripurasuras aforementioned\]

So without intending to reduce the All-God in psychoemotive scope and
range to this one expression \[and Veerabhadra is depicted as having
pretty much *all* emotions simultaneously on show\], grief has
nevertheless felt quite powerful as a part of His Myth.

In terms of IE cognates … I would put forward Hades & Persephone –
specifically the notion of the half-year separation between the couple
\[a situation also found with the Wife of Odin Skadi in the Nordic
sphere – although for different reasoning\]

As applies the Greek myth, people often presume that a kidnapping made
the Bride an unwilling captive; yet I am not sure that is quite what was
actually in the archaic (P)IE myth, and Victorian Englishmen almost
certainly over-emphasized certain elements for morality of the day

Perhaps it is the romantic in me, but I should like to believe that we
have the right of it – and that the relationship between Rudra and Devi
was (and very much is) a loving one, with intensive sorrow to the
prospective separation between the Two.

It has certainly rendered what is celebrated on MahaShivRatri all the
more poignant – a love story so great it transcends death itself.

But I digress.

To return to the texts aforementioned, here are some brief selections
from Shiva Purana I 25:

These words are ascribed in the text to an exchange of Shiva with His
Wife, explicating the nature and the characteristics of varying grades
of Rudraksha –

“O Śivā, Maheśāni, be pleased to hear the greatness of Rudrākṣa. I speak
out love for you from a desire for the benefit of the devotees of Śiva.

O Mahesāni, formerly I had been performing penance for thousands of
divine years. Although I had controlled it rigorously, my mind was in
flutter. Out of sport, I being self-possessed just opened my eyes, O
Goddess, from a desire of helping the worlds. Drops of tears fell from
my beautiful half-closed eyes. From those tear-drops there cropped up
the Rudrākṣa plants.”

The text goes on at quite some length extolling the proper
interpretation and utilization of the varying forms of Rudraksha, and
interestingly also quotes Yama issuing injunction to His Servants not to
tarry the way of the proper Rudraksha wearer and waylay this being to
YamaLoka. It is said that even the most egregious sin of Brahmahatya
\[Brahmin-killing\] is warded against via these more powerful tokens of
the Auspicious One’s favour. Although, as ever, this is not something to
be attempted.

Now, as applies the Devi Bhagavatam quotation I had earlier cited – XI 4
–

“Rudra Deva spoke :– O Child Ṣaḍānana. I will dwell briefly on the
secret cause of the greatness of the Rudrākṣa seed. Hear. In days of
yore, there was a Daitya called Tripurā who could not be conquered by
any body. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas were defeated by him. They
then came to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura. At their request, I
called in my mind the Divine Great weapon, named Aghora, beautiful and
terrible and containing the strength of all the Devas, to kill him. It
was inconceivable and it was blazing with fire.

For full divine one thousand years I remained awake with eyelids wide
open in thinking of the Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all obstacles,
whereby the killing of Tripurāsura might be effected and the troubles of
the Devas be removed. Not for a moment my eyelids dropped. There by my
eyes were affected and drops of water came out of my eyes. Note here.
How enemies are to be killed. It requires great thought, great
concentration, great yoga and great powers. O Mahāsena! From those drops
of water coming out of my eyes, the great tree of Rudrākṣam did spring
for the welfare of all.”

Again, the rest of the section is given over to detailing the various
forms and functions of the Rudraksha encountered in this world of ours.
I shall not repeat these here.

Now, for our purposes as devotees – the benefits of wearing the
Rudraksha, whether in Mala form like mine or as a pendant etc., have
been capaciously extolled elsewhere. They also make for rather handy
mechanisms to ‘keep count’ for the 108-cycles of Japa \[‘repetition of
mantra/theonym’\] worship.

Yet I think that the rather more intriguing element to all of this is
the one which is understated literally every time we use the term :
“Rudraksha”.

Tears of Rudra.

Tears, as we have seen – not merely of Fury, or of Lament (although
certainly, those too, are most eminently appropriate for the theonymics
surrounding Rudra and Manyu) – but also of an ’empathy’, a ‘sodality’, a
‘compassion’.

We so often focus upon the Raging Face of Rudra – and that is
understandable, it is certainly an incredibly powerful visage. Yet it is
not the whole story. There is also the Merciful and Caring God, One
Whose Wrath is also motivated by compassion for the sufferings caused by
that rage’s targets.

Fortunately, we have a quite tangible reminder for us of this essential
truth.

The Rudraksha. As seen, right here about the arm.

ॐ नमः शिवाय
