+++
title = "On The Etymology Of Airavata – The Elephant Ofxa0Indra"
date = "June 20, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/46cece98defd8b3f85caad0fff1e7a5b.jpg?w=750)

Airavata is the Vahana \[‘Steed/Mount/Vehicle’\] of Lord Indra; and with
a rather apt etymology to connect it to the Thunderer.

It effectively works out as ‘Rain-bearing Cloud’ ; which is rather apt,
given that a stormcloud is, of course, large, grey, and may make a
thunderous noise \[‘Garja’\] … like an Elephant (indeed, गर्ज can refer
to this aforementioned roaring sound … or to an elephant, for reasons
that ought be obvious). 　

To render it into its constituent components –

इरावत् \[Iravat, for readers not following Devanagari\], as in ‘Ocean’
or ‘Water’ .. although it also has the meaning of ‘providing
liquid/sustenance’.

Now, for what it is worth, I don’t disagree that ‘Vata’ is figuratively
relevant \[i.e. वात – ‘Vaata’ for people not following the Devanagari ..
which is indeed cognate with English ‘Wind’\], as it is, after all, the
high atmosphere where a cloud does rise to immediately prior to the
thunder and rainfall occurring. \[in Sanskrit , and Hindu cosmology –
there is a bit of a distinction made between the more ‘regular’ Wind,
i.e. ‘Vayu’ … and the higher atmospheric layer closer to the border of
Space – that is the ‘Vata’ zone aforementioned\]

However, the ‘Vata’ in ऐरावत is rather ‘वत’, which I would suggest to be
वत् \[ ‘-vata’ as in .. well, the ‘adjectival’ – like -‘ful’ or ‘-ous’
in modern English .. the latter of which it is interestingly cognate
with; although ‘-full’ .. as in ‘full of’ would be another way to
approach the Sanskrit term in question\]

Thus giving us, in effect, Ira + Vata \[ इरा + वत् \] – meaning
‘Water-full’ / ‘Water-ful’ .. I suppose ‘Aqueous’ would be another more
English grammatically correct translation.

To this we add an A-/An- Sanskrit prefix – producing an “Of the-“

So … Of The (Nourishing) Water. \[which is also held to pertain to the
mythic origination of Airavata in the Sea of Milk\]

And, to see this ‘Ira’ in context, \[the word i mean\], it may be
interesting to consider RV V 83 4, addressed to Parjanya :

प्र वाता वान्ति पतयन्ति विद्युत उदोषधीर्जिहते पिन्वते स्वः ।  
इरा विश्वस्मै भुवनाय जायते यत्पर्जन्यः पृथिवीं रेतसावति ॥

There, to quote Griffith, we find ‘Ira’ used to mean ‘Food’ in his
translation – although as we can see, ‘nourishment’ (in the sense that
the rains are thusly so) is perhaps more apt in general terms:

“Forth burst the winds, down come the lightning-flashes: the plants
shoot up, the realm of light is streaming.  
Food springs abundant for all living creatures, what time Parjanya
quickens earth with moisture.”

Although as we have previously covered in a number of pieces, and lest
there be any confusion – Parjanya is a Sky Father Aspect/Facing … thus
rendering Indra as His Son.

Nobody *ever* said that the Striker/Thunderer deific had a monopoly upon
Thunder, Lightning, and Rainfall.

Or, as it happens, having an Elephant Vahana \[Brihaspati, another Sky
Father Form, is also depicted riding an Elephant, for instance\].

Although I do not think that there are any *quite* like Airavata !
