+++
title = "On Robert Sepehr’s Spurious Suggestion That Vanaras Constituted A “Simian Slavexa0Race”"
date = "June 22, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/main-qimg-67c11d4278913969eb30ae0077102987.jpg?w=602)

Earlier today, an associate alerted me to some annoying remarks by one
Rober Sepehr – a pseudo-anthropologist of dubious standingyet notable
following, who appears to have made a small mint off conspiratorial
ravings with a veneer of ‘serious’ sounding mythological referencing.

This time, he’s taken as his target some bizarre prognostications about
a ‘hidden history’ for humanity involving a genetically altered ‘slave
race’ … which he has identified as also being expressed via the Hindu
concept of Vanaras.

Here’s the quote from Sepehr – “similar stories can be found in India,
which describe a simian slave race used by the Gods which were depicted
as a different archaic species”.

Why am I furious? That description of Vanaras (and his video at this
point shows scenes from the Ramayana featuring Lord Ram’s allies engaged
in the bridge-building to Lanka) as being a “simian slave race used by
the Gods”.

It’s just .. simply not the case. Instead, it seems that Sepehr
basically just heard we have ‘monkey’ featured mythic beings involved in
one of our epics, that they perform physical labour at one point in the
story, and decided it fitted nicely with his predetermined beliefs
around an ‘untermenschen’ ‘slave race’ of pseudo-men.

In order to correct this, it is necessary to briefly explicate just what
a Vanara actually is. And in particular, why some of the most prominent
of that race *really resoundingly disprove* this ‘simian slave race’
silliness.

Now, the Vanaras – for those unaware – are an anthropomorphic race of
animal-resembling, forest-dwelling humanoids variously stated to have
features of Bears or Apes / Monkeys. With deference to the most archaic
occurrence of a Vanara, RV X 86, it may be said that the VrsaKapi is a
‘Bull Ape’. Vrsa (वृष ) does mean ‘Bull’, and can also mean ‘Strong’,
‘Virtuous’, ‘Potent’, ‘Masculine’, and perhaps somewhat figuratively,
‘Thrusting’. Kapi (कपि ), refers perhaps unsurprisingly to an ‘Ape’ –
although also has within its definitional ambit the notion of
‘proficiency’, ‘expertise’. Vrsa is also, again unsurprisingly, a way to
refer to Lord Indra (and I say ‘unsurprisingly’, because the point of RV
X 86 is to state that Vrsakapi is ritually equivalent to Indra –
offerings to Vrsakapi going to the same place) – and so therefore, we
may similarly render Vrsakapi as ‘Ape Indra’ … or, perhaps, as Marvel
Comics once put it … “Thorangutang”.

In more recent times, we hail this Vrsakapi as Lord Hanuman – often
known as ‘the monkey god’; and in Hindu theological terms regarded as a
Son of the Wind God (other texts have a Son of Shiva – but then, of
course, I repeat myself) and even an Avatar in a sense of His
Progenitor. Hanuman is known via an array of titles, although the one
most frequently encountered is Bajrangi / Bajrang Bali. This derives
from ‘Vajra’ – and refers simultaneously to His ‘indestructible’ /
‘invincible’ nature as well as His striking with sheer irresistible
force.

So, far from being some sort of genetically engineered subservient
“slave race”, we find this foremost of the Vanaras to actually be … the
Indo-European Striker/Thunderer deific and quite literally a God.

Some in the audience might point out that Lord Hanuman is also
incredibly devoted to Lord Rama, and is also described in quite positive
terms as the ‘Friend to Man’. It is definitely true that Hanuman has
immense love for Lord Rama, as well as Lakshman and Sita – there is a
touching portion of the Ramayana wherein Hanuman opens up His Chest, and
it is seen that within His Heart, quite literally, there are these
Three. Except I should say that it would be a truly churlish and alien
psychology which could *possibly* regard such love, such friendship as
being the insignia of “enslavement”. Probably one without too many
friends of their own.

As applies the ‘Friend to Man’ sobriquet – this, again, is something
found as emblematic for the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer deific. It
is a quality of Thor, it is a quality of Herakles / Hercules. In other
words, despite the fearful and formidable power of the Lord of Thunder
and His Great Demon-Smiting Weapon, this God is an ‘approachable’ one by
mortals – and also takes a keen interest in the protection of our realm
‘gainst threats to it and us. Some might view such a thing as ‘slavery’
… if they were some sort of Satanist who viewed ‘divinity’ in the most
childish possible manner as being like an infantilie view of being a
King as “oh, that just means I can do whatever I want with nobody
\[able\] to tell me what to do!” Being a Divinity is, in no small
measure, an existence of service to the Cosmos, the upholding and active
(re-)immanentization of Cosmic Law – the DevaRajya, RtaRajya, the Divine
Regime of which we, too, as humanity are a part. ‘With Great Power Comes
Great Responsibility’, indeed – and this, too, funnily enough, was a
core portion of Lord Hanuman’s mythic ‘narrative arc’ also seen through
the Ramayana: He had been sent to Earth and stripped of His Powers
(well, His recollection of having Them) due to using them in an
irresponsible and irreverent manner – and could only ‘earn’ these back
through acting in the required and expected-of manner for a God, looking
after and protecting others. Perhaps there is some figurative comparison
to the Redemption to be won by Herakles through His performance of the
Twelve Tasks – but that is another matter for another time.

In terms of other great scions of the Vanara race(s), a further
prominent exemplar is the King Jambavan. Whereas often Vanaras
(especially Hanuman) are described as Monkeys or Apes with human
features (or, perhaps, the other way around – and some have sought to
euhemerize the whole concept to simply ‘forest-dwelling’ humans, from
‘Vana’ – ‘forest’), Jambavan is often pointedly described as a Bear.
Indeed, the term utilized for Jambavan is Rksa – which is of interest
not only because it is a direct cognate for Arktos, Ursa, etc. … but due
to what this therefore indicates about the station of this King. Rksa is
stated in the Shatapatha Brahmana to be an archaic manner to refer to a
Rsi – a Seer, one of the original Priests of the Vedic Religion (to
summarize and oversimplify greatly). We have recently managed to connect
the celestial occurrency of this term – specifically the Rksa
constellation (the “Great Bear” as we would call it in the West –
exactly the same stars) – to a broader typology of Bear-shaped priestly
sorts or metaphysically empowered humans across the Indo-European
sphere. The Berserks referred to in the Ynglinga Saga are another
example of this typology in mythic presentation – Odin’s Men, enabled to
change shape via His empowerment. See my ‘Arktos, Ursa, Rksa SaptaRsi –
The Seven Bear-Seers Amidst The Stars And The Foundational Act Of Piety
Of The Maidens Of Milk And Fate’ for further details.

Now Jambavan is, of course, described as a sage – and I would suggest
that there is some archaic Indo-European saliency to the notion of the
Bear as teacher (this concept was raised with me some days ago by a
mister AJ Matheson); however why this is relevant is twofold. First,
because the notion of an *ursine* rather than ‘simian’ humanoid helps to
show that the Vanara is not merely a ‘monkey-man’, but that both ‘bear’
and ‘ape’ are rather imprecise (yet symbolically resonant) descriptors
for the beings in question … but second, because while I am sure some
people presume that a ‘simian’ makes for a logical visual
reference-point for a “slave”, I would also suspect rather strongly that
when we think of a *bear*, we do not tend to envisage these creatures as
engaged in servitude (unless enlisted in the Polish Army – although as
applies Wojtek the Bear, it is perhaps interesting to note that he was
more properly speaking *Corporal* Wojtek … and therefore actually
outranked many human soldiers). Instead, you ask somebody about a Bear
in mythic terms, and you shall hear that they are Mighty, Dangerous, and
decidedly not ‘servile’.

Quite a difference this saliency makes, no?

As applies the Vanaras which Sepehr has chosen to illustrate his video
with – these Vanaras are assembled in an army, immediately prior to the
assault upon Lanka in order to recover Rama’s Wife Sita from the
clutches of the demon emperor Ravana. They did indeed construct a
causeway across to Lanka – in a manner perhaps not un-reminiscent of
Alexander’s army engaged in similar such conduct during the course of
the ‘Son of Zeus” siege of Tyre in 323 B.C..

Now, again, these Vanaras are not described as ‘slaves’, or anything of
the sort. They are members of an army – indeed, a divine war-host with
various of these being of direct divine descent or emanation and
possessed of potent metaphysically charged abilities. The rest of the
Vanara army is also described in impressive terms – being incredibly
strong, valorous, and capable of fighting with weapons or even their
bare hands against the Rakshasa (Demon) army of the foe. Their immense
strength is not only useful for impressive feats of combat-engineering –
they hurl massive trees like javelins and are even capable of felling a
war-elephant in such a manner.

Some might suggest that military discipline and putting one’s life upon
the line for a cause is somehow commensurate with slavery – in which
case, there assumedly has never been such a thing as a free people with
a free army at any time in the Ancient World.

It is absolutely, undeniably true that the Vanaras of the war-effort
against Ravana fought for a cause which was more expansive than any one
individual caught embroiled up within same. Does that somehow make them
“slaves”? “Servile”? No!

It makes them pious, dutiful, principled, and loyal. All admirable – and
decidedly *human* – traits which many of us could do with a damn sight
more of in our own lives. A slave does something because he or she is
compelled to do it – they have no say in the matter, nor any real
feeling of connexion or of insight into what it is and why it is done. A
free man, by contrast, does something *because he chooses to* – and at
least some of the time, because he has at least some inkling of what it
is which he is actually choosing to do … what is at stake, and what he
risks via his conduct in doing it.

That is what we see with the constituent members of Lord Ram’s Army.
Volunteers who have *chosen* to be there, and have *chosen* to make
their contribution – even at the cost of their own lives if necessary …
the proverbial “ultimate sacrifice” (and a sacrifice, it must be
remembered, is something voluntarily offered (up)). A hugely
heartwarming occurrence of exactly this is to be found in the tale of a
certain squirrel who yearned to make just such a pious contribution to
the war-effort even in spite of his diminutivestature. I looked at this
in more depth and detail in ‘ON THE MYTHOLINGUISTICS OF WAR \[Part 2\] –
In The Divine War, The Squirrel Is (Also) The Role Of Man’; however I
think it’s time for a brief excerpted revisit (because I really do find
it immensely touching as a tale – I literally tear up talking about it).

“Now it is not in everybody to be a *literal* (or, rather
‘mytho-literal’) Indo-European equivalent to what Chesterton had cited
as the “knights of God” – the *direct* combatants amidst the fray \[on
that note, my mind recalls the Slavic term ‘Bogatyr’, which *looks* as
if it combines both Indo-Iranian and Germanic/Nordic elements referring
to a Lord, a Deity, a Warrior … although this is likely a ‘false friend’
in one or possibly both portions\]. And it is generally only the Gods,
the mightiest of the mighty, to be found at the वीराशंसन \[‘Virasansana’
– a term which might, perhaps, translate figuratively into English as
the ‘Forlorn Hope’, in the military sense; ‘where the fighting is
thickest’ – where the greatest Veer would wish to be, a great position
of honour, both pre and post-mortem\] .

But that is not and should not be regarded as any sort of barrier to
making your contribution. As the old proverb goes – “it takes all sorts
to make an army”. Or, to illustrate this principle via recourse to
mythology – during the course of the construction of the bridge that
would allow Lord Rama’s army to make its way to Lanka \[thus presaging
Alexander the Great’s somewhat similar exercise carried out against
Tyre\], it was observed that in amidst the mighty Vanaras who were
bearing great boulders to cast into the surf, a small squirrel was
darting to and fro carrying pebbles. This was regarded somewhat
disparagingly by some, who scoffed at the squirrel’s presumption that it
had a meaningful contribution to make in amidst the far physically
larger and stronger Vanaras, who were already (and occasionally
literally single-handedly) ferrying tonnes of rock for the bridge at a
time. This did not dissuade the squirrel, however, who is reported to
have earnestly kept attempting to do its bit to help – as much as its
comparatively meager strength would allow. Even being directly insulted
by a Vanara on grounds of its alleged superfluity and the purported
comical insignificance of its efforts could not dissuade the squirrel,
who responded to such barbs with vocal protestations of its piety
(towards Rama) as the cause of its need to assist and matched saliencies
of physical exertion which turned words into tangible action. In fact,
the only thing which *did* manage to stop the Squirrel, was its being
physically assaulted and flung through the air by an irritated Vanara –
whereupon the Squirrel is reported to have landed at Rama. Who pointed
out to all assembled that quite apart from the noble virtue demonstrated
by the little squirrel’s indefatigable determination to make whatever
contribution it could, as being the essence of piety – that in fact,
what the Squirrel had actually been doing, between its diligent
gap-filling with the pebbles, and its shaking off of the water, salt,
and sand it had picked up by running across the beach each time to the
construction site … was providing the cementing which bound the
structure and gave it much of its its resilience, cohesiveness,
integrity and strength. In recognition of this, and in thanks, Lord Rama
then placed a mark of His Divine Favour upon the Squirrel – the three
pale lines which run longitudinally down the fur of the Indian Palm
Squirrel’s back.

A more succinct summation of the above was pointed out by one of my
devotees –  
Squirrel: “Tiny, I am, Lord, and so I carried only pebbles.”  
Rama: “Tiny, you are, and yet you did the giant’s work.”

A beautiful thing, it brings tears to my eyes.”

Some people out there take the rather demonic view that the properly
Pious are ‘Slaves’ to God or Gods. This is frequently the perspective of
the sort of ‘person’ who merely wishes to displace a divinity and become
a self-perceived ‘slave-master’ (or ‘authority’, ‘law’) unto themselves.
Often whilst talking in vague and pseudo-grandiloquent terms of general
themes of “liberation”. Ignoring of course, that as Hannah Arendt sagely
pointed out (drawing heavily from the ancient Greeks to do so – hence
the charge levied against her of having perceived ‘Polis Envy’),
‘Freedom’ or ‘Liberty’ is not some asinine absolute absence of
constraint and the ability to act as a total solipsist within this world
of ours … but rather, a sphere of self-actualization only capable of
meaningfully occurring in a public sphere. And hence, implicitly only
something really possessable by a citizen. One who makes a contribution
– and one who adheres to, belongs to, is only fully expressed in, this
greater context than themselves.

Our acts of piety do not render us ‘slaves’ – they simply evince that we
have chosen to live righteously, and perceive that there is more to this
earth and this life within it than ‘us’. That there is Something above
us, to Whom we are enduringly grateful – and to Whose solemn, sacred,
joyous cause we also pledge our enacting, enduring, empowering
allegiance.

To be a “slave”, would be to lack the wit and the wisdom to realize this
– to recognize, and to be able to recognize, only one’s self (and one’s
self-perceived ‘self-interest’), especially as the supreme arbiter
(moral or otherwise) of the world within which we might thrive. Even
being a slave to one’s self is still the condition of a slave.

It is true to state that Hanuman is regarded in contemporary Hinduism as
emblematic of a certain attitude toward the Divine which is hailed as
healthy (‘whole’) – that of a properly pious devotee prepared to
undertake perilous endeavours in service of the Divine, and capable of
embarking upon quite the journey of self-knowledge, self-discovery, and
‘self-cultivation’ to become more than one was (more than one even
realized (or, perhaps, remembered) that one could be) at its outset.

And yet, such things were not – and in all likelihood, *could* not – be
compelled from Him. They were instead engaged in of choice, of free
will, and out of love.

The Vanara, in other words, undoubtedly the most famous of his kind –
was the *exact opposite* of a “Slave”. “Simian” (or, perhaps more
properly, ‘Bull-Ape’) though He might be.

A worthy lesson to us all!

Jai Sri Ram.

Bajrang Bali Ki Jaye !
