+++
title = "The Indo-European Death And Resurrection Show – A Remarkable Persistence Even At The Periphery Of Modern (Myth)Understanding"
date = "June 30, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/10812.jpg?w=1024)

The recent Pew Research Forum analysis of religion in India makes for
interesting reading. One point which has attracted some surprise is the
finding that apparently ‘only’ 40% of Hindus really believe in
Reincarnation (as compared, as a point of interest, to 27% of Indian
Muslims, 29% of Indian Christians, 18% of Indian Sikhs, 18% of Indian
Buddhists, and 23% of Indian Jains). Now this should not actually be
terribly surprising. Professor Michael Witzel wrote about this
phenomenon – the apparent lack of serious Reincarnation Uber Alles for
post-mortem situation of the soul amongst Hindus, I mean, not the
intriguing Hindufication of Muslims upon some of these matters – some
years ago. I shall quote his work below, however first I want to address
the matter from a comparative Indo-European view.

Now, there appear to have always been two not-entirely-competing strands
within the broader Indo-European sphere about what happens to a person
after they die –

Either the person ‘persists’ in some form, whether this is a
metempsychotic journey to an afterworld (possibly featuring return
travel at specified junctures of the year, as seen with the Roman
Lemuria and Hindu Pitru Paksha) or persistence as a ghost within this
world of ours;

Or the person is ‘sent back’ in another form and very much alive.

We tend – understandably – to focus upon the former, here in the Western
IE sphere, as that is what many of the great myths also place their
evocatively illustrative emphasis upon. Who could forget, for instance,
the tales of Odysseus sailing down to the Underworld in a bid to beseech
advice from the Dead and encountering the horrifying reality of his own
mother’s death while he has been away? Or the Nordic vision of winning
one’s place within Valhalla through heroic feats of arms upon the
battlefield.

However, the belief in reincarnation has also been in evidence in both
the Classical and the Germanic spheres. In the latter, the heroHelgi
Hundingsbane and his Valkyrie lover, Svava / Kara, do just exactly this
– it is treated in the texts themselves (Helgakviða Hiörvarðssonar and
Helgakviða Hundingsbana II) in a somewhat cursory manner, and in the
case of the latter it is somewhat derisively termed an “old wives’ tale”
… but it is there.

To quote:

“Þat var trua i fornescio, at menn vęri endrbornir, enn þat er nu calluð
kerlinga villa” – “It was believed, in the old days, that people were
reincarnated, although this is now called old wives´ tales”
\[Helgakviða Hundingsbana II \]

“Helgi oc Svava er sagt at vęri endrborin” – “Helgi and Svava are said
to have been reincarnated” \[Helgakviða Hiörvarðssonar\]

“hon var Sváva endrborin” – “She was Sváva reincarnated” \[Helgakviða
Hundingsbana II\]

Now, as the astute reader shall have likely detected – it is that word
“endrborin” which refers to “reincarnation”. Literally, it is “Endr+
Borin”, that is to say “Again-Born”. Quite direct, even if perhaps less
ornately imaginative than some other cultures’ ways of putting it –
although “Reincarnation” is, obviously, directly the same thing. There
are some additional intriguing elements to the Nordic conception of such
things around the rather strong potentia for patrilineal conditioning to
this reincarnation (and a debate some will probably seek to enter into
as to whether the *female* reincarnation observed here is ‘just because
she’s a Valkyrie’) – but we can safely leave those matters for another
time. The point is, there was *an* awareness of reincarnation … in
amidst quite a lot of talking about not-this and various forms of more
.. enduring afterlife either in the upper and more heavenly-construed
realms or the dark and disturbing underworlds.

A similar “Do You Believe In An Afterlife Or In Reincarnation? “Yes”
scenario is observed within the Classical schema.

People are not infrequently aware of Plato or Pythagoras being drawn
upon to support various positions of this reincarnatory framework within
the Greek world-view, along with the Orphic etc. mystery perspectives.
What might be less prominent – although presumably of greater importance
for our understanding of a more ‘orthodox’ archaic Greek belief, is what
is found in Pindar’s Odes:

“When they die, hearts that were void of mercy pay the due penalty, and
of this world’s sins a judge below the earth holds trial, and of dread
necessity declares the word of doom.  
But the good, through the nights alike, and through the days unending,
beneath the sun’s bright ray, tax no the soil with the strength of their
hands, nor the broad sea for a poor living, but enjoy a life that knows
no toil; with men honoured of heaven, who kept their sworn word gladly,
spending an age free from all tears. But the unjust endure pain that no
eye can bear to see.  
But those who had good courage, three times on either side of death, to
keep their hearts untarnished of all wrong, these travel along the road
of Zeus to Kronos’ tower. There round the Islands of the Blest, the
winds of Oceanus play, and golden blossoms burn, some nursed upon the
waters, others on land on glorious trees; and woven on their hands are
wreaths enchained and flowering crowns, under the just decrees of
Rhadamanthys, who has his seat at the right hand of the great father,
Rhea’s husband, goddess who holds the throne highest of all. And Peleus
and Cadmus are of that number, and thither, when her prayers on the
heart of Zeus prevailed, his mother brought Achilles, he who felled
Hektor, Troy’s pillar invincible, unyielding, and brought death to
Cycnus, and the Aithiop \[Memnon\] son of Eos.”

Of particular interest for us, is Pindar’s additional contribution in
his Dirges – of which, unfortunately, only fragments have survived:

“But, as for those from whom Persephone shall exact the penalty of their
pristine woe, in the ninth year she once more restoreth their souls to
the upper sun-light; and from these come into being august monarchs, and
men who are swift in strength and supreme in wisdom; and, for all future
time, men call them sainted heroes.”

Now, this line ought presumably be read in concert with other materials
pointing toward an eventual ‘getting off’ the merry-go-round of
(re-)incarnation, in the manner of the aforementioned Ode explication.
The idea being communicated assumedly having several cycles of
incarnation with the last of these being a truly ‘great’ one afore the
eventual more enduring outcome / reward is attained. Perhaps amidst the
Stars – but that is cosmological speculation for another time.

I say that it is ‘of particular interest’ for us, because it depicts
Persephone in a rather active role engaged in the management of the
Death And Resurrection Show – indeed, something of an Underworld (dare I
say – ‘Iron’) Queen. This is coterminous with the presentation of Aditi
in the Vedic understanding reigning over the Pitrs, and of course,
Hekate as both Solar Goddess and ‘Underworld Sun’ co-identified with
Persephone elsewhere. Freyja’s rule in Folkvangr is definitely relevant
here likewise.

All of which brings us back to the Hindu perception of these things.

Now, I said I was going to quote Witzel at length here, and I shall
indeed do that – but first it is necessary to set out some context.

The Vedic understanding does indeed have an afterworld prominently
featured – and it is not an “underworld”, but rather it is on high.
Indeed, Yama’s Realm is actively used at least once as something of a
kenning in one of the RigVeda’s ‘riddle hymns’ for the Sun at its
noon-day zenith-apex. The Solar Afterworld is, indeed, an archaic
Indo-European understanding. I have looked at how this position has
‘migrated’ to a ‘night side’ one under the earth as a fairly consistent
derivation in multiple Indo-European conceptual schemas elsewhere in the
course of my work, and shall not seek to repeat that analysis here.

However, there is *also* conceptual space within the Vedic verses upon
these matters for resurrective reincarnation to ensue. It is really a
case of ‘both’ rather than either – although with not a huge amount of
detailed explication upon the ‘how’ for reincarnation in the most
archaic elements; and with some academics (interestingly, including
Koenraad Elst – who is usually something of an on-side darling for
various modern Hindu revisionist narratives) attempting to argue that
these should be instead interpreted as something else entirely and
positing reincarnation to be a non-Indo-European belief picked up from
other (i.e. ‘non-Aryan’, non-Vedic) communities archaically upon the
Indian subcontinent. Which would conflict with the evident fact that
these other Indo-European peoples much to the west have long held
reincarnation beliefs *along with* an afterworld, and presumably did not
*also* pick up all of these from the same non-Indo-European
Subcontinental source posited by Elst et co.

In short, when we find that the Pew Research Forum has identified that
only a minority of Indian Hindus have this significant emphasis upon
reincarnation, this does not mean – as some might scurrilously imply –
that they’re “doing Hinduism wrong”. Rather, it more likely means that
they are continuing to persist with elements that are archaically
attested – and that it is a subsequent greatly enhanced emphasis upon
the reincarnation side of things amidst the minds of various
philosophers and theologians .. and the more modern or Western
commentators attempting to engage with our religion largely through
these … which have produced a somewhat distorted perception of the
matter.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, archaic foundationals persist less obscurated
amidst the ‘Rustics’ – the ‘Pagans’ (in the old Latin sense of the term)
– than in the less peripheral ‘centres’ of intellectual development.

And now, Professor Witzel:

“Further, we must also distinguish between an ‘academic’ approach based
on the systems of (some favoured) Hindu philosophers – all too often
this is Sankara – and an analysis based on the thought and religion of
the bulk of the (non-philosophical) populations. As, for example, I have
frequently learned ‘on ground level’, in villages and towns, it is
primarily neither the concept of karma nor the cycle of endless
reincarnations \[…\] but some much older and persistent features that
are more prominent in the thought and lives of most Hindus.  
\[…\]  
We may, however, easily find individual examples whereVedic concepts
and beliefs have been perpetuated into modern times. One such group is
clustered around death and its rituals. The Vedic texts, for example,
refer to ‘the departed’ (preta) flying around as birds or visiting their
descendants in the form of birds \[…\]. This thought is still found in
various parts of modern South Asia and fits poorly into the idea of a
departed soul on its way to the other world or in the process of
reincarnating itself. First, there is the Kaka Bali, ‘Crow offering,’ in
many rituals \[…\]. Crows indeed represent ancestors in Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, and other places – though not everywhere in India. It is
noteworthy that on a certain day, once a year, all crows are said to
assemble in Benares, as if to take part in an annual sraddha feeding. In
Bhaktapur this belief persists in the annual Kwa Puja, ‘Crow Puja’, just
before the Newar New Year in October, which Levy characterizes as
‘Placation of Yama, the god of death’ \[…\].

Another persistent idea is of a departed person going to heaven (or to
the pleasant world of the ancestors in Yama’s realm; RV 10 135 1; ;VadhB
3 91). While this is prominent in Vedic religion from Rgvedic times,
some doubt about it should have been expressed once the late Vedic
‘doctrine’ of reincarnation emerged. This juncture \[…\] of an earlier
common belief in rebirth and the new one in the retributive force of
karma would turn ‘heaven’ into an unnecessary if not an impossible
notion: rebirth should take place upon death. Indeed, medieval Jainas
(and non-Nepalese Buddhists) ridiculed the Brahmans for performing
‘useless’ sraddha rituals since their ancestors must have already been
reincarnated. Rebirth, however, is usually not stressed in modern South
Asia; rather, a long sojourn in (Visnu’s) Heaven is supposed to occur.
The stay in Yama’s, by now, dreadful world or the subsequent rebirth in
this world are played down \[…\], and this is indeed what I often heard
express in Nepal and India: people do not talk about reincarnation, but
everyone wants ‘to go to heaven.’ The expression is also used in the
common Sanskritic term for a departed person: divamgata, ‘gone to
heaven.’ It can be read, for instance, on the printed flyers commonly
found on the walls of houses announcing someone’s death. Even the Newar
Buddhists suppose that a departed person would go to heaven (for
example, Amitabha’s western paradise) before the various constituent
parts of his or her personality would reassemble in various new life
forms. Both Buddhists (even though their interpretation may vary) and
Hindus in Nepal, therefore, perform sraddha ceremonies to feed their
departed ancestors. In other words, the Vedic idea of a stay in heaven
has been integrated into the post-Vedic and medieval view of constant
reincarnation, and it nowadays forms but one step in this process. It
is, however, such an important step that it still takes precedence over
all post-Vedic philosophy and perpetuates the age-old human wish to stay
in a blissful world in the afterlife.  
\[…\]  
The importance of male children in the Mahabharata (1 19) shows links
with Vedic as well as modern concepts. In the epic, the childless
ascetic Jaratkaru meets his ancestors hanging on a string that is gnawed
at by rodents. They are in danger of falling into a deep abyss. They
explain that this is so because they have no descendants beyond
Jaratkaru who could take care of them in the next world. \[…\] If not,
the deep darkness of Nirrti threatens, an abyss which has no light, no
food, no children (RV 7 104)”
