+++
title = "The Way Of The Gun – The Surprising Re-Development Of A Proto-Indo-European Term Into Modern English … And its Comparative Cognates Considered In Both Ritual And Conventional Phraseology Across The Indo-Europeanxa0Sphere"
date = "June 7, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/67094644_10162033685870574_6923656090546601984_n.jpg?w=504)

Something I have long remarked upon is the manner in which certain
terms, certain concepts … they are to be found in incredibly archaic
spheres, and then they ‘fade away’ or they undergo some
transmogrification which obscures their essence somewhat, only to thence
re-emerge somewhere else entirely amidst one of the Indo-European
descendant groups who may erstwiley have forgotten them. It is almost as
if our modern forms are ‘guided’ or *we* are guided to bring back the
past in these regards – to go back to what was once there before.

A good example of this in practice is modern English ‘Huge’. Now, I
hardly need to explicate what its meaning is to be … and it would
therefore seem eminently logical to suppose that it hailed as its
ultimate origin from Proto-Indo-European ‘Hewg’ – which means ‘to get
larger, to increase’.

Except here’s the curious thing: it doesn’t. Huge in English actually
derives from Proto-Germanic ‘Haugaz’, meaning ‘Hill’, from PIE ‘Kewk’
(‘Height’, ‘Hill’, ‘Elevation’). So what has in fact happened is we have
over the span of centuries, ‘re-developed’ a term which sounds
*suspiciously* like the PIE term which means broadly what the modern
English does … even though this has in fact come down to us from a
different ultimate PIE root entirely. Funny, that.

So, too, it would seem, is the case with ‘Gun’.

Now, the etymology for ‘Gun’ is one which isn’t entirely linguistic in
nature – but also has a semi-mythic saliency to it at a key stage in its
development. You see, the Gun as we know it, is so named due to a rather
impressive crossbow itself called the ‘Domina Gunilda’ – the
‘Lady/Mistress Gunnhilda’.

Gunnhilda, as many are presumably aware, is a not infrequently
encountered Nordic name for a woman – quite prominent for several
noblewomen, including the wife of Erik Bloodaxe. I am not aware of a
*direct* statement for a Valkyrie by this name – although certainly, it
would fit with the general underlying typology to Their nomenclature,
and we do find both a Gunnr(‘Battle’/’War’/’Conflict’) and a Hildr
(‘Battle’/’Fight’) enumerated amidst Their ranks.

So, Gunnhilda effectively means … Battle-Battle – or, presuming that the
doublet acts as an intensifier, *big* battle, *serious* conflict, that
sort of thing.

But for our purposes, we may just focus in upon the “Gunnr” element – it
is, after all, the most directly related to our modern “Gun”.

Gunnr is from Proto-Germanic ‘Gunþiz’, and means much the same as its
later Old Norse descendant.

It hails from Proto-Indo-European ‘Gwhen’, in the specific formulation
of ‘Gwhentis’. And that’s where things get somewhat interesting (if they
weren’t already 😛 ).

PIE ‘Gwhen’ means ‘To Kill’ or ‘To Strike’, and informs quite an array
of also-PIE immediately-derived terms which have been preserved with
remarkable fidelity down the ages in various liturgical canons,
occasionally with quite specific shades of meaning understood to dwell
within them.

So, for instance, we have Herakles engaged in the act of ‘κᾰτέπεφνον’
\[‘Katepephnon’ – which, given the ‘Kata-‘ prefex, I suppose we might
feasibly translate as ‘To Strike *Down*‘ somewhat more aptly than merely
‘To Slay’\] in Hesiod against Giants or the Nemean Lion; or Indra in RV
VIII 49 2 –शतानीकेव पर जिगाति धर्ष्णुया हन्ति वर्त्राणि दाशुषे ,
rendered in the Jamison-Brereton translation as “Like (a missile) with a
hundred facets he advances boldly. He smashes obstacles for the pious
man”. The key word in the ecclesiastical Sanskrit there being ‘Hanti’,
our ‘Gwhen’ derivation’ – and the ‘Obstacles’ actually being, funnily
enough, ‘Vritrani’ – that is to say “Vritras”, the word “Vritra”
performing double duty for *both* ‘obstacles’ in the general sense (for
example, to the free flow of waters as part of the orderly cycle of
creation in accordance with Cosmic Law), and ‘adversary’ especially
‘demon dragon(s)’ in the more specific intonation. That ‘Friend to Man’,
‘Helper of (Pious) Man’ theological element is quite consistent across
many of the manifestations of the (Proto-)Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer Deific – however more upon that, perhaps some other
time.

The Sanskrit ‘Gwhen’ formulations are quite pervasive, and we shan’t go
through all of them here. Suffice to say that they are so endemic in
association to certain figures that we do not merely see ‘Ahann Ahim’
\[‘Slew the Serpent’\] as a phrase, but an entire field of theonymics
built around the concept. Vritrahan, Vritraghni, etc. – as seen, for
instance, in RV VI 61 7:वर्त्रघ्नी वष्टि सुष्टुतिम (‘Vritraghni Vasti
Sustutim’) … translated by Griffith as ‘Foe-Slayer, Claims Our Eulogy’,
although given that the Deity being hailed there, Vak Saraswati, is also
stated to play the key role in *slaying* *the* Vritra (in a manner not
unrelated to Athena making Herakles and Iolaos able to slay the Hydra in
Hesiod etc.), it is also quite feasible to interpret this more directly
*as well*, as hailing Vak Saraswati *as* the enactor of Gwhen ‘gainst
the demon-dragon Vritra.

This genus of theonymic provides the evident source for the Zoroastrian
‘Verethragna’, as well as the broader Iranic Vahram, Bahram, etc. and
Armenian ‘Vahagn’, although in the Armenian case I would surmise that
theVishapakagh epithet for Vahagn is effectively a doublet for the
forename. Vahagn is a direct cognate for Vritrahan / Vritraghni \[i.e.
‘Slayer of Vritra’ / ‘Smiter of Resistance’\], a Vishap is a (venomous)
serpent/dragon in the Armenian Indo-European mythology, and ‘-akagh’
would seem an obvious phonetic (multilingual pun there, potentially, for
Ancient Greek ‘Phonos’) coterminity for our relevant Sanskrit ‘slayer’
element. This is important, because it represents a fundamental
distinguishment between the Armenian Vahagn, and the Zoroastrian
Verethragna – as Verethragna does *not* have a dragon-slaying element to
his myth. The reasons for that curious discrepancy likely have to do
with the convoluted process of the Zoroastrian Heresy’s congealment –
wherein Indra was demonized (as Indar / Indra , a ‘Daeva’) and thus
removed from worship amongst them, but much later on (perhaps due to
sustained pressure from the cultic context of the Zoroastrian warrior
class) a sort of genericized and imitation-brand off-label *and much
more ‘controllable’* Striker figure was (re-)incorporated utilizing this
name … albeit missing the key conflict against the demon dragon, and the
Vajra (both elements of which having been apportioned off elsewhere in
the course of the Zoroastrians’ general mess-up slash “editorialization”
of Indo-Iranic religious post-orthodoxy to fit their own changing needs
as they saw fit).

In short – we can therefore show that the Armenian Indo-European
mythology is NOT, contrary to what some might have you believe, merely
some sort of Persianified ‘Zoroastrian Lite’ sphere : but rather, had
likewise carried forward authentic and archaic elements which were not
occurrent in the Zoroastrian model they’d wound up in contact with later
on. There are other elements we could mention with regard to this,
including the most intriguing direct parallel involving the
Striker/Thunderer in the Stalk which is also co-expressed in the Vedas
with regard to Indra (and with some elements also occurrent in relation
to Thor in the Husdrapa, for instance), but more upon that some other
time.

Indra is, of course, an incredibly prominent bearer of such accolades,
although in addition to Vak Saraswati, Agni is also hailed in similar
terms – RV III 16 1:राय ईशे सवपत्यस्य गोमत ईशे वर्त्रहथानाम (‘Raya Ise
Svapatyasya Ghomata Ise Vrtrahathanam’), rendered by Griffith as ‘Lord
of wealth in herds of kine; Lord of the battles with the foe.’ I am sure
by now that I do not need to point out which portions of ‘Vritra+
Hathanam’ are in the last few words of that translation! We likewise
find Trita Aptya engaged in a ‘Gwhen’ derived strike against His
adversary in RV X 8 8 – the Tricephal \[Trisiras\] that links to Geryon,
Cacus, etc. (as well as, in a certain sense, the Hydra due to some
mythic conflation occurrent perhaps amidst the Greeks) in the Classical
sphere.

Given the strong association of the Striker/Thunderer with this ‘Gwhen’
term and its derivatives, it should therefore come as no surprise that
in addition to the broad and general verbs for ‘Killing’ or ‘Striking’
(consider Ancient Greek ‘Phonos’ (φόνος )and ‘Theino’ ( θείνω)
respectively), we also find rather more hard-edged developments more
specifically salient for His general forms of usage. Sanskritहन्ति
(‘Hanti’) includes in its ambit ‘striking’ in the sense of *beating* and
*hammering* , as we might strike a drum to produce a ‘beat’ (‘beating’
and ‘pounding’ are certainly in there as well).घन (‘Ghana’) is an
operationalized noun – referring to a killer, a slayer … but also a
percussive weapon such as a mace or a hammer specifically.

However, it should come as no surprise that ‘Gwhen’ can also be utilized
by deific figures engaged in an entirely different type of killing. RV I
114 has the plea to Rudra –आरे ते गोघ्नमुत पूरुषघ्नं कषयद्वीर
सुम्नमस्मे तेस्तु (‘Are Te Ghoghnamuta Purusaghnam Ksayadvira Sumnamasme
Teastu’), rendered by Griffith as ‘Far be Thy dart that killeth men or
cattle: Thy bliss be with us, O Thou Lord of Heroes.’ The relevant words
there being ‘Ghoghnam’ and ‘Purusaghnam’ for ‘Cow-slayer’ and
‘Man-slayer’ respectively.

This would inform a rather useful English presentation of what is going
on here with ‘Gwhen’ – namely, the ‘Bane’ of those affixed to it when we
look at ‘Vritraghni’, ‘Purushaghnam’, etc. And I mean that quite
directly, as ‘Bane’ in modern English is likewise derived from this very
same ‘Gwhen’ root. Specifically, it is from an adjectival form for
‘Gwhen’ – PIE ‘Ghwonos’, which also provides that Ancient Greek ‘Phonos’
(‘Murder’, ‘Slaughter’) we had met earlier. This leads us to
Proto-Germanic ‘Bano’ and ‘Bano’ (with slightly different pronunciation
on the ‘-o’) to mean a ‘Murderer’, or a ‘Battlefield’. The latter is of
additional interest to us, not simply because it implies that the
‘battlefield’ is in fact really more of a ‘Killing Ground’ in the
archaic Germanic world-view (as implicitly referenced by Sabaton in
their English translation of the song ‘Ett slag färgat rött’ (‘A Battle
Coloured Red’), detailing the clash of the Swedish Caroleans
underRehnskiöld against the Saxon and Russian forces at the Battle of
Fraustadt, where the armies of the latter were lured out of a superior
position via a feigned Swedish retreat and into .. well … a more than
fourteen to one kill-to-death ratio in favour of the Swedes), but also
due to the other meanings for the term as a ‘space cleared’, a ‘path
cleared’, etc. – which is rather on-point for the Sanskrit
understandings for Vritrahan etc. in the sense of clearing away
obstacles and obstructions to forge a path.

The former sense of ‘Bano’ as ‘Murderer’ obviously informs the later
Germanic interpretations of ‘Bane’ as ‘Killer of something’. So, for
example, we have the reasonably straightforward ‘Mannsbani’ in Old
Norse, meaning ‘Man-Bane’ or ‘Man-Slayer’; and the mention for the
wolf-demon, Fenrir, to be Odin’s Bane due to the proceedings at
Ragnarok.

Slavic and Celtic languages provide additional highlights from the
potential meaning-field for PIE ‘Gwhen’ and its derivatives. Irish has
the obvious ‘Goin’ (‘Wound’ / ‘Sting’), whilst in Welsh, we find ‘Gwanu’
to mean ‘piercing’ … or ‘raiding’ (all of these are from Proto-Celtic
‘Gwaneti’; which oddly enough, doesn’t appear to provide the root for
‘Gawain’, the famed knight).

Meanwhile, Proto-Balto-Slavic gives us ‘Guntei’, meaning ‘To Chase’;
which thence provides an array of terms directly relevant for this and
setting things in forceful motion (consider Lithuanian Ginti and Latvian
Dzit (with this Latvian term apparently deriving from an expression
around ‘hammering’ a nail) as well as Polish ‘Gnac’ (which adds ‘rush’),
all of which mean ‘to drive’ or ‘to chase’); as well as in some cases
‘to persecute’ / ‘prosecute’, as seen via Proto-Slavic ‘Goniti’ (and its
derivatives such as Serbian ‘Goniti’ ( го̀нити ) and the very similar Old
Church Slavonic term with much the same meaning); or the specific ‘Hunt’
terms such as Czech ‘Hon’, Silesian ‘Gon’, and Russian ‘гон’ (‘Gon’),
all of which are from Proto-Slavicgònъ.

A ‘Hunting Gun’ and a ‘Nailgun’, indeed.

Now of course, there is far more I could say about … quite an array of
these elements, as you can no doubt imagine. I may, in future, look at
some of the implications of particular terms and term-sets in the
context of both our Operation Jarjara \[the revitalization /
re-illumination of Indra Worship, and the Striker/Thunderer deific more
generally, particularly as viewed through that lens\] and our escalating
Proto-Indo-European-anchored liturgy / ritual reconstructive efforts.
But more upon those some other time, perhaps.

There’s another pair of terms which do deserve our more immediate
attention, however, and not only because I’ve left Latin strikingly
under-utilized here. Offend and Defend , Offence and Defence. These come
down to us from, surprise surprise … PIE ‘Gwhen’.

Latin took ‘Gwhen’, and via Proto-Italic we have ‘Fendo’ – meaning ‘to
hit’, ‘to thrust’. Defend is, therefore, in the manner of Latin Defendo
(which means exactly what you think it does), the prefix ‘De-‘ (which,
again, means significantly the same in both English and Latin – ‘from’ /
‘away from’) affixed to ‘Fendo’; just as ‘Offend’ is likewise the Latin
prefix ‘Ob-‘ (‘against’ / ‘toward’) plus ‘Fendo’. ‘Defendo’ would
therefore either entail striking *away* a blow, or deflecting one (and
Latin ‘deflecto’ is, similarly a ‘de-‘ plus ‘flecto’) – so ‘striking’
against, or being against the ‘striking’ (or, more likely, both – a
‘parry’, we would think of it as). Offendo being to strike *towards*,
or to strike *against* the target.

How does all of that pertain to our modern English ‘Gun’? Well, as with
PIE ‘Gwhen’ in subsequent descendant languages … it’s all a matter of
how you use it.  
And as for how *we* use it – well, rapid-fire sustained heavy
bombardment in the mytholinguistic sense and with a literally
intercontinental range would appear to be the fire-plan.

So the *next time* somebody looks to criticize my ‘techno-theology’ with
specific view to the notion of the Striker/Thunderer deific wielding a
firearm (or, perhaps, artillery-piece) … I shall be able to point out
that, at least by intentional essence-of-meaning, the God with a Gun is
mytholinguisticallyapt. And then we can point to that fine Indian
painting of Krishna \[Himself an expression of the Striker/Thunderer
deific as we have previously demonstrated\] hefting a rather massive
cannon in the defence of a fortification in Bengal several hundred years
ago.

Oh, and as for the image I’ve chosen to accompany this piece? Well, you
see – one of the derivations for PIE ‘Gwhen’ in Proto-Germanic is
‘Banjo’ (‘Wound’ – verbal form ‘Banjona’). And ‘Banjos’ and ‘Folk
Music’, well .. I’m not suggesting the instrument has such an effect,
nor anything about the players of such, either. Does go nicely with the
notion of the effective empowerment of the Vajra and other such Divine
Weaponry as being Song (‘prayer’ would perhaps be a slightly closer
translation – invocation?), too (with some suggestion that the ‘Ghana’
utilized to refer to Brihaspati’s ‘Thunder-Speech’ might be similarly
‘Gwhen’ derived).

As attested in AV 11 10, “An Incantation For The Destruction Of A
Hostile Army”:  
‘Sarvahllokantsamajayan Deva Ahutyanaya. Brhaspatirangiraso Vajram
Yamasincatasura- Ksayanam Vadham.  
Brhaspatirangiraso Vajram Yamasincatasura- Ksayanam Vadham. Tendhamamum
Senam Ni Limpami Brhaspate’mitran Hanmyojasa.’

Which, as you shall note, concludes with our friend, the ‘Gwhen’
particle – in the specific form of ‘ हन्मि ‘ (‘Hanmi’), the meaning of
which ought be clearly apparent.

Or, phrased in a perhaps more approachable speech, if a less immanently
resonant one:

‘All worlds did the Gods completely conquer by means of that offering
\[‘Song Calling To’ – ‘Invocation’\] — the thunderbolt which Brihaspati
of the Angiras race poured, a Demon-destroying weapon. The Thunderbolt
which Brihaspati of the Anngiras race poured, a Demon-destroying weapon
— therewith do I blot out yon army, O Brihaspati; I slay the enemies
with force.’
