+++
title = "On Proto-Indo-European Agriculture – A Briefxa0Excerpt"
date = "June 30, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/c4d974a44e8b204fced05a396617354f.png?w=600)

Running this as an excerpt \[it’s from my latest long-form
(A)Arti-cle\], because I think that this is quite important:

“The supposition that this may, therefore, preserve an archaic PIE
traditional understanding is likely to run into the immediate objection
that so far as we know the Proto-Indo-Europeans were not large-scale
plantation farmers. Which is often misinterpreted by many as the archaic
Indo-Europeans not being farmers at all – presumably because this does
not fit comfortably with a reductionist ‘headcanon’ about steppe
pastoralists as a sort of raiding, hunting, and assumedly
barely-even-omnivorous “barbarian” pastiche.

While some of the (later) Classical corpus of texts around Triptolemos
make an interesting point about his boon of agriculture being
unavailable to the Scythians (and/or potentially Thrace) due to an
incident in which Triptolemus or one of the Dragons drawing the chariot
was attacked by a barbarian king … this contrasts rather heavily with
the evidence available to us that Scythians did, in fact, know how to
farm, consumed cereals, and were even exporting significant quantities
of grain to Greece many centuries before these later texts had been
written (which, when placed alongside the name of the supposed Scythian
king in question, leads me to suspect that at best this is a symbolic
representation for something else, that has become misunderstood,
misinterpreted, and therefore misapplied).

Further, the fact that we have an array of Proto-Indo-European terms
shared among both East and West branches of its descent for not only
various agriculturally derived edibles (including quite specifically
grains and cereals) but also the actual mechanics entailed in their
production (featuring sowing, ploughing, threshing, chaff, etc.) … would
appear to rather strongly suggest at least some active facility with
agriculture (notwithstanding the saliency for non-IE substrate
contributions about particular elements where these later-encountered
non-IE populations may have held competitive advantage – for example,
the potentially BMAC-origin terms for ‘irrigation channels’ encountered
in Indo-Iranian and Tocharian) ; and there is also the again
demonstrable fact that we have mythic/religious concordancies in
multiple Indo-European descendant populations for ritual and mythic
occurrences of significant import for agriculture.

Even if agriculture were left largely out of the equation, I see no
reason to suspect that the earthy abundance of consumable foodstuffs
sourced from plants should have no space within the archaic
Indo-European world view – nor, therefore, their devotional framework of
tangible applications.”
