+++
title = "On Persephone As “Ironxa0Queen”"
date = "June 11, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/persephone-flower-large.png?w=580)

I’ve been meaning to post this for some time – because it’s an
interesting perspective which I think is a useful part of countering the
Victorian-era ‘re-characterization’ of Persephone. But, as is my
proclivity, I felt I had to check out some of the claims made herein …
to make sure that things hadn’t gone in the direction of being merely
another kind of ‘creative’ re-interpretation of the characterof the
Goddess.

Now, here’s the interesting thing – one of the main elements to this,
“The Iron Queen”, is … not *directly* accurate, but is indirectly. And
perhaps usefully – the inaccuracy *hasn’t* crept in because somebody on
Tumblr (yes, I know…) decided they needed to spice up or ‘re-tell’ a
mythic element in-line with 21st century feminist sensibilities. Rather,
it all appears to arcen back to an element from a pretty well-respected
translation of the Odyssey published more than half a century ago. And
which has since crept in quite pervasively in a fair amount of
encyclopedic and other ‘secondary’ source material.

Confused? See that bit wherein Persephone is said to be the “Iron Queen”
in this post – as far as I can tell (and it is possible that I have
missed something in my admittedly brief scouring of the
source-material), the major occurrence for this which everybody cites is
in Odyssey XI 214.  
  
For context – what’s just happened there is Odysseus is speaking with
His Mother, who is now a shade ; and Odysseus is understandably quite
grief-stricken to experience this, as it means that she has thusly
become deceased while He has been away from home. Odysseus therefore
asks an obvious question – whether this Shade is, in fact, really real
.. really her, or whether this is instead, as the Murray translation
puts it – “Is this but a phantom that august Persephone has sent me,
that I may lament and groan the more?”

In the original Homeric Greek, the words we are interested in in that
sentence are rendered ” ἀγαυὴ Περσεφόνεια ” … and the more recent
Fitzgerald translation renders this as: “Or is this all hallucination,
sent against me by the iron queen, Perséphonê to make me groan again?”
In both cases, “grieve and lament” would probably be a better rendering
than “groan”, and indeed the Cook translation which is
near-contemporaneous with the immediately aforementioned Fitzgerald does
exactly this. Yet that is not what interests us here.

Rather, it is the fact that this phrase, which clearly means
“Noble/August Persephone”, has instead been quite poetically rendered
“Iron Queen”. Lest there be any doubt upon the matter,ἀγαυός (‘Agauos’,
seen here in feminine form – ἀγαυὴ (‘Agaue’)), effectively means
‘Illustrious’, ‘Great’, ‘Noble’, or perhaps ‘Attention-Commanding’
(compare ‘ ἐπαινὴν Περσεφόνειαν‘ (‘Epaine’) for “Dread Persephone” in
IX 569 of the Iliad). There is no “Iron Queen” to be found there … if we
take the verse *literally*. But that has not been Fitzgerald’s intent –
instead, it has been to endeavour to give us a sense of how the Greeks
actually *beheld* the figures in question, rather than merely what was
literally and directly communicated in the actual words themselves. A
translation, as we have long observed, is a unique kind of infidelity –
and a translator’s superior task is to render not merely the *words
themselves* but the *meanings*, the entire world-view if he should
possibly be able to manage it, behind them. Truly an enormous
undertaking !

So, Persephone as the Iron Queen – what is connoted via this
figuratively? Inflexibility, Law, a certain ‘Adamantine’ ethos and
rulership – I would also suggest ‘Death’, via the coldness and darkness
and lethality of Iron, and we shall be encountering *that* particular
interpretation again later.

Certainly, the comments made in the cap concerning a taboo upon speaking
the ‘proper name’ or direct theonym of the Goddess known as Despoina is
accurate. Although it should additionally be noted that there was some
.. blurryness as to which more familiar Goddess-form was intended to be
referred to by Despoina (‘Mistress/Lady’, female counterpart to
‘Despot’) – with Artemis and Hekate also referred to in such terms. This
is unsurprising, as we have the Diva Triformis conceptry from Rome which
directly links Diana, Luna, and Persephone or Hekate as the same
(Triple) Goddess – and also due to some other comparative Indo-European
theology which I have written about more extensively elsewhere (and
shall be doing again in the near future as pertains to Artemis
directly). For our purposes, it is enough to note that Odysseus earlier
in Scroll XI of the Odyssey asks His Mother whether the death suffered
by her had come via the arrows of Artemis. People perhaps do not think
of Artemis as a death-dealing Goddess in general terms, and yet there it
is. Apt, perhaps, given Persephone’s own prominently recalled theonym
was popularly understood to be derived from ‘Pherein Phonon’ – that is
to say “Death-Bringer”.

A perhaps rather more unexpected (although similarly resonant)
interpretation would render Persephone as ‘Destroyer/Killer of Death’ –
mirroring the role of Lord Shiva as Kaalantaka, Yamantaka, etc. … which
mean much the same thing, and are uttered in the context of asking for
deliverance *from* Death, for instance in the same manner as the Maha
Mrityunjaya \[‘Great Death-Conquering’ – Mrit, here, like Mort; ‘Jaya’
as ‘Victorious\[-over-\]’\] Mantra, and of obvious saliency for Her
‘Mystery’ religion role (c.f also Her epithet ofΣωτειρα – Soteira –
‘Savior’).

A third proposition – and one I am fond of an alteration to – would
instead posit ‘Persephone’ as deriving from PIE ‘Pers’+ ‘Gwhen’;
understood by modern academics to suggest ‘Thresher of Grain’. Except
while I can see how they have sought to connect these PIE terms to the
relevancy for Persephone’s portfolio connexion to the growing of
vegetation (as somebody once observed, with Death carrying a Scythe, and
the Devil wielding a pitchfork .. even afore we consider the labouring
in the Fields, agriculture must be a growth industry in the Underworld),
taking PIE ‘Gwhen’ and rendering it as a mere ‘thresher’ … rather than a
“Slayer”, a “Striker”, a “Killer” (or, perhaps, a “Pursuer”/”Prosecutor”
.. “Hunter”), seems a bit peculiar, to say the least. See my recent “The
Way Of The Gun” looking at this particular PIE particle for more details
as to why (and note that ‘Phone’, akin to ‘Phonos’, in particular –
“Killer” – is thusly derived). As applies the former particle to Her
name – PIE ‘Pers’ actually refers to an act of ‘Sprinkling’. While one
can see how this has been interpreted as ‘seeds’ which are sown in a
sprinkling manner (i.e. grains), I would suggest that Sanskrit ‘Parsati’
( पर्षति ) is probably closer to the mark – it means both ‘to sprinkle’,
but also ‘to bestow/give’, and to ‘harm/hurt’. An associate therefore
suggested the rather nicely poetic (he evidently aptly termed it
‘metal’) translation of ‘Raining Death’. ‘Reigning Death’, eh?

Now as applies why I find this compelling, especially in terms of the
text presented in the image accompanying this piece – the additional
theonyms and epithets of Persephone make for relevant reading.Αζησια
(Azesia), for instance, which either means ‘to dry out’, or “Huntress”
(more literally, ‘Seeker’).Βριμώ (‘Brimo’), “Terrifying”, “Enraged” – a
term also encountered not only for Demeter, but for Hekate (as we should
of course expect) and Cybele, and for the Furies (Erinyes), with a
potential etymology connecting it either toβρῑ́μη (‘Brime’ – ‘Power /
Strength / Might’, or, interestingly, ‘Roaring’) orΒρόμιος (‘Bromios’ –
‘Roaring / Thundering’; encountered as a theonym of Dionysus) orβρέμω
(‘Bremo’ – a term for clamorous noise, such as the roaring of waves,
clashing of men in combat, or other enraged conduct; interestingly, with
a PIE root – bhrem – which produces Sanskrit terms for both ‘wandering’
(भ्रमति – Bhramati) and a buzzing bee (भृङ्ग – ‘bhrnga’; perhaps
interesting given the Honey related epithet for Persephone – ‘Melitodes’
– and some broader conceptry we shall not examine here), as well as
Germanic terms for ‘famed’ and ‘stormy’).Θεσμοφορος and
Θεσμιη(Thesmophoraand Thesmia, respectively – ‘Law-Bringer’, ‘Of
Law’), and of courseΠραξιδικη (Praxidike, the latter being our familiar
PIE ‘Deyk’ particle, and the theonym all-up meaning “Executor of
Justice”).

These link rather well with both Persephone as the mother and effective
commandant / sender of the Furies (Erinyes) \[c.f Statius’ Silvae,
wherein ‘Ennean Juno’ is prayed to to dismiss the Eumenides attentions
from the supplicant’s father’s shade; along with the situation of
Phoenix and Amyntor in book IX the Iliad, where ‘Dread Persephone’ along
with Hades ‘drives home’ the Curse via the Erinyes; and Nonnus’
Dionysiaca which, as with Statius, depicts Persephone arming-up the
Erinyes afore sending Them at / as the tangible expressive-executors to
Her Will\], as well as the Black Avenging Form of the (Earth) Mother
Goddess understanding that we have previously articulated. To phrase the
latter in brief – we find the Goddess directly commensurate with Cosmic
Law and Its (Hers, more properly) immanency here in this universe
(‘Cosmos’ – a term itself cognate with Law in terms of meaning), and
capable of manifesting (as) a dread black avenger/destroyer form as a
sort of ultimate ‘enforcement clause’ for same. It is in this latter
sphere where we find a pattern of ‘Iron’ associations for the Erinyes –
Statius’ Thiebald describing the figure of Tisiphone thus: “sedet intus
abactis ferrea lux oculis, qualis per nubila Phoebes Atracia rubet arte
labor”, or in translation – “deep within her sunken eyes there glows a
light of iron hue, as when Atracian \[Thessalian witches’\] spells make
travailing Phoebe \[the Moon\] redden through the clouds” / ”a steely
light lurked in her sunken eyes, as when Thessalian witchcraft makes the
eclipsed moon blush through cloud.”

The relevant Latin word there is, of course, “ferrea” – an adjectival
form for “Iron” in that language, which carries quite the similar
connotations to our modern English understanding for the term. That is
to say, “harsh, cruel”, “unyielding, firm, implacable /immoveable/
undeterrable”. It might, of course, be interesting to speculate that the
‘Red Moon’ which Statius invokes via way of simile could suggest that
the ‘Iron’ in question is also that of ‘Blood’, but that is another
matter for another time.

Given the associations of Persephone both in terms of Her Absence from
the sunlit realm and the nature of the Grave, “Cold” might be quite a
viable adjective, also.  
  
There is much more which could – and almost certainly should – be said
upon each and every of these points aforementioned; but I have already
strayed (or, if one prefers, wandered) well into the streets of Trivia
(perhaps in multiple senses of that theonymically resonant term). To
bring matters back to the comparative Indo-European theology – it is
necessary to but briefly situate some of the above within its relevant
IE context.

We know that the notion of the Afterlife/Underworld ruled over, at least
in part, by a Goddess is of archaic Proto-Indo-European origins. We have
the direct Vedic attestation for Aditi (the ‘Queen of Law’, the
Law-Giver and Bearer – recall the Law relevant theonymics for Persephone
earlier) reigning over such a Realm, and likewise the Germanics
preserved this understanding in the form of Freyja’s dominion over
Folkvangr (a counterpart realm to the more-well-known-today Valhalla,
indeed drawing from the very same sort of intake ‘populace’); the
Classical mythoi having not only Persephone (and, in Latin terms, the
aforementioned “Juno of the Underworld”), but also Hekate in a
sepulchral association – and further evidence that the Anatolian Greek
perception of Hekate owes something to the Hittites with their own
Indo-European Solar Goddess conceptry (they also knew of the Underworld
Sun; a ‘Solar Afterlife’ being, likewise, an archaic (P)IE conceptive
understanding). Unsurprisingly, “Queen” tends to come up rather
frequently as the apt entitlement of these Goddess expressions –
although to my mind, “Empress” is the better, especially as applies
Aditi. Deyk-tator may have some semi-apt conceptual saliency as well,
given that this is the Goddess of Speech, and Supreme Law(‘s Expressor)
– ‘She Who Points Out’, and Commands.

It is again utterly uncoincidental that each of these Goddess
understandings also tend to have a *very* lethal and obliquely
terrifying potency. Including that aforementioned Black
Avenging/Destroyer Form – known in the Nordic sphere asSkaði / Skadi
(the ‘Shadow’ Huntress Wife of Odin, responsible for the underground
serpent-venom sanction meted out upon Loki, inter alia … and likewise to
Persephone, domiciled alternatingly between two Realms due to a
matrimonial arrangement : either Three and Nine, or Nine and Nine (i.e.
half-and-half) between Her preferred domain (the Mountains – consider
the similar, dare I say ‘riphaean’ associations and environs of Parvati,
Cybele, Artemis, etc.) and that of the Husband) – and, most famous of
all, Kali (कलि ).

Now I say that Kali is most famous for a number of reasons – certainly,
if you asked many non-Hindus to name one of our deifics, this would be
the major one they could conjure to mind … even if this is the
regrettable result of a certain film featuring an errant archaeologist.
But here, Kali is also perhaps the most resonant. Not only because there
we have this Black Avenging/Destroyer Form – the tangible expression of
the unquenchable Rage (Βριμώ / Brimo) of Devi (‘the Goddess’) Who is
married to Lord Shiva (the Sky Father, and Himself with a demesne of
Death and After-realm; Married, in fact, in a scenario some would
consider to be akin to the ‘Raptus’ of the Persephone myth – insofar as
the Bride was not engaged with Her Father’s (initial) approval; and with
both Persephone and Ambika cited in direct connexion with Autumn), but
because the theonym contains within itself much which is relevant for
our understanding of this sphere and its most famous commanders.

Kaal ( काल – also anglicized as “Kala” or “Kaala”) in Sanskrit refers to
Darkness and Death, as well as to “Time”. I have often observed that
Oppenheimer’s “And now I am become Death, the Destroyer of Worlds”
remark is, itself, a particularly resonant semi-mis-translation, as in
the original text he’s quoting from, it is ‘Time’ and ‘Inevitability’
\[perhaps we might suggest, with deference to the Ancient Greek –
‘Adrasteia’, ‘The Inescapable’, a theonymic of some prominency for
Nemesis and the Mountain Mother Goddess(es) therein\] which does the
slaying; although that would be perhaps less apt for a nuclear weapon.
The reasoning for this curious meaning-field is obvious – ‘Time’ is most
certainly what kills everything, even the universe, in the end. And it
also, per my interpretation of the relevant linguistics, suggests the
carrying-forward of a particular PIE particle – ‘Kel’ – which refers to
a ‘covering’, and which interestingly enough is also the root for terms
like “Hell” in modern English. The Night covers the Day (and the visual
expanse of the Land), providing the most foundational demarcation of
Time known to our ancestors, or to us even today. The ‘Veil’ between the
Worlds of the Living and the Dead is likewise a ‘Covering’ – and quite a
dark one at that. It is not hard to see how ‘Death’, as the transmissive
migration *beyond* that Veil from whence few return, would be an
eminently logical understanding. Where one is subsumed via the onrushing
shades of Night, even as one’s physical form is placed into the Earth
and ‘covered’ with same in a Barrow-Mound.

Kaal as (Blue-)Black is reasonably well attested, and we likewise find
the Death God(s) and Goddess(es) of other Indo-European pantheonic
expressions oft-similarly complexioned. Odin’s Mantle/Hood/Mask, for
instance, is that particular Germanic shade occasionally
(semi-mis-)translated as ‘Blue’, yet in fact meaning something more akin
to ‘Corpse-Black’, ‘Bruise-Black’ – and a hood or a mask is, itself, a
‘covering’ as well, after all. Hades, meanwhile, is literally ‘The
Unseen’ – another saliency for the ‘Veiled’, the ‘Darkened’ or what lies
therein thereby there-beyond. Demeter, too, we find asΚυανοπεπλος
(Kyanopeplos – Blue-Black Cloaked / Veiled) in circumstances pertaining
to both the Underworld, and Her Furious (indeed, rather directly (I
hesitate to declare it “literally”) Fury-ous) ‘Demeter Erinyes’ phasic
form. The associations of ‘Night’ (another meaning for Kaal and Kali)
are likewise plentiful for the Underworld in general – and it is not for
nothing that in addition to Persephone, we also find Nyx hailed as the
Mother of the Erinyes (along with the Earth Mother, although I do
suspect that I repeat myself; intriguingly there is also some suggestion
for Athena as Commandant to the Erinyes – but more upon this, perhaps,
on some other occasion … as with the Horae, female divine figures of
Order of another guise).

However, my major reason for invoking Kali here is also quite a simple
one. Kali can also mean “Iron”. Kali, the eminently regal Goddess of
Death and Destruction … yet also *so* much more and else besides
(including, most particularly, that aforementioned Cosmic Law – Rta,
Dharma, Orlog, Dikaiosune, and Cosmos, etc. – particularly via its
defence and (violently lethal) upholding), is therefore also an Iron
Queen.

Or, phrased much more succinctly than all of the above – I do not think
that Fitzgerald was necessarily inaccurate in his presentation of
Persephone as the “Iron Queen”. I merely think that it is not literally
what the words themselves meant upon the page in the original Homeric
Greek he was purporting to render in translation therethroughwith them.

It is quite an apt, and even in a sense, accurate characterization for
the Goddess – which not only helps to convey to the modern reader the
appropriate sense, especially in the context in which She occurs in the
original Odyssey verse (where ‘coldness’ and ‘cruelty’ – the latter
being from PIE ‘Krewh’ (which interestingly provides an array of terms
for ‘Coldness’ such as Ancient Greek ‘Cryo-‘, and terms for Death …
‘Krewh’ actually means ‘Cold Blood’, as in ‘blood on the outside of the
body, ‘freezing’ as it dries) – are quite understandable in terms of
Odysseus’ sentiments) – but also is ‘adjacently’ correct insofar as it
directly resonates most strongly with another Indo-European
mythoreligion’s perspective upon the similar/same Goddess.

Indeed, we might go so far as to suggest that this “Iron Queen” epithet,
even if it lacks direct attestation in primary source from the Ancient
Greeks – is only ‘improper’ to cite in this regard in relation to that
fact. It is not, to be sure, either Ancient or in Greek – and I am not
up to providing an adequate corrective for the latter. Yet as we can
quite clearly see from an array of *actual* archaic theonymics and
cultic epithets, ways of referring to deifics did indeed grow and graft
in antiquity where they were resonant or necessary for loka-lized
development.

I am occasionally criticized for taking the view that the living
Indo-European religion is just that – *living*. Elements which have
stood the test of time and trials of eroica are, of course, to be
generally preferred and especially for specific sacral, ritualine
utilization (nobody should be seeking to displace (the) proper
liturgical language, for example). Yet if one is not content to merely
pursue the part-petrified, part-preserved fragments of the past, then
there is quite pointedly scope for certain spheres where ‘developments’
in our understanding and our ability to communicate these elements to be
engaged with. Provided that the essential underlying ‘essence’ remains
true. After all, the fact that we are having this conversation *in
English* rather than Ancient Greek (or, for that matter, Sanskrit, Old
Norse, or any of the other liturgical languages I regularly draw from),
anchored around essential elements and archaic terms from the height of
the respective religious cultures’ ages, shows that such ‘development’
has, at least somewhat, already transpired.

Now to be clear about this – it is NOT because a term like “Iron Queen”
has appeared on Wikipedia and various other latter-day compendia of the
popularly available perceptions of such things that it becomes
appropriate. We are quite specifically NOT suggesting anything so
worrisomely inchoate as ‘mass perception maketh reality’, still much
less ‘theology’. Just because many thousands of people may say a thing,
does not make it so. Rather, it is the other way around here in this
occurrence – Persephone as “Iron Queen” attains its excellency
*precisely because* it *enables* many thousands of people to perceive
something which is already, in somewhat more disparate spheres, there to
be beheld by us. And which forms a viable, even perhaps ‘vibrant’
connective element *for* the less intensively immersed in Her, in our
sphere.

It does not “make up” anything – it simply expresses what is already
there; and does so in a way which is not merely theologically resonant,
but has that crucial ablative characteristic – the ‘Rule of Cool’ – with
which the Truth can, must, and should most frequently be up-armoured.

So, with all of that in mind – “Iron Queen”, it is. And *so* much more /
else besides.  
Jai Mata Di ! \[‘Hail Mother Goddess’ ! \]
