---
title: SPIRITUAL REALISATION, THE AIM OF BHAKTI-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](the_philosophy_of_ishwara.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_need_of_guru.htm)

  

CHAPTER III

## SPIRITUAL REALISATION, THE AIM OF BHAKTI-YOGA

To the Bhakta these dry details are necessary only to strengthen his
will; beyond that they are of no use to him. For he is treading on a
path which is fitted very soon to lead him beyond the hazy and turbulent
regions of reason, to lead him to the realm of realisation. He, soon,
through the mercy of the Lord, reaches a plane where pedantic and
powerless reason is left far behind, and the mere intellectual groping
through the dark gives place to the daylight of direct perception. He no
more reasons and believes, he almost perceives. He no more argues, he
senses. And is not this seeing God, and feeling God, and enjoying God
higher than everything else? Nay, Bhaktas have not been wanting who have
maintained that it is higher than even Moksha — liberation. And is it
not also the highest utility? There are people — and a good many of them
too — in the world who are convinced that only that is of use and
utility which brings to man creature-comforts. Even religion, God,
eternity, soul, none of these is of any use to them, as they do not
bring them money or physical comfort. To such, all those things which do
not go to gratify the senses and appease the appetites are of no
utility. In every mind, utility, however, is conditioned by its own
peculiar wants. To men, therefore, who never rise higher than eating,
drinking, begetting progeny, and dying, the only gain is in sense
enjoyments; and they must wait and go through many more births and
reincarnations to learn to feel even the faintest necessity for anything
higher. But those to whom the eternal interests of the soul are of much
higher value than the fleeting interests of this mundane life, to whom
the gratification of the senses is but like the thoughtless play of the
baby, to them God and the love of God form the highest and the only
utility of human existence. Thank God there are some such still living
in this world of too much worldliness.

Bhakti-Yoga, as we have said, is divided into the Gauni or the
preparatory, and the Parâ or the supreme forms. We shall find, as we go
on, how in the preparatory stage we unavoidably stand in need of many
concrete helps to enable us to get on; and indeed the mythological and
symbological parts of all religions are natural growths which early
environ the aspiring soul and help it Godward. It is also a significant
fact that spiritual giants have been produced only in those systems of
religion where there is an exuberant growth of rich mythology and
ritualism. The dry fanatical forms of religion which attempt to
eradicate all that is poetical, all that is beautiful and sublime, all
that gives a firm grasp to the infant mind tottering in its Godward way
— the forms which attempt to break down the very ridge-poles of the
spiritual roof, and in their ignorant and superstitious conceptions of
truth try to drive away all that is life-giving, all that furnishes the
formative material to the spiritual plant growing in the human soul —
such forms of religion too soon find that all that is left to them is
but an empty shell, a contentless frame of words and sophistry with
perhaps a little flavour of a kind of social scavengering or the
so-called spirit of reform.

The vast mass of those whose religion is like this, are conscious or
unconscious materialists — the end and aim of their lives here and
hereafter being enjoyment, which indeed is to them the alpha and the
omega of human life, and which is their Ishtâpurta; work like
street-cleaning and scavengering, intended for the material comfort of
man is, according to them, the be-all and end-all of human existence;
and the sooner the followers of this curious mixture of ignorance and
fanaticism come out in their true colours and join, as they well deserve
to do, the ranks of atheists and materialists, the better will it be for
the world. One ounce of the practice of righteousness and of spiritual
Self-realisation outweighs tons and tons of frothy talk and nonsensical
sentiments. Show us one, but one gigantic spiritual genius growing out
of all this dry dust of ignorance and fanaticism; and if you cannot,
close your mouths, open the windows of your hearts to the clear light of
truth, and sit like children at the feet of those who know what they are
talking about — the sages of India. Let us then listen attentively to
what they say.

</div>
