---
title: QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ASPIRANT AND THE TEACHER

---
<div>

[←](the_need_of_guru.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](incarnate_teachers_and_incarnation.htm)

  

CHAPTER V

## QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ASPIRANT AND THE TEACHER

How are we to know a teacher, then? The sun requires no torch to make
him visible, we need not light a candle in order to see him. When the
sun rises, we instinctively become aware of the fact, and when a teacher
of men comes to help us, the soul will instinctively know that truth has
already begun to shine upon it. Truth stands on its own evidence, it
does not require any other testimony to prove it true, it is self
effulgent. It penetrates into the innermost corners of our nature, and
in its presence the whole universe stands up and says, "This is truth."
The teachers whose wisdom and truth shine like the light of the sun are
the very greatest the world has known, and they are worshipped as God by
the major portion of mankind. But we may get help from comparatively
lesser ones also; only we ourselves do not possess intuition enough to
judge properly of the man from whom we receive teaching and guidance; so
there ought to be certain tests, certain conditions, for the teacher to
satisfy, as there are also for the taught.

The conditions necessary for the taught are purity, a real thirst after
knowledge, and perseverance. No impure soul can be really religious.
Purity in thought, speech, and act is absolutely necessary for any one
to be religious. As to the thirst after knowledge, it is an old law that
we all get whatever we want. None of us can get anything other than what
we fix our hearts upon. To pant for religion truly is a very difficult
thing, not at all so easy as we generally imagine. Hearing religious
talks or reading religious books is no proof yet of a real want felt in
the heart; there must be a continuous struggle, a constant fight, an
unremitting grappling with our lower nature, till the higher want is
actually felt and the victory is achieved. It is not a question of one
or two days, of years, or of lives; the struggle may have to go on for
hundreds of lifetimes. The success sometimes may come immediately, but
we must be ready to wait patiently even for what may look like an
infinite length of time. The student who sets out with such a spirit of
perseverance will surely find success and realisation at last.

In regard to the teacher, we must see that he knows the spirit of the
scriptures. The whole world reads Bibles, Vedas, and Korans; but they
are all only words, syntax, etymology, philology, the dry bones of
religion. The teacher who deals too much in words and allows the mind to
be carried away by the force of words loses the spirit. It is the
knowledge of the *spirit* of the scriptures alone that constitutes the
true religious teacher. The network of the words of the scriptures is
like a huge forest in which the human mind often loses itself and finds
no way out. शब्दजालं महारण्यं चित्तभ्रमणकारणम्। — "The network of words
is a big forest; it is the cause of a curious wandering of the mind."
"The various methods of joining words, the various methods of speaking
in beautiful language, the various methods of explaining the diction of
the scriptures are only for the disputations and enjoyment of the
learned, they do not conduce to the development of spiritual perception"
- वाग्वैश्वरी शब्दझरी शास्त्रव्याख्यानकौशलम्‌। वैदुष्यं विदुषां तद्वद्
भुक्तये न तु मुक्तये॥ Those who employ such methods to impart religion
to others are only desirous to show off their learning, so that the
world may praise them as great scholars. You will find that no one of
the great teachers of the world ever went into these various
explanations of the text; there is with them no attempt at
"text-torturing", no eternal playing upon the meaning of words and their
roots. Yet they nobly taught, while others who have nothing to teach
have taken up a word sometimes and written a three-volume book on its
origin, on the man who used it first, and on what that man was
accustomed to eat, and how long he slept, and so on.

Bhagavân Ramakrishna used to tell a story of some men who went into a
mango orchard and busied themselves in counting the leaves, the twigs,
and the branches, examining their colour, comparing their size, and
noting down everything most carefully, and then got up a learned
discussion on each of these topics, which were undoubtedly highly
interesting to them. But one of them, more sensible than the others, did
not care for all these things. and instead thereof, began to eat the
mango fruit. And was he not wise? So leave this counting of leaves and
twigs and note-taking to others. This kind of work has its proper place,
but not here in the spiritual domain. You never see a strong spiritual
man among these "leaf counters". Religion, the highest aim, the highest
glory of man, does not require so much labour. If you want to be a
Bhakta, it is not at all necessary for you to know whether Krishna was
born in Mathurâ or in Vraja, what he was doing, or just the exact date
on which he pronounced the teachings of the Gitâ. You only require to
*feel* the craving for the beautiful lessons of duty and love in the
Gita. All the other particulars about it and its author are for the
enjoyment of the learned. Let them have what they desire. Say "Shântih,
Shântih" to their learned controversies, and let *us* "eat the mangoes".

The second condition necessary in the teacher is — sinlessness. The
question is often asked, "Why should we look into the character and
personality of a teacher? We have only to judge of what he says, and
take that up." This is not right. If a man wants to teach me something
of dynamics, or chemistry, or any other physical science, he may be
anything he likes, because what the physical sciences require is merely
an intellectual equipment; but in the spiritual sciences it is
impossible from first to last that there can be any spiritual light in
the soul that is impure. What religion can an impure man teach? The
*sine qua non* of acquiring spiritual truth for one's self or for
imparting it to others is the purity of heart and soul. A vision of God
or a glimpse of the beyond never comes until the soul is pure. Hence
with the teacher of religion we must see first what he *is*, and then
what he says. He must be perfectly pure, and then alone comes the value
of his words, because he is only then the true "transmitter". What can
he transmit if he has not spiritual power in himself? There must be the
worthy vibration of spirituality in the mind of the teacher, so that it
may be sympathetically conveyed to the mind of the taught. The function
of the teacher is indeed an affair of the transference of something, and
not one of mere stimulation of the existing intellectual or other
faculties in the taught. Something real and appreciable as an influence
comes from the teacher and goes to the taught. Therefore the teacher
must be pure.

The third condition is in regard to the motive. The teacher must not
teach with any ulterior selfish motive — for money, name, or fame; his
work must be simply out of love, out of pure love for mankind at large.
The only medium through which spiritual force can be transmitted is
love. Any selfish motive, such as the desire for gain or for name, will
immediately destroy this conveying median. God is love, and only he who
has known God as love can be a teacher of godliness and God to man.

When you see that in your teacher these conditions are all fulfilled,
you are safe; if they are not, it is unsafe to allow yourself to be
taught by him, for there is the great danger that, if he cannot convey
goodness to your heart, he may convey wickedness. This danger must by
all means be guarded against. श्रोत्रियोऽवृजिनोऽकामहतो यो ब्रह्मवित्तमः
— "He who is learned in the scriptures, sinless, unpolluted by lust, and
is the greatest knower of the Brahman" is the real teacher.

From what has been said, it naturally follows that we cannot be taught
to love, appreciate, and assimilate religion everywhere and by
everybody. The "books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and good
in everything" is all very true as a poetical figure: but nothing can
impart to a man a single grain of truth unless he has the undeveloped
germs of it in himself. To whom do the stones and brooks preach sermons?
To the human soul, the lotus of whose inner holy shrine is already quick
with life. And the light which causes the beautiful opening out of this
lotus comes always from the good and wise teacher. When the heart has
thus been opened, it becomes fit to receive teaching from the stones or
the brooks, the stars, or the sun, or the moon, or from any thing which
has its existence in our divine universe; but the unopened heart will
see in them nothing but mere stones or mere brooks. A blind man may go
to a museum, but he will not profit by it in any way; his eyes must be
opened first, and then alone he will be able to learn what the things in
the museum can teach.

This eye-opener of the aspirant after religion is the teacher. With the
teacher, therefore, our relationship is the same as that between an
ancestor and his descendant. Without faith, humility, submission, and
veneration in our hearts towards our religious teacher, there cannot be
any growth of religion in us; and it is a significant fact that, where
this kind of relation between the teacher and the taught prevails, there
alone gigantic spiritual men are growing; while in those countries which
have neglected to keep up this kind of relation the religious teacher
has become a mere lecturer, the teacher expecting his five dollars and
the person taught expecting his brain to be filled with the teacher's
words, and each going his own way after this much has been done. Under
such circumstances spirituality becomes almost an unknown quantity.
There is none to transmit it and none to have it transmitted to.
Religion with such people becomes business; they think they can obtain
it with their dollars. Would to God that religion could be obtained so
easily! But unfortunately it cannot be.

Religion, which is the highest knowledge and the highest wisdom, cannot
be bought, nor can it be acquired from books. You may thrust your head
into all the corners of the world, you may explore the Himalayas, the
Alps, and the Caucasus, you may sound the bottom of the sea and pry into
every nook of Tibet and the desert of Gobi, you will not find it
anywhere until your heart is ready for receiving it and your teacher has
come. And when that divinely appointed teacher comes, serve him with
childlike confidence and simplicity, freely open your heart to his
influence, and see in him God manifested. Those who come to seek truth
with such a spirit of love and veneration, to them the Lord of Truth
reveals the most wonderful things regarding truth, goodness, and beauty.

</div>
