---
title: INCARNATE TEACHERS AND INCARNATION

---
<div>

[←](qualifications_of_the_aspirant_and_teacher.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm)
/ [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_mantra_om_word_and_wisdom.htm)

  

CHAPTER VI

## INCARNATE TEACHERS AND INCARNATION

Wherever His name is spoken, that very place is holy. How much more so
is the man who speaks His name, and with what veneration ought we to
approach that man out of whom comes to us spiritual truth! Such great
teachers of spiritual truth are indeed very few in number in this world,
but the world is never altogether without them. They are always the
fairest flowers of human life — अहेतुकदयासिन्धुः — "the ocean of mercy
without any motive". आचार्यं मां विजानीयात् — "Know the Guru to be Me",
says Shri Krishna in the *Bhagavata*. The moment the world is absolutely
bereft of these, it becomes a hideous hell and hastens on to its
destruction.

Higher and nobler than all ordinary ones are another set of teachers,
the Avatâras of Ishvara, in the world. They can transmit spirituality
with a touch, even with a mere wish. The lowest and the most degraded
characters become in one second saints at their command. They are the
Teachers of all teachers, the highest manifestations of God through man.
We cannot see God except through them. We cannot help worshipping them;
and indeed they are the only ones whom we are bound to worship.

No man can really see God except through these human manifestations. If
we try to see God otherwise, we make for ourselves a hideous caricature
of Him and believe the caricature to be no worse than the original.
There is a story of an ignorant man who was asked to make an image of
the God Shiva, and who, after days of hard struggle, manufactured only
the image of a monkey. So whenever we try to think of God as He is in
His absolute perfection, we invariably meet with the most miserable
failure, because as long as we are men, we cannot conceive Him as
anything higher than man. The time will come when we shall transcend our
human nature and know Him as He is; but as long as we are men, we must
worship Him in man and as man. Talk as you may, try as you may, you
cannot think of God except as a man. You may deliver great intellectual
discourses on God and on all things under the sun, become great
rationalists and prove to your satisfaction that all these accounts of
the Avataras of God as man are nonsense. But let us come for a moment to
practical common sense. What is there behind this kind of remarkable
intellect? Zero, nothing, simply so much froth. When next you hear a man
delivering a great intellectual lecture against this worship of the
Avataras of God, get hold of him and ask what *his* idea of God is, what
*he* understands by "omnipotence", "omnipresence", and all similar
terms, beyond the spelling of the words. He really means nothing by
them; he cannot formulate as their meaning any idea unaffected by his
own human nature; he is no better off in this matter than the man in the
street who has not read a single book. That man in the street, however,
is quiet and does not disturb the peace of the world, while this big
talker creates disturbance and misery among mankind. Religion is, after
all, realisation, and we must make the sharpest distinction between
talk; and intuitive experience. What we experience in the depths of our
souls is realisation. Nothing indeed is so uncommon as common sense in
regard to this matter.

By our present constitution we are limited and bound to see God as man.
If, for instance the buffaloes want to worship God, they will, in
keeping with their own nature, see Him as a huge buffalo; if a fish
wants to worship God, it will have to form an Idea of Him as a big fish,
and man has to think of Him as man. And these various conceptions are
not due to morbidly active imagination. Man, the buffalo, and the fish
all may be supposed to represent so many different vessels, so to say.
All these vessels go to the sea of God to get filled with water, each
according to its own shape and capacity; in the man the water takes the
shape of man, in the buffalo, the shape of a buffalo and in the fish,
the shape of a fish. In each of these vessels there is the same water of
the sea of God. When men see Him, they see Him as man, and the animals,
if they have any conception of God at all, must see Him as animal each
according to its own ideal. So we cannot help seeing God as man, and,
therefore, we are bound to worship Him as man. There is no other way.

Two kinds of men do not worship God as man — the human brute who has no
religion, and the Paramahamsa who has risen beyond all the weaknesses of
humanity and has transcended the limits of his own human nature. To him
all nature has become his own Self. He alone can worship God as He is.
Here, too, as in all other cases, the two extremes meet. The extreme of
ignorance and the other extreme of knowledge — neither of these go
through acts of worship. The human brute does not worship because of his
ignorance, and the Jivanmuktas (free souls) do not worship because they
have realised God in themselves. Being between these two poles of
existence, if any one tells you that he is not going to worship God as
man, take kindly care of that man; he is, not to use any harsher term,
an irresponsible talker; his religion is for unsound and empty brains.

God understands human failings and becomes man to do good to humanity:

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत। अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदात्मानं
सृजाम्यहम्॥  
परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम्। धर्मसंस्थापनार्थाय सम्भवामि
युगे युगे॥

— "Whenever virtue subsides and wickedness prevails, I manifest Myself.
To establish virtue, to destroy evil, to save the good I come from Yuga
(age) to Yuga."

अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषीं तनुमाश्रितम्।  
परं भावमजानन्तो मम भूतमहेश्वरम्॥

— "Fools deride Me who have assumed the human form, without knowing My
real nature as the Lord of the universe." Such is Shri Krishna's
declaration in the Gita on Incarnation. "When a huge tidal wave comes,"
says Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna, "all the little brooks and ditches
become full to the brim without any effort or consciousness on their own
part; so when an Incarnation comes, a tidal wave of spirituality breaks
upon the world, and people feel spirituality almost full in the air."

</div>
