---
title: 'THE MANTRA: OM: WORD AND WISDOM'

---
<div>

[←](incarnate_teachers_and_incarnation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](worship_of_substitutes_and_images.htm)

  

CHAPTER VII

## THE MANTRA: OM: WORD AND WISDOM

But we are now considering not these Mahâ-purushas, the great
Incarnations, but only the Siddha-Gurus (teachers who have attained the
goal); they, as a rule, have to convey the germs of spiritual wisdom to
the disciple by means of words (Mantras) to be meditated upon. What are
these Mantras? The whole of this universe has, according to Indian
philosophy, both name and form (Nâma-Rupa) as its conditions of
manifestation. In the human microcosm, there cannot be a single wave in
the mind-stuff (Chittavritti) unconditioned by name and form. If it be
true that nature is built throughout on the same plan, this kind of
conditioning by name and form must also be the plan of the building of
the whole of the cosmos. यथा एकेन मृत्पिण्डेन सर्वं मृन्मयं विज्ञातं
स्यात् — "As one lump of clay being known, all things of clay are
known", so the knowledge of the microcosm must lead to the knowledge of
the macrocosm. Now form is the outer crust, of which the name or the
idea is the inner essence or kernel. The body is the form, and the mind
or the Antahkarana is the name, and sound-symbols are universally
associated with Nâma (name) in all beings having the power of speech. In
the individual man the thought-waves rising in the limited Mahat or
Chitta (mind-stuff), must manifest themselves, first as *words*, and
then as the more concrete *forms*.

In the universe, Brahmâ or Hiranyagarbha or the cosmic Mahat first
manifested himself as name, and then as form, i.e. as this universe. All
this expressed sensible universe is the form, behind which stands the
eternal inexpressible Sphota, the manifester as *Logos* or Word. This
eternal Sphota, the essential eternal material of all ideas or names is
the power through which the Lord creates the universe, nay, the Lord
first becomes conditioned as the Sphota, and then evolves Himself out as
the yet more concrete sensible universe. This Sphota has one word as its
only possible symbol, and this is the ओं (Om). And as by no possible
means of analysis can we separate the word from the idea this Om and the
eternal Sphota are inseparable; and therefore, it is out of this holiest
of all holy words, the mother of all names and forms, the eternal Om,
that the whole universe may be supposed to have been created. But it may
be said that, although thought and word are inseparable, yet as there
may be various word-symbols for the same thought, it is not necessary
that this particular word Om should be the word representative of the
thought, out of which the universe has become manifested. To this
objection we reply that this Om is the only possible symbol which covers
the whole ground, and there is none other like it. The Sphota is the
material of all words, yet it is not any definite word in its fully
formed state. That is to say, if all the peculiarities which distinguish
one word from another be removed, then what remains will be the Sphota;
therefore this Sphota is called the Nâda-Brahma. the *Sound-Brahman*.

Now, as every word-symbol, intended to express the inexpressible Sphota,
will so particularise it that it will no longer be the Sphota, that
symbol which particularises it the least and at the same time most
approximately expresses its nature, will be the truest symbol thereof;
and this is the Om, and the Om only; because these three letters अ उ म
(A.U.M.), pronounced in combination as Om, may well be the generalised
symbol of all possible sounds. The letter A is the least differentiated
of all sounds, therefore Krishna says in the Gita अक्षराणां अकारोऽस्मि—
"I am A among the letters". Again, all articulate sounds are produced in
the space within the mouth beginning with the root of the tongue and
ending in the lips — the throat sound is A, and M is the last lip sound,
and the U exactly represents the rolling forward of the impulse which
begins at the root of the tongue till it ends in the lips. If properly
pronounced, this Om will represent the whole phenomenon of
sound-production, and no other word can do this; and this, therefore, is
the fittest symbol of the Sphota, which is the real meaning of the Om.
And as the symbol can never be separated from the thing signified, the
Om and the Sphota are one. And as the Sphota, being the finer side of
the manifested universe, is nearer to God and is indeed that first
manifestation of divine wisdom this Om is truly symbolic of God. Again,
just as the "One only" Brahman, the Akhanda-Sachchidânanda, the
undivided Existence-Knowledge-Bliss, can be conceived by imperfect human
souls only from particular standpoints and associated with particular
qualities, so this universe, His body, has also to be thought of along
the line of the thinker's mind.

This direction of the worshipper's mind is guided by its prevailing
elements or Tattvas. The result is that the same God will be seen in
various manifestations as the possessor of various predominant
qualities, and the same universe will appear as full of manifold forms.
Even as in the case of the least differentiated and the most universal
symbol Om, thought and sound-symbol are seen to be inseparably
associated with each other, so also this law of their inseparable
association applies to the many differentiated views of God and the
universe: each of them therefore must have a particular word-symbol to
express it. These word-symbols, evolved out of the deepest spiritual
perception of sages, symbolise and express, as nearly as possible the
particular view of God and the universe they stand for. And as the Om
represents the Akhanda, the undifferentiated Brahman, the others
represent the Khanda or the differentiated views of the same Being; and
they are all helpful to divine meditation and the acquisition of true
knowledge.

</div>
