---
title: THE CHOSEN IDEAL

---
<div>

[←](worship_of_substitutes_and_images.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_method_and_the_means.htm)

  

CHAPTER IX

## THE CHOSEN IDEAL

The next thing to be considered is what we know as Ishta-Nishthâ. One
who aspires to be a Bhakta must know that "so many opinions are so many
ways". He must know that all the various sects of the various religions
are the various manifestations of the glory of the same Lord. "They call
You by so many names; they divide You, as it were, by different names,
yet in each one of these is to be found Your omnipotence....You reach
the worshipper through all of these, neither is there any special time
so long as the soul has intense love for You. You are so easy of
approach; it is my misfortune that I cannot love You." Not only this,
the Bhakta must take care not to hate, nor even to criticise those
radiant sons of light who are the founders of various sects; he must not
even hear them spoken ill of. Very few indeed are those who are at once
the possessors of an extensive sympathy and power of appreciation, as
well as an intensity of love. We find, as a rule, that liberal and
sympathetic sects lose the intensity of religious feeling, and in their
hands, religion is apt to degenerate into a kind of politico-social club
life. On the other hand, intensely narrow sectaries, whilst displaying a
very commendable love of their own ideals, are seen to have acquired
every particle of that love by hating every one who is not of exactly
the same opinions as themselves. Would to God that this world was full
of men who were as intense in their love as worldwide in their
sympathies! But such are only few and far between. Yet we know that it
is practicable to educate large numbers of human beings into the ideal
of a wonderful blending of both the width and the intensity of love; and
the way to do that is by this path of the Istha-Nishtha or "steadfast
devotion to the chosen ideal". Every sect of every religion presents
only one ideal of its own to mankind, but the eternal Vedantic religion
opens to mankind an infinite number of doors for ingress into the inner
shrine of divinity, and places before humanity an almost inexhaustible
array of ideals, there being in each of them a manifestation of the
Eternal One. With the kindest solicitude, the Vedanta points out to
aspiring men and women the numerous roads, hewn out of the solid rock of
the realities of human life, by the glorious sons, or human
manifestations, of God, in the past and in the present, and stands with
outstretched arms to welcome all — to welcome even those that are yet to
be — to that Home of Truth and that Ocean of Bliss, wherein the human
soul, liberated from the net of Mâyâ, may transport itself with perfect
freedom and with eternal joy.

Bhakti-Yoga, therefore, lays on us the imperative command not to hate or
deny any one of the various paths that lead to salvation. Yet the
growing plant must be hedged round to protect it until it has grown into
a tree. The tender plant of spirituality will die if exposed too early
to the action of a constant change of ideas and ideals. Many people, in
the name of what may be called religious liberalism, may be seen feeding
their idle curiosity with a continuous succession of different ideals.
With them, hearing new things grows into a kind of disease, a sort of
religious drink-mania. They want to hear new things just by way of
getting a temporary nervous excitement, and when one such exciting
influence has had its effect on them, they are ready for another.
Religion is with these people a sort of intellectual opium-eating, and
there it ends. "There is another sort of man", says Bhagavan
Ramakrishna, "who is like the pearl-oyster of the story. The
pearl-oyster leaves its bed at the bottom of the sea, and comes up to
the surface to catch the rain-water when the star Svâti is in the
ascendant. It floats about on the surface of the sea with its shell wide
open, until it has succeeded in catching a drop of the rain-water, and
then it dives deep down to its sea-bed, and there rests until it has
succeeded in fashioning a beautiful pearl out of that rain-drop."

This is indeed the most poetical and forcible way in which the theory of
Ishta-Nishtha has ever been put. This Eka-Nishtha or devotion to one
ideal is absolutely necessary for the beginner in the practice of
religious devotion. He must say with Hanuman in the Râmâyana, "Though I
know that the Lord of Shri and the Lord of Jânaki are both
manifestations of the same Supreme Being, yet my all in all is the
lotus-eyed Râma." Or, as was said by the sage Tulasidâsa, he must say,
"Take the sweetness of all, sit with all, take the name of all, say yea,
yea, but keep your seat firm." Then, if the devotional aspirant is
sincere, out of this little seed will come a gigantic tree like the
Indian banyan, sending out branch after branch and root after root to
all sides, till it covers the entire field of religion. Thus will the
true devotee realise that He who was his own ideal in life is worshipped
in all ideals by all sects, under all names, and through all forms.

</div>
