---
title: THE RAMAYANA

---
<div>

[←](../addresses_on_bhakti-yoga/the_ishta.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_mahabharata.htm)

  

## THE RAMAYANA

(*Delivered at the Shakespeare Club, Pasadena, California, January 31,
1900*)

There are two great epics in the Sanskrit language, which are very
ancient. Of course, there are hundreds of other epic poems. The Sanskrit
language and literature have been continued down to the present day,
although, for more than two thousand years, it has ceased to be a spoken
language. I am now going to speak to you of the two most ancient epics,
called the Râmâyana and the Mahâbhârata. They embody the manners and
customs, the state of society, civilisation, etc., of the ancient
Indians. The oldest of these epics is called Ramayana, "The Life of
Râma". There was some poetical literature before this — most of the
Vedas, the sacred books of the Hindus, are written in a sort of metre —
but this book is held by common consent in India as the very beginning
of poetry.

The name of the poet or sage was Vâlmiki. Later on, a great many
poetical stories were fastened upon that ancient poet; and subsequently,
it became a very general practice to attribute to his authorship very
many verses that were not his. Notwithstanding all these interpolations,
it comes down to us as a very beautiful arrangement, without equal in
the literatures of the world.

There was a young man that could not in any way support his family. He
was strong and vigorous and, finally, became a highway robber; he
attacked persons in the street and robbed them, and with that money he
supported his father, mother, wife, and children. This went on
continually, until one day a great saint called Nârada was passing by,
and the robber attacked him. The sage asked the robber, "Why are you
going to rob me? It is a great sin to rob human beings and kill them.
What do you incur all this sin for?" The robber said, "Why, I want to
support my family with this money." "Now", said the sage, "do you think
that they take a share of your sin also?" "Certainly they do," replied
the robber. "Very good," said the sage, "make me safe by tying me up
here, while you go home and ask your people whether they will share your
sin in the same way as they share the money you make." The man
accordingly went to his father, and asked, "Father, do you know how I
support you?" He answered, "No, I do not." "I am a robber, and I kill
persons and rob them." "What! you do that, my son? Get away! You
outcast! "He then went to his mother and asked her, "Mother, do you know
how I support you?" "No," she replied. "Through robbery and murder."
"How horrible it is!" cried the mother. "But, do you partake in my sin?"
said the son. "Why should I? I never committed a robbery," answered the
mother. Then, he went to his wife and questioned her, "Do you know how I
maintain you all?" "No," she responded. "Why, I am a highwayman," he
rejoined, "and for years have been robbing people; that is how I support
and maintain you all. And what I now want to know is, whether you are
ready to share in my sin." "By no means. You are my husband, and it is
your duty to support me."

The eyes of the robber were opened. "That is the way of the world — even
my nearest relatives, for whom I have been robbing, will not share in my
destiny." He came back to the place where he had bound the sage,
unfastened his bonds, fell at his feet, recounted everything and said,
"Save me! What can I do?" The sage said, "Give up your present course of
life. You see that none of your family really loves you, so give up all
these delusions. They will share your prosperity; but the moment you
have nothing, they will desert you. There is none who will share in your
evil, but they will all share in your good. Therefore worship Him who
alone stands by us whether we are doing good or evil. He never leaves
us, for love never drags down, knows no barter, no selfishness."

Then the sage taught him how to worship. And this man left everything
and went into a forest. There he went on praying and meditating until he
forgot himself so entirely that the ants came and built ant-hills around
him and he was quite unconscious of it. After many years had passed, a
voice came saying, "Arise, O sage! " Thus aroused he exclaimed, "Sage? I
am a robber!" "No more 'robber'," answered the voice, "a purified sage
art thou. Thine old name is gone. But now, since thy meditation was so
deep and great that thou didst not remark even the ant-hills which
surrounded thee, henceforth, thy name shall be Valmiki — 'he that was
born in the ant-hill'." So, he became a sage.

And this is how he became a poet. One day as this sage, Valmiki, was
going to bathe in the holy river Ganga, he saw a pair of doves wheeling
round and round, and kissing each other. The sage looked up and was
pleased at the sight, but in a second an arrow whisked past him and
killed the male dove. As the dove fell down on the ground, the female
dove went on whirling round and round the dead body of its companion in
grief. In a moment the poet became miserable, and looking round, he saw
the hunter. "Thou art a wretch," he cried, "without the smallest mercy!
Thy slaying hand would not even stop for love!" "What is this? What am I
saying?" the poet thought to himself, "I have never spoken in this sort
of way before." And then a voice came: "Be not afraid. This is poetry
that is coming out of your mouth. Write the life of Rama in poetic
language for the benefit of the world." And that is how the poem first
began. The first verse sprang out of pits from the mouth of Valmiki, the
first poet. And it was after that, that he wrote the beautiful Ramayana,
"The Life of Rama".

There was an ancient Indian town called Ayodhyâ — and it exists even in
modern times. The province in which it is still located is called Oudh,
and most of you may have noticed it in the map of India. That was the
ancient Ayodhya. There, in ancient times, reigned a king called
Dasharatha. He had three queens, but the king had not any children by
them. And like good Hindus, the king and the queens, all went on
pilgrimages fasting and praying, that they might have children and, in
good time, four sons were born. The eldest of them was Rama.

Now, as it should be, these four brothers were thoroughly educated in
all branches of learning. To avoid future quarrels there was in ancient
India a custom for the king in his own lifetime to nominate his eldest
son as his successor, the Yuvarâja, young king, as he is called.

Now, there was another king, called Janaka, and this king had a
beautiful daughter named Sitâ. Sita was found in a field; she was a
daughter of the Earth, and was born without parents. The word "Sita" in
ancient Sanskrit means the furrow made by a plough. In the ancient
mythology of India you will find persons born of one parent only, or
persons born without parents, born of sacrificial fire, born in the
field, and so on — dropped from the clouds as it were. All those sorts
of miraculous birth were common in the mythological lore of India.

Sita, being the daughter of the Earth, was pure and immaculate. She was
brought up by King Janaka. When she was of a marriageable age, the king
wanted to find a suitable husband for her.

There was an ancient Indian custom called Svayamvara, by which the
princesses used to choose husbands. A number of princes from different
parts of the country were invited, and the princess in splendid array,
with a garland in her hand, and accompanied by a crier who enumerated
the distinctive claims of each of the royal suitors, would pass in the
midst of those assembled before her, and select the prince she liked for
her husband by throwing the garland of flowers round his neck. They
would then be married with much pomp and grandeur.

There were numbers of princes who aspired for the hand of Sita; the test
demanded on this occasion was the breaking of a huge bow, called
Haradhanu. All the princes put forth all their strength to accomplish
this feat, but failed. Finally, Rama took the mighty bow in his hands
and with easy grace broke it in twain. Thus Sita selected Rama, the son
of King Dasharatha for her husband, and they were wedded with great
rejoicings. Then, Rama took his bride to his home, and his old father
thought that the time was now come for him to retire and appoint Rama as
Yuvaraja. Everything was accordingly made ready for the ceremony, and
the whole country was jubilant over the affair, when the younger queen
Kaikeyi was reminded by one of her maidservants of two promises made to
her by the king long ago. At one time she had pleased the king very
much, and he offered to grant her two boons: "Ask any two things in my
power and I will grant them to you," said he, but she made no request
then. She had forgotten all about it; but the evil-minded maidservant in
her employ began to work upon her jealousy with regard to Rama being
installed on the throne, and insinuated to her how nice it would be for
her if her own son had succeeded the king, until the queen was almost
mad with jealousy. Then the servant suggested to her to ask from the
king the two promised boons: one would be that her own son Bharata
should be placed on the throne, and the other, that Rama should be sent
to the forest and be exiled for fourteen years.

Now, Rama was the life and soul of the old king and when this wicked
request was made to him, he as a king felt he could not go back on his
word. So he did not know what to do. But Rama came to the rescue and
willingly offered to give up the throne and go into exile, so that his
father might not be guilty of falsehood. So Rama went into exile for
fourteen years, accompanied by his loving wife Sita and his devoted
brother Lakshmana, who would on no account be parted from him.

The Aryans did not know who were the inhabitants of these wild forests.
In those days the forest tribes they called "monkeys", and some of the
so-called "monkeys", if unusually strong and powerful, were called
"demons".

So, into the forest, inhabited by demons and monkeys, Rama, Lakshmana,
and Sita went. When Sita had offered to accompany Rama, he exclaimed,
"How can you, a princess, face hardships and accompany me into a forest
full of unknown dangers!" But Sita replied, "Wherever Rama goes, there
goes Sita. How can you talk of 'princess' and 'royal birth' to me? I go
before you!" So, Sita went. And the younger brother, he also went with
them. They penetrated far into the forest, until they reached the river
Godâvari. On the banks of the river they built little cottages, and Rama
and Lakshmana used to hunt deer and collect fruits. After they had lived
thus for some time, one day there came a demon giantess. She was the
sister of the giant king of Lanka (Ceylon). Roaming through the forest
at will, she came across Rama, and seeing that he was a very handsome
man, she fell in love with him at once. But Rama was the purest of men,
and also he was a married man; so of course he could not return her
love. In revenge, she went to her brother, the giant king, and told him
all about the beautiful Sita, the wife of Rama.

Rama was the most powerful of mortals; there were no giants or demons or
anybody else strong enough to conquer him. So, the giant king had to
resort to subterfuge. He got hold of another giant who was a magician
and changed him into a beautiful golden deer; and the deer went prancing
round about the place where Rama lived, until Sita was fascinated by its
beauty and asked Rama to go and capture the deer for her. Rama went into
the forest to catch the deer, leaving his brother in charge of Sita.
Then Lakshmana laid a circle of fire round the cottage, and he said to
Sita, "Today I see something may befall you; and, therefore, I tell you
not to go outside of this magic circle. Some danger may befall you if
you do." In the meanwhile, Rama had pierced the magic deer with his
arrow, and immediately the deer, changed into the form of a man, died.

Immediately, at the cottage was heard the voice of Rama, crying, "Oh,
Lakshmana, come to my help!" and Sita said, ''Lakshmana, go at once into
the forest to help Rama! ""That is not Rama's voice," protested
Lakshmana. But at the entreaties of Sita, Lakshmana had to go in search
of Rama. As soon as he went away, the giant king, who had taken the form
of a mendicant monk, stood at the gate and asked for alms. "Wait
awhile," said Sita, "until my husband comes back and I will give you
plentiful alms." "I cannot wait, good lady," said he, "I am very hungry,
give me anything you have." At this, Sita, who had a few fruits in the
cottage, brought them out. But the mendicant monk after many persuasions
prevailed upon her to bring the alms to him, assuring her that she need
have no fear as he was a holy person. So Sita came out of the magic
circle, and immediately the seeming monk assumed his giant body, and
grasping Sita in his arms he called his magic chariot, and putting her
therein, he fled with the weeping Sita. Poor Sita! She was utterly
helpless, nobody, was there to come to her aid. As the giant was
carrying her away, she took off a few of the ornaments from her arms and
at intervals dropped them to the grounds

She was taken by Râvana to his kingdom, Lanka, the island of Ceylon. He
made peals to her to become his queen, and tempted her in many ways to
accede to his request. But Sita who was chastity itself, would not even
speak to the giant; and he to punish her, made her live under a tree,
day and night, until she should consent to be his wife.

When Rama and Lakshmana returned to the cottage and found that Sita was
not there, their grief knew no bounds. They could not imagine what had
become of her. The two brothers went on, seeking, seeking everywhere for
Sita, but could find no trace of her. After long searching, they came
across a group of "monkeys", and in the midst of them was Hanumân, the
"divine monkey". Hanuman, the best of the monkeys, became the most
faithful servant of Rama and helped him in rescuing Sita, as we shall
see later on. His devotion to Rama was so great that he is still
worshipped by the Hindus as the ideal of a true servant of the Lord. You
see, by the "monkeys" and "demons" are meant the aborigines of South
India.

So, Rama, at last, fell in with these monkeys. They told him that they
had seen flying through the sky a chariot, in which was seated a demon
who was carrying away a most beautiful lady, and that she was weeping
bitterly, and as the chariot passed over their heads she dropped one of
her ornaments to attract their attention. Then they showed Rama the
ornament. Lakshmana took up the ornament, and said, "I do not know whose
ornament this is." Rama took it from him and recognised it at once,
saying, "Yes, it is Sita's." Lakshmana could not recognise the ornament,
because in India the wife of the elder brother was held in so much
reverence that he had never looked upon the arms and the neck of Sita.
So you see, as it was a necklace, he did not know whose it was. There is
in this episode a touch of the old Indian custom. Then, the monkeys told
Rama who this demon king was and where he lived, and then they all went
to seek for him.

Now, the monkey-king Vâli and his younger brother Sugriva were then
fighting amongst themselves for the kingdom. The younger brother was
helped by Rama, and he regained the kingdom from Vali, who had driven
him away; and he, in return, promised to help Rama. They searched the
country all round, but could not find Sita. At last Hanuman leaped by
one bound from the coast of India to the island of Ceylon, and there
went looking all over Lanka for Sita, but nowhere could he find her.

You see, this giant king had conquered the gods, the men, in fact the
whole world; and he had collected all the beautiful women and made them
his concubines. So, Hanuman thought to himself, "Sita cannot be with
them in the palace. She would rather die than be in such a place." So
Hanuman went to seek for her elsewhere. At last, he found Sita under a
tree, pale and thin, like the new moon that lies low in the horizon. Now
Hanuman took the form of a little monkey and settled on the tree, and
there he witnessed how giantesses sent by Ravana came and tried to
frighten Sita into submission, but she would not even listen to the name
of the giant king.

Then, Hanuman came nearer to Sita and told her how he became the
messenger of Rama, who had sent him to find out where Sita was; and
Hanuman showed to Sita the signet ring which Rama had given as a token
for establishing his identity. He also informed her that as soon as Rama
would know her whereabouts, he would come with an army and conquer the
giant and recover her. However, he suggested to Sita that if she wished
it, he would take her on his shoulders and could with one leap clear the
ocean and get back to Rama. But Sita could not bear the idea, as she was
chastity itself, and could not touch the body of any man except her
husband. So, Sita remained where she was. But she gave him a jewel from
her hair to carry to Rama; and with that Hanuman returned.

Learning everything about Sita from Hanuman, Rama collected an army, and
with it marched towards the southernmost point of India. There Rama's
monkeys built a huge bridge, called Setu-Bandha, connecting India with
Ceylon. In very low water even now it is possible to cross from India to
Ceylon over the sand-banks there.

Now Rama was God incarnate, otherwise, how could he have done all these
things? He was an Incarnation of God, according to the Hindus. They in
India believe him to be the seventh Incarnation of God.

The monkeys removed whole hills, placed them in the sea and covered them
with stones and trees, thus making a huge embankment. A little squirrel,
so it is said, was there rolling himself in the sand and running
backwards and forwards on to the bridge and shaking himself. Thus in his
small way he was working for the bridge of Rama by putting in sand. The
monkeys laughed, for they were bringing whole mountains, whole forests,
huge loads of sand for the bridge — so they laughed at the little
squirrel rolling in the sand and then shaking himself. But Rama saw it
and remarked: "Blessed be the little squirrel; he is doing his work to
the best of his ability, and he is therefore quite as great as the
greatest of you." Then he gently stroked the squirrel on the back, and
the marks of Rama's fingers, running lengthways, are seen on the
squirrel's back to this day.

Now, when the bridge was finished, the whole army of monkeys, led by
Rama and his brother entered Ceylon. For several months afterwards
tremendous war and bloodshed followed. At last, this demon king, Ravana,
was conquered and killed; and his capital, with all the palaces and
everything, which were entirely of solid gold, was taken. In far-away
villages in the interior of India, when I tell them that I have been in
Ceylon, the simple folk say, "There, as our books tell, the houses are
built of gold." So, all these golden cities fell into the hands of Rama,
who gave them over to Vibhishana, the younger brother of Ravana, and
seated him on the throne in the place of his brother, as a return for
the valuable services rendered by him to Rama during the war.

Then Rama with Sita and his followers left Lanka. But there ran a murmur
among the followers. "The test! The test!" they cried, "Sita has not
given the test that she was perfectly pure in Ravana's household.''
"Pure! she is chastity itself" exclaimed Rama. "Never mind! We want the
test," persisted the people. Subsequently, a huge sacrificial fire was
made ready, into which Sita had to plunge herself. Rama was in agony,
thinking that Sita was lost; but in a moment, the God of fire himself
appeared with a throne upon his head, and upon the throne was Sita.
Then, there was universal rejoicing, and everybody was satisfied.

Early during the period of exile, Bharata, the younger brother had come
and informed Rama, of the death of the old king and vehemently insisted
on his occupying the throne. During Rama's exile Bharata would on no
account ascend the throne and out of respect placed a pair of Rama's
wooden shoes on it as a substitute for his brother. Then Rama returned
to his capital, and by the common consent of his people he became the
king of Ayodhya.

After Rama regained his kingdom, he took the necessary vows which in
olden times the king had to take for the benefit of his people. The king
was the slave of his people, and had to bow to public opinion, as we
shall see later on. Rama passed a few years in happiness with Sita, when
the people again began to murmur that Sita had been stolen by a demon
and carried across the ocean. They were not satisfied with the former
test and clamoured for another test, otherwise she must be banished.

In order to satisfy the demands of the people, Sita was banished, and
left to live in the forest, where was the hermitage of the sage and poet
Valmiki. The sage found poor Sita weeping and forlorn, and hearing her
sad story, sheltered her in his Âshrama. Sita was expecting soon to
become a mother, and she gave birth to twin boys. The poet never told
the children who they were. He brought them up together in the
Brahmachârin life. He then composed the poem known as Ramayana, set it
to music, and dramatised it.

The drama, in India, was a very holy thing. Drama and music are
themselves held to be religion. Any song — whether it be a love-song or
otherwise — if one's whole soul is in that song, one attains salvation,
one has nothing else to do. They say it leads to the same goal as
meditation.

So, Valmiki dramatised "The Life of Rama", and taught Rama's two
children how to recite and sing it.

There came a time when Rama was going to perform a huge sacrifice, or
Yajna, such as the old kings used to celebrate. But no ceremony in India
can be performed by a married man without his wife: he must have the
wife with him, the Sahadharmini, the "co-religionist" — that is the
expression for a wife. The Hindu householder has to perform hundreds of
ceremonies, but not one can be duly performed according to the Shâstras,
if he has not a wife to complement it with her part in it.

Now Rama's wife was not with him then, as she had been banished. So, the
people asked him to marry again. But at this request Rama for the first
time in his life stood against the people. He said, "This cannot be. My
life is Sita's." So, as a substitute, a golden statue of Sita was made,
in order that the; ceremony could be accomplished. They arranged even a
dramatic entertainment, to enhance the religious feeling in this great
festival. Valmiki, the great sage-poet, came with his pupils, Lava and
Kusha, the unknown sons of Rama. A stage had been erected and everything
was ready for the performance. Rama and his brothers attended with all
his nobles and his people — a vast audience. Under the direction of
Valmiki, the life of Rama was sung by Lava and Kusha, who fascinated the
whole assembly by their charming voice and appearance. Poor Rama was
nearly maddened, and when in the drama, the scene of Sita's exile came
about, he did not know what to do. Then the sage said to him, "Do not be
grieved, for I will show you Sita." Then Sita was brought upon the stage
and Rama delighted to see his wife. All of a sudden, the old murmur
arose: "The test! The test!" Poor Sita was so terribly overcome by the
repeated cruel slight on her reputation that it was more than she could
bear. She appealed to the gods to testify to her innocence, when the
Earth opened and Sita exclaimed, "Here is the test", and vanished into
the bosom of the Earth. The people were taken aback at this tragic end.
And Rama was overwhelmed with grief.

A few days after Sita's disappearance, a messenger came to Rama from the
gods, who intimated to him that his mission on earth was finished and he
was to return to heaven. These tidings brought to him the recognition of
his own real Self. He plunged into the waters of Sarayu, the mighty
river that laved his capital, and joined Sita in the other world.

This is the great, ancient epic of India. Rama and Sita are the ideals
of the Indian nation. All children, especially girls, worship Sita. The
height of a woman's ambition is to be like Sita, the pure, the devoted,
the all-suffering! When you study these characters, you can at once find
out how different is the ideal in India from that of the West. For the
race, Sita stands as the ideal of suffering. The West says, "Do! Show
your power by doing." India says, "Show your power by suffering." The
West has solved the problem of how much a man can have: India has solved
the problem of how little a man can have. The two extremes, you see.
Sita is typical of India — the idealised India. The question is not
whether she ever lived, whether the story is history or not, we know
that the ideal is there. There is no other Paurânika story that has so
permeated the whole nation, so entered into its very life, and has so
tingled in every drop of blood of the race, as this ideal of Sita. Sita
is the name in India for everything that is good, pure and holy —
everything that in woman we call womanly. If a priest has to bless a
woman he says, "Be Sita!" If he blesses a child, he says "Be Sita!" They
are all children of Sita, and are struggling to be Sita, the patient,
the all-suffering, the ever-faithful, the ever-pure wife. Through all
this suffering she experiences, there is not one harsh word against
Rama. She takes it as her own duty, and performs her own part in it.
Think of the terrible injustice of her being exiled to the forest! But
Sita knows no bitterness. That is, again, the Indian ideal. Says the
ancient Buddha, "When a man hurts you, and you turn back to hurt him,
that would not cure the first injury; it would only create in the world
one more wickedness." Sita was a true Indian by nature; she never
returned injury.

Who knows which is the truer ideal? The apparent power and strength, as
held in the West, or the fortitude in suffering, of the East?

The West says, "We minimise evil by conquering it." India says, "We
destroy evil by suffering, until evil is nothing to us, it becomes
positive enjoyment." Well, both are great ideals. Who knows which will
survive in the long run? Who knows which attitude will really most
benefit humanity? Who knows which will disarm and conquer animality?
Will it be suffering, or doing?

In the meantime, let us not try to destroy each other's ideals. We are
both intent upon the same work, which is the annihilation of evil. You
take up your method; let us take up our method. Let us not destroy the
ideal. I do not say to the West, "Take up our method." Certainly not.
The goal is the same, but the methods can never be the same. And so,
after hearing about the ideals of India, I hope that you will say in the
same breath to India, "We know, the goal, the ideal, is all right for us
both. You follow your own ideal. You follow your method in your own way,
and Godspeed to you!" My message in life is to ask the East and West not
to quarrel over different ideals, but to show them that the goal is the
same in both cases, however opposite it may appear. As we wend our way
through this mazy vale of life, let us bid each other Godspeed.

</div>
