---
title: THE MAHABHARATA

---
<div>

[←](the_ramayana.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](thoughts_on_the_gita.htm)

  

## THE MAHABHARATA

(*Delivered at the Shakespeare Club, Pasadena, California, February 1,
1900*)

The other epic about which I am going to speak to you this evening, is
called the Mahâbhârata. It contains the story of a race descended from
King Bharata, who was the son of Dushyanta and Shakuntalâ. Mahâ means
great, and Bhârata means the descendants of Bharata, from whom India has
derived its name, Bhârata. Mahabharata means Great India, or the story
of the great descendants of Bharata. The scene of this epic is the
ancient kingdom of the Kurus, and the story is based on the great war
which took place between the Kurus and the Panchâlas. So the region of
the quarrel is not very big. This epic is the most popular one in India;
and it exercises the same authority in India as Homer's poems did over
the Greeks. As ages went on, more and more matter was added to it, until
it has become a huge book of about a hundred thousand couplets. All
sorts of tales, legends and myths, philosophical treatises, scraps of
history, and various discussions have been added to it from time to
time, until it is a vast, gigantic mass of literature; and through it
all runs the old, original story. The central story of the Mahabharata
is of a war between two families of cousins, one family, called the
Kauravas, the other the Pândavas — for the empire of India.

The Aryans came into India in small companies. Gradually, these tribes
began to extend, until, at last, they became the undisputed rulers of
India. and then arose this fight to gain the mastery, between two
branches of the same family. Those of you who have studied the Gitâ know
how the book opens with a description of the battlefield, with two
armies arrayed one against the other. That is the war of the
Mahabharata.

There were two brothers, sons of the emperor. The elder one was called
Dhritarâshtra, and the other was called Pându. Dhritarashtra, the elder
one, was born blind. According to Indian law, no blind, halt, maimed,
consumptive, or any other constitutionally diseased person, can inherit.
He can only get a maintenance. So, Dhritarashtra could not ascend the
throne, though he was the elder son, and Pandu became the emperor.

Dhritarashtra had a hundred sons, and Pandu had only five. After the
death of Pandu at an early age, Dhritarashtra became king of the Kurus
and brought up the sons of Pandu along with his own children. When they
grew up they were placed under the tutorship of the great priestwarrior,
Drona, and were well trained in the various material arts and sciences
befitting princes. The education of the princes being finished,
Dhritarashtra put Yudhishthira, the eldest of the sons of Pandu, on the
throne of his father. The sterling virtues of Yudhishthira and the
valour and devotion of his other brothers aroused jealousies in the
hearts of the sons of the blind king, and at the instigation of
Duryodhana, the eldest of them, the five Pandava brothers were prevailed
upon to visit Vâranâvata, on the plea of a religious festival that was
being held there. There they were accommodated in a palace made under
Duryodhana's instructions, of hemp, resin, and lac, and other
inflammable materials, which were subsequently set fire to secretly. But
the good Vidura, the step-brother of Dhritarashtra, having become
cognisant of the evil intentions of Duryodhana and his party, had warned
the Pandavas of the plot, and they managed to escape without anyone's
knowledge. When the Kurus saw the house was reduced to ashes, they
heaved a sigh of relief and thought all obstacles were now removed out
of their path. Then the children of Dhritarashtra got hold of the
kingdom. The five Pandava brothers had fled to the forest with their
mother, Kunti. They lived there by begging, and went about in disguise
giving themselves out as Brâhmana students. Many were the hardships and
adventures they encountered in the wild forests, but their fortitude of
mind, and strength, and valour made them conquer all dangers. So things
went on until they came to hear of the approaching marriage of the
princess of a neighbouring country.

I told you last night of the peculiar form of the ancient Indian
marriage. It was called Svayamvara, that is, the choosing of the husband
by the princess. A great gathering of princes and nobles assembled,
amongst whom the princess would choose her husband. Preceded by her
trumpeters and heralds she would approach, carrying a garland of flowers
in her hand. At the throne of each candidate for her hand, the praises
of that prince and all his great deeds in battle would be declared by
the heralds. And when the princess decided which prince she desired to
have for a husband, she would signify the fact by throwing the
marriage-garland round his neck. Then the ceremony would turn into a
wedding. King Drupada was a great king, king of the Panchalas, and his
daughter, Draupadi, famed far and wide for her beauty and
accomplishments, was going to choose a hero.

At a Svayamvara there was always a great feat of arms or something of
the kind. On this occasion, a mark in the form of a fish was set up high
in the sky; under that fish was a wheel with a hole in the centre,
continually turning round, and beneath was a tub of water. A man looking
at the reflection of the fish in the tub of water was asked to send an
arrow and hit the eye of the fish through the Chakra or wheel, and he
who succeeded would be married to the princess. Now, there came kings
and princes from different parts of India, all anxious to win the hand
of the princess, and one after another they tried their skill, and every
one of them failed to hit the mark.

You know, there are four castes in India: the highest caste is that of
the hereditary priest, the Brâhmana; next is the caste of the Kshatriya,
composed of kings and fighters; next, the Vaishyas, the traders or
businessmen, and then Shudras, the servants. Now, this princess was, of
course, a Kshatriya, one of the second caste.

When all those princes failed in hitting the mark, then the son of King
Drupada rose up in the midst of the court and said: "The Kshatriya, the
king caste has failed; now the contest is open to the other castes. Let
a Brahmana, even a Shudra, take part in it; whosoever hits the mark,
marries Draupadi."

Among the Brahmanas were seated the five Pandava brothers. Arjuna, the
third brother, was the hero of the bow. He arose and stepped forward.
Now, Brahmanas as a caste are very quiet and rather timid people.
According to the law, they must not touch a warlike weapon, they must
not wield a sword, they must not go into any enterprise that is
dangerous. Their life is one of contemplation, study, and control of the
inner nature. Judge, therefore, how quiet and peaceable a people they
are. When the Brahmanas saw this man get up, they thought this man was
going to bring the wrath of the Kshatriyas upon them, and that they
would all be killed. So they tried to dissuade him, but Arjuna did not
listen to them, because he was a soldier. He lifted the bow in his hand,
strung it without any effort, and drawing it, sent the arrow right
through the wheel and hit the eye of the fish.

Then there was great jubilation. Draupadi, the princess, approached
Arjuna and threw the beautiful garland of flowers over his head. But
there arose a great cry among the princes, who could not bear the idea
that this beautiful princess who was a Kshatriya should be won by a poor
Brahmana, from among this huge assembly of kings and princes. So, they
wanted to fight Arjuna and snatch her from him by force. The brothers
had a tremendous fight with the warriors, but held their own, and
carried off the bride in triumph.

The five brothers now returned home to Kunti with the princess.
Brahmanas have to live by begging. So they, who lived as Brahmanas, used
to go out, and what they got by begging they brought home and the mother
divided it among them. Thus the five brothers, with the princess, came
to the cottage where the mother lived. They shouted out to her jocosely,
"Mother, we have brought home a most wonderful alms today." The mother
replied, "Enjoy it in common, all of you, my children." Then the mother
seeing the princess, exclaimed, "Oh! what have I said! It is a girl!"
But what could be done! The mother's word was spoken once for all. It
must not be disregarded. The mother's words must be fulfilled. She could
not be made to utter an untruth, as she never had done so. So Draupadi
became the common wife of all the five brothers.

Now, you know, in every society there are stages of development. Behind
this epic there is a wonderful glimpse of the ancient historic times.
The author of the poem mentions the fact of the five brothers marrying
the same woman, but he tries to gloss it over, to find an excuse and a
cause for such an act: it was the mother's command, the mother
sanctioned this strange betrothal, and so on. You know, in every nation
there has been a certain stage in society that allowed polyandry — all
the brothers of a family would marry one wife in common. Now, this was
evidently a glimpse of the past polyandrous stage.

In the meantime, the brother of the princess was perplexed in his mind
and thought: "Who are these people? Who is this man whom my sister is
going to marry? They have not any chariots, horses, or anything. Why,
they go on foot!" So he had followed them at a distance, and at night
overheard their conversation and became fully convinced that they were
really Kshatriyas. Then King Drupada came to know who they were and was
greatly delighted.

Though at first much objection was raised, it was declared by Vyâsa that
such a marriage was allowable for these princes, and it was permitted.
So the king Drupada had to yield to this polyandrous marriage, and the
princess was married to the five sons of Pandu.

Then the Pandavas lived in peace and prosperity and became more powerful
every day. Though Duryodhana and his party conceived of fresh plots to
destroy them, King Dhritarashtra was prevailed upon by the wise counsels
of the elders to make peace with the Pandavas; and so he invited them
home amidst the rejoicings of the people and gave them half of the
kingdom. Then, the five brothers built for themselves a beautiful city,
called Indraprastha, and extended their dominions, laying all the people
under tribute to them. Then the eldest, Yudhishthira, in order to
declare himself emperor over all the kings of ancient India, decided to
perform a Râjasuya Yajna or Imperial Sacrifice, in which the conquered
kings would have to come with tribute and swear allegiance, and help the
performance of the sacrifice by personal services. Shri Krishna, who had
become their friend and a relative, came to them and approved of the
idea. But there alas one obstacle to its performance. A king, Jarâsandha
by name, who intended to offer a sacrifice of a hundred kings, had
eighty-six of them kept as captives with him. Shri Krishna counselled an
attack on Jarasandha. So he, Bhima, and Arjuna challenged the king, who
accepted the challenge and was finally conquered by Bhima after fourteen
days, continuous wrestling. The captive kings were then set free.

Then the four younger brothers went out with armies on a conquering
expedition, each in a different direction, and brought all the kings
under subjection to Yudhishthira. Returning, they laid all the vast
wealth they secured at the feet of the eldest brother to meet the
expenses of the great sacrifice.

So, to this Rajasuya sacrifice all the liberated kings came, along with
those conquered by the brothers, and rendered homage to Yudhishthira.
King Dhritarashtra and his sons were also invited to come and take a
share in the performance of the sacrifice. At the conclusion of the
sacrifice, Yudhishthira was crowned emperor, and declared as lord
paramount. This was the sowing of the future feud. Duryodhana came back
from the sacrifice filled with jealousy against Yudhishthira, as their
sovereignty and vast splendour and wealth were more than he could bear;
and so he devised plans to effect their fall by guile, as he knew that
to overcome them by force was beyond his power. This king, Yudhishthira,
had the love of gambling, and he was challenged at an evil hour to play
dice with Shakuni, the crafty gambler and the evil genius of Duryodhana.
In ancient India, if a man of the military caste was challenged to
fight, he must at any price accept the challenge to uphold his honour.
And if he was challenged to play dice, it was a point of honour to play,
and dishonourable to decline the challenge. King Yudhishthira, says the
Epic, was the incarnation of all virtues. Even he, the great sage-king,
had to accept the challenge. Shakuni and his party had made false dice.
So Yudhishthira lost game after game, and stung with his losses, he went
on with the fatal game, staking everything he had, and losing all, until
all his possessions, his kingdom and everything, were lost. The last
stage came when, under further challenge, he had no other resources left
but to stake his brothers, and then himself, and last of all, the fair
Draupadi, and lost all. Now they were completely at the mercy of the
Kauravas, who cast all sorts of insults upon them, and subjected
Draupadi to most inhuman treatment. At last through the intervention of
the blind king, they got their liberty, and were asked to return home
and rule their kingdom. But Duryodhana saw the danger and forced his
father to allow one more throw of the dice in which the party which
would lose, should retire to the forests for twelve years, and then live
unrecognised in a city for one year; but if they were found out, the
same term of exile should have to be undergone once again and then only
the kingdom was to be restored to the exiled. This last game also
Yudhishthira lost, and the five Pandava brothers retired to the forests
with Draupadi, as homeless exiles. They lived in the forests and
mountains for twelve years. There they performed many deeds of virtue
and valour, and would go out now and then on a long round of
pilgrimages, visiting many holy places. That part of the poem is very
interesting and instructive, and various are the incidents, tales, and
legends with which this part of the book is replete. There are in it
beautiful and sublime stories of ancient India, religious and
philosophical. Great sages came to see the brothers in their exile and
narrated to them many telling stories of ancient India, so as to make
them bear lightly the burden of their exile. One only I will relate to
you here.

There was a king called Ashvapati. The king had a daughter, who was so
good and beautiful that she was called Sâvitri, which is the name of a
sacred prayer of the Hindus. When Savitri grew old enough, her father
asked her to choose a husband for herself. These ancient Indian
princesses were very independent, you see, and chose their own princely
suitors.

Savitri consented and travelled in distant regions, mounted in a golden
chariot, with her guards and aged courtiers to whom her father entrusted
her, stopping at different courts, and seeing different princes, but not
one of them could win the heart of Savitri. They came at last to a holy
hermitage in one of those forests that in ancient India were reserved
for animals, and where no animals were allowed to be killed. The animals
lost the fear of man — even the fish in the lakes came and took food out
of the hand. For thousands of years no one had killed anything therein.
The sages and the aged went there to live among the deer and the birds.
Even criminals were safe there. When a man got tired of life, he would
go to the forest; and in the company of sages, talking of religion and
meditating thereon, he passed the remainder of his life.

Now it happened that there was a king, Dyumatsena, who was defeated by
his enemies and was deprived of his kingdom when he was struck with age
and had lost his sight. This poor, old, blind king, with his queen and
his son, took refuge in the forest and passed his life in rigid penance.
His boy's name was Satyavân.

It came to pass that after having visited all the different royal
courts, Savitri at last came to this hermitage, or holy place. Not even
the greatest king could pass by the hermitages, or Âshramas as they were
called, without going to pay homage to the sages, for such honour and
respect was felt for these holy men. The greatest emperor of India would
be only too glad to trace his descent to some sage who lived in a
forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, and clad in rags. We are all
children of sages. That is the respect that is paid to religion. So,
even kings, when they pass by the hermitages, feel honoured to go in and
pay their respects to the sages. If they approach on horseback, they
descend and walk as they advance towards them. If they arrive in a
chariot, chariot and armour must be left outside when they enter. No
fighting man can enter unless he comes in the manner of a religious man,
quiet and gentle.

So Savitri came to this hermitage and saw there Satyavan, the hermit's
son, and her heart was conquered. She had escaped all the princes of the
palaces and the courts, but here in the forest-refuge of King
Dyumatsena, his son, Satyavan, stole her heart.

When Savitri returned to her father's house, he asked her, "Savitri,
dear daughter, speak. Did you see anybody whom you would like to marry "
Then softly with blushes, said Savitri, "Yes, father." "What is the name
of the prince?" "He is no prince, but the son of King Dyumatsena who has
lost his kingdom — a prince without a patrimony, who lives a monastic
life, the life of a Sannyasin in a forest, collecting roots and herbs,
helping and feeding his old father and mother, who live in a cottage."

On hearing this the father consulted the Sage Nârada, who happened to be
then present there, and he declared it was the most ill-omened choice
that was ever made. The king then asked him to explain why it was so.
And Narada said, "Within twelve months from this time the young man will
die." Then the king started with terror, and spoke, "Savitri, this young
man is going to die in twelve months, and you will become a widow: think
of that! Desist from your choice, my child, you shall never be married
to a short-lived and fated bridegroom." "Never mind, father; do not ask
me to marry another person and sacrifice the chastity of mind, for I
love and have accepted in my mind that good and brave Satyavan only as
my husband. A maiden chooses only once, and she never departs from her
troth." When the king found that Savitri was resolute in mind and heart,
he complied. Then Savitri married prince Satyavan, and she quietly went
from the palace of her father into the forest, to live with her chosen
husband and help her husband's parents. Now, though Savitri knew the
exact date when Satyavan was to die, she kept it hidden from him. Daily
he went into the depths of the forest, collected fruits and flowers,
gathered faggots, and then came back to the cottage, and she cooked the
meals and helped the old people. Thus their lives went on until the
fatal day came near, and three short days remained only. She took a
severe vow of three nights' penance and holy fasts, and kept her hard
vigils. Savitri spent sorrowful and sleepless nights with fervent
prayers and unseen tears, till the dreaded morning dawned. That day
Savitri could not bear him out of her sight, even for a moment. She
begged permission from his parents to accompany her husband, when he
went to gather the usual herbs and fuel, and gaining their consent she
went. Suddenly, in faltering accents, he complained to his wife of
feeling faint, "My head is dizzy, and my senses reel, dear Savitri, I
feel sleep stealing over me; let me rest beside thee for a while." In
fear and trembling she replied, "Come, lay your head upon my lap, my
dearest lord." And he laid his burning head in the lap of his wife, and
ere long sighed and expired. Clasping him to her, her eyes flowing with
tears, there she sat in the lonesome forest, until the emissaries of
Death approached to take away the soul of Satyavan. But they could not
come near to the place where Savitri sat with the dead body of her
husband, his head resting in her lap. There was a zone of fire
surrounding her, and not one of the emissaries of Death could come
within it. They all fled back from it, returned to King Yama, the God of
Death, and told him why they could not obtain the soul of this man.

Then came Yama, the God of Death, the Judge of the dead. He was the
first man that died — the first man that died on earth — and he had
become the presiding deity over all those that die. He judges whether,
after a man has died, he is to be punished or rewarded. So he came
himself. Of course, he could go inside that charmed circle as he was a
god. When he came to Savitri, he said, "Daughter, give up this dead
body, for know, death is the fate of mortals, and I am the first of
mortals who died. Since then, everyone has had to die. Death is the fate
of man." Thus told, Savitri walked off, and Yama drew the soul out. Yama
having possessed himself of the soul of the young man proceeded on his
way. Before he had gone far, he heard footfalls upon the dry leaves. He
turned back. "Savitri, daughter, why are you following me? This is the
fate of all mortals." "I am not following thee, Father," replied
Savitri, "but this is, also, the fate of woman, she follows where her
love takes her, and the Eternal Law separates not loving man and
faithful wife." Then said the God of Death, "Ask for any boon, except
the life of your husband." "If thou art pleased to grant a boon, O Lord
of Death, I ask that my father-in-law may be cured of his blindness and
made happy." "Let thy pious wish be granted, duteous daughter." And then
the King of Death travelled on with the soul of Satyavan. Again the same
footfall was heard from behind. He looked round. "Savitri, my daughter,
you are still following me?" "Yes my Father; I cannot help doing so; I
am trying all the time to go back, but the mind goes after my husband
and the body follows. The soul has already gone, for in that soul is
also mine; and when you take the soul, the body follows, does it not?"
"Pleased am I with your words, fair Savitri. Ask yet another boon of me,
but it must not be the life of your husband." "Let my father-in-law
regain his lost wealth and kingdom, Father, if thou art pleased to grant
another supplication." "Loving daughter," Yama answered, "this boon I
now bestow; but return home, for living mortal cannot go with King
Yama." And then Yama pursued his way. But Savitri, meek and faithful
still followed her departed husband. Yama again turned back. "Noble
Savitri, follow not in hopeless woe." "I cannot choose but follow where
thou takest my beloved one." "Then suppose, Savitri, that your husband
was a sinner and has to go to hell. In that case goes Savitri with the
one she loves?" "Glad am I to follow where he goes be it life or death,
heaven or hell," said the loving wife. "Blessed are your words, my
child, pleased am I with you, ask yet another boon, but the dead come
not to life again." "Since you so permit me, then, let the imperial line
of my father-in-law be not destroyed; let his kingdom descend to
Satyavan's sons." And then the God of Death smiled. "My daughter, thou
shalt have thy desire now: here is the soul of thy husband, he shall
live again. He shall live to be a father and thy children also shall
reign in due course. Return home. Love has conquered Death! Woman never
loved like thee, and thou art the proof that even I, the God of Death,
am powerless against the power of the true love that abideth!"

This is the story of Savitri, and every girl in India must aspire to be
like Savitri, whose love could not be conquered by death, and who
through this tremendous love snatched back from even Yama, the soul of
her husband.

The book is full of hundreds of beautiful episodes like this. I began by
telling you that the Mahabharata is one of the greatest books in the
world and consists of about a hundred thousand verses in eighteen
Parvans, or volumes.

To return to our main story. We left the Pandava brothers in exile. Even
there they were not allowed to remain unmolested from the evil plots of
Duryodhana; but all of them were futile.

A story of their forest life, I shall tell you here. One day the
brothers became thirsty in the forest. Yudhishthira bade his brother,
Nakula, go and fetch water. He quickly proceeded towards the place where
there was water and soon came to a crystal lake, and was about to drink
of it, when he heard a voice utter these words: "Stop, O child. First
answer my questions and then drink of this water." But Nakula, who was
exceedingly thirsty, disregarded these words, drank of the water, and
having drunk of it, dropped down dead. As Nakula did not return, King
Yudhishthira told Sahadeva to seek his brother and bring back water with
him. So Sahadeva proceeded to the lake and beheld his brother lying
dead. Afflicted at the death of his brother and suffering severely from
thirst, he went towards the water, when the same words were heard by
him: "O child, first answer my questions and then drink of the water."
He also disregarded these words, and having satisfied his thirst,
dropped down dead. Subsequently, Arjuna and Bhima were sent, one after
the other, on a similar quest; but neither returned, having drunk of the
lake and dropped down dead. Then Yudhishthira rose up to go in search of
his brothers. At length, he came to the beautiful lake and saw his
brothers lying dead. His heart was full of grief at the sight, and he
began to lament. Suddenly he heard the same voice saying, "Do not, O
child, act rashly. I am a Yaksha living as a crane on tiny fish. It is
by me that thy younger brothers have been brought under the sway of the
Lord of departed spirits. If thou, O Prince, answer not the questions
put by me even thou shalt number the fifth corpse. Having answered my
questions first, do thou, O Kunti's son, drink and carry away as much as
thou requires"." Yudhishthira replied, "I shall answer thy questions
according to my intelligence. Do thou ask met" The Yaksha then asked him
several questions, all of which Yudhishthira answered satisfactorily.
One of the questions asked was: "What is the most wonderful fact in this
world?" "We see our fellow-beings every moment falling off around us;
but those that are left behind think that they will never die. This is
the most curious fact: in face of death, none believes that he will die!
" Another question asked was: "What is the path of knowing the secret of
religion?" And Yudhishthira answered, "By argument nothing can be
settled; doctrines there are many; various are the scriptures, one part
contradicting the other. There are not two sages who do not differ in
their opinions. The secret of religion is buried deep, as it were, in
dark caves. So the path to be followed is that which the great ones have
trodden." Then the Yaksha said, "I am pleased. I am Dharma, he God of
Justice in the form of the crane. I came to test you. Now, your
brothers, see, not one of them is dead. It is all my magic. Since
abstention from injury is regarded by thee as higher than both profit
and pleasure, therefore, let all thy brothers live, O Bull of the
Bharata race." And at these words of the Yaksha, the Pandavas rose up.

Here is a glimpse of the nature of King Yudhishthira. We find by his
answers that he was more of a philosopher, more of a Yogi, than a king.

Now, as the thirteenth year of the exile was drawing nigh, the Yaksha
bade them go to Virâta's kingdom and live there in such disguises as
they would think best.

So, after the term of the twelve years' exile had expired, they went to
the kingdom of Virata in different disguises to spend the remaining one
year in concealment, and entered into menial service in the king's
household. Thus Yudhishthira became a Brâhmana courtier of the king, as
one skilled in dice; Bhima was appointed a cook; Arjuna, dressed as a
eunuch, was made a teacher of dancing and music to Uttarâ, the princess,
and remained in the inner apartments of the king; Nakula became the
keeper of the king's horses; and Sahadeva got the charge of the cows;
and Draupadi, disguised as a waiting-woman, was also admitted into the
queen's household. Thus concealing their identity the Pandava brothers
safely spent a year, and the search of Duryodhana to find them out was
of no avail. They were only discovered just when the year was out.

Then Yudhishthira sent an ambassador to Dhritarashtra and demanded that
half of the kingdom should, as their share, be restored to them. But
Duryodhana hated his cousins and would not consent to their legitimate
demands. They were even willing to accept a single province, nay, even
five villages. But the headstrong Duryodhana declared that he would not
yield without fight even as much land as a needle's point would hold.
Dhritarashtra pleaded again and again for peace, but all in vain.
Krishna also went and tried to avert the impending war and death of
kinsmen, so did the wise elders of the royal court; but all negotiations
for a peaceful partition of the kingdom were futile. So, at last,
preparations were made on both sides for war, and all the warlike
nations took part in it.

The old Indian customs of the Kshatriyas were observed in it. Duryodhana
took one side, Yudhishthira the other. From Yudhishthira messengers were
at once sent to all the surrounding kings, entreating their alliance,
since honourable men would grant the request that first reached them.
So, warriors from all parts assembled to espouse the cause of either the
Pandavas or the Kurus according to the precedence of their requests; and
thus one brother joined this side, and the other that side, the father
on one side, and the son on the other. The most curious thing was the
code of war of those days; as soon as the battle for the day ceased and
evening came, the opposing parties were good friends, even going to each
other's tents; however, when the morning came, again they proceeded to
fight each other. That was the strange trait that the Hindus carried
down to the time of the Mohammedan invasion. Then again, a man on
horseback must not strike one on foot; must not poison the weapon; must
not vanquish the enemy in any unequal fight, or by dishonesty; and must
never take undue advantage of another, and so on. If any deviated from
these rules he would be covered with dishonour and shunned. The
Kshatriyas were trained in that way. And when the foreign invasion came
from Central Asia, the Hindus treated the invaders in the selfsame way.
They defeated them several times, and on as many occasions sent them
back to their homes with presents etc. The code laid down was that they
must not usurp anybody's country; and when a man was beaten, he must be
sent back to his country with due regard to his position. The Mohammedan
conquerors treated the Hindu kings differently, and when they got them
once, they destroyed them without remorse.

Mind you, in those days — in the times of our story, the poem says — the
science of arms was not the mere use of bows and arrows at all; it was
magic archery in which the use of Mantras, concentration, etc., played a
prominent part. One man could fight millions of men and burn them at
will. He could send one arrow, and it would rain thousands of arrows and
thunder; he could make anything burn, and so on — it was all divine
magic. One fact is most curious in both these poems — the Ramayana and
the Mahabharata — along with these magic arrows and all these things
going on, you see the cannon already in use. The cannon is an old, old
thing, used by the Chinese and the Hindus. Upon the walls of the cities
were hundreds of curious weapons made of hollow iron tubes, which filled
with powder and ball would kill hundreds of men. The people believed
that the Chinese, by magic, put the devil inside a hollow iron tube, and
when they applied a little fire to a hole, the devil came out with a
terrific noise and killed many people.

So in those old days, they used to fight with magic arrows. One man
would be able to fight millions of others. They had their military
arrangements and tactics: there were the foot soldiers, termed the Pâda;
then the cavalry, Turaga; and two other divisions which the moderns have
lost and given up — there was the elephant corps — hundreds and hundreds
of elephants, with men on their backs, formed into regiments and
protected with huge sheets of iron mail; and these elephants would bear
down upon a mass of the enemy — then, there were the chariots, of course
(you have all seen pictures of those old chariots, they were used in
every country). These were the four divisions of the army in those old
days.

Now, both parties alike wished to secure the alliance of Krishna. But he
declined to take an active part and fight in this war, but offered
himself as charioteer to Arjuna, and as the friend and counsellor of the
Pandavas while to Duryodhana he gave his army of mighty soldiers.

Then was fought on the vast plain of Kurukshetra the great battle in
which Bhisma, Drona, Karna, and the brothers of Duryodhana with the
kinsmen on both sides and thousands of other heroes fell. The war lasted
eighteen days. Indeed, out of the eighteen Akshauhinis of soldiers very
few men were left. The death of Duryodhana ended the war in favour of
the Pandavas. It was followed by the lament of Gândhâri, the queen and
the widowed women, and the funerals of the deceased warriors.

The greatest incident of the war was the marvellous and immortal poem of
the Gitâ, the Song Celestial. It is the popular scripture of India and
the loftiest of all teachings. It consists of a dialogue held by Arjuna
with Krishna, just before the commencement of the fight on the
battle-field of Kurukshetra. I would advise those of you who have not
read that book to read it. If you only knew how much it has influenced
your own country even! If you want to know the source of Emerson's
inspiration, it is this book, the Gita. He went to see Carlyle, and
Carlyle made him a present of the Gita; and that little book is
responsible for the Concord Movement. All the broad movements in
America, in one way or other, are indebted to the Concord party.

The central figure of the Gita is Krishna. As you worship Jesus of
Nazareth as God come down as man so the Hindus worship many Incarnations
of God. They believe in not one or two only, but in many, who have come
down from time to time, according to the needs of the world, for the
preservation of Dharma and destruction of wickedness. Each sect has one,
and Krishna is one of them. Krishna, perhaps, has a larger number of
followers in India than any other Incarnation of God. His followers hold
that he was the most perfect of those Incarnations. Why? "Because," they
say, "look at Buddha and other Incarnations: they were only monks, and
they had no sympathy for married people. How could they have? But look
at Krishna: he was great as a son, as a king, as a father, and all
through his life he practiced the marvellous teachings which he
preached." "He who in the midst of the greatest activity finds the
sweetest peace, and in the midst of the greatest calmness is most
active, he has known the secret of life." Krishna shows the way how to
do this — by being non-attached: do everything but do not get identified
with anything. You are the soul, the pure, the free, all the time; you
are the Witness. Our misery comes, not from work, but by our getting
attached to something. Take for instance, money: money is a great thing
to have, earn it, says Krishna; struggle hard to get money, but don't
get attached to it. So with children, with wife, husband, relatives,
fame, everything; you have no need to shun them, only don't get
attached. There is only one attachment and that belongs to the Lord, and
to none other. Work for them, love them, do good to them, sacrifice a
hundred lives, if need be, for them, but never be attached. His own life
was the exact exemplification of that.

Remember that the book which delineates the life of Krishna is several
thousand years old, and some parts of his life are very similar to those
of Jesus of Nazareth. Krishna was of royal birth; there was a tyrant
king, called Kamsa, and there was a prophecy that one would be born of
such and such a family, who would be king. So Kamsa ordered all the male
children to be massacred. The father and mother of Krishna were cast by
King Kamsa into prison, where the child was born. A light suddenly shone
in the prison and the child spoke saying, "I am the Light of the world,
born for the good of the world." You find Krishna again symbolically
represented with cows — "The Great Cowherd," as he is called. Sages
affirmed that God Himself was born, and they went to pay him homage. In
other parts of the story, the similarity between the two does not
continue.

Shri Krishna conquered this tyrant Kamsa, but he never thought of
accepting or occupying the throne himself. He had nothing to do with
that. He had done his duty and there it ended.

After the conclusion of the Kurukshetra War, the great warrior and
venerable grandsire, Bhishma, who fought ten days out of the eighteen
days' battle, still lay on his deathbed and gave instructions to
Yudhishthira on various subjects, such as the duties of the king, the
duties of the four castes, the four stages of life, the laws of
marriage, the bestowing of gifts, etc., basing them on the teachings of
the ancient sages. He explained Sânkhya philosophy and Yoga philosophy
and narrated numerous tales and traditions about saints and gods and
kings. These teachings occupy nearly one-fourth of the entire work and
form an invaluable storehouse of Hindu laws and moral codes.
Yudhishthira had in the meantime been crowned king. But the awful
bloodshed and extinction of superiors and relatives weighed heavily on
his mind; and then, under the advice of Vyasa, he performed the
Ashvamedha sacrifice.

After the war, for fifteen years Dhritarashtra dwelt in peace and
honour, obeyed by Yudhishthira and his brothers. Then the aged monarch
leaving Yudhishthira on the throne, retired to the forest with his
devoted wife and Kunti, the mother of the Pandava brothers, to pass his
last days in asceticism.

Thirty-six years had now passed since Yudhishthira regained his empire.
Then came to him the news that Krishna had left his mortal body.
Krishna, the sage, his friend, his prophet, his counsellor, had
departed. Arjuna hastened to Dwârâka and came back only to confirm the
sad news that Krishna and the Yâdavas were all dead. Then the king and
the other brothers, overcome with sorrow, declared that the time for
them to go, too, had arrived. So they cast off the burden of royalty,
placed Parikshit, the grandson of Arjuna, on the throne, and retired to
the Himalayas, on the Great Journey, the Mahâprasthâna. This was a
peculiar form of Sannyâsa. It was a custom for old kings to become
Sannyasins. In ancient India, when men became very old, they would give
up everything. So did the kings. When a man did not want to live any
more, then he went towards the Himalayas, without eating or drinking and
walked on and on till the body failed. All the time thinking of God, be
just marched on till the body gave way.

Then came the gods, the sages, and they told King Yudhishthira that he
should go and reach heaven. To go to heaven one has to cross the highest
peaks of the Himalayas. Beyond the Himalayas is Mount Meru. On the top
of Mount Meru is heaven. None ever went there in this body. There the
gods reside. And Yudhishthira was called upon by the gods to go  
there.

So the five brothers and their wife clad themselves in robes of bark,
and set out on their journey. On the way, they were followed by a dog.
On and on they went, and they turned their weary feet northward to where
the Himalayas lifts his lofty peaks, and they saw the mighty Mount Meru
in front of them. Silently they walked on in the snow, until suddenly
the queen fell, to rise no more. To Yudhishthira who was leading the
way, Bhima, one of the brothers, said, "Behold, O King, the queen has
fallen." The king shed tears, but he did not look back. "We are going to
meet Krishna," he says. "No time to look back. March on." After a while,
again Bhima said, "Behold, our brother, Sahadeva has fallen." The king
shed tears; but paused not. "March on," he cried.

One after the other, in the cold and snow, all the four brothers dropped
down, but unshaken, though alone, the king advanced onward. Looking
behind, he saw the faithful dog was still following him. And so the king
and the dog went on, through snow and ice, over hill and dale, climbing
higher and higher, till they reached Mount Meru; and there they began to
hear the chimes of heaven, and celestial flowers were showered upon the
virtuous king by the gods. Then descended the chariot of the gods, and
Indra prayed him, "Ascend in this chariot, greatest of mortals: thou
that alone art given to enter heaven without changing the mortal body."
But no, that Yudhishthira would not do without his devoted brothers and
his queen; then Indra explained to him that the brothers had already
gone thither before him.

And Yudhishthira looked around and said to his dog, "Get into the
chariot, child." The god stood aghast. "What! the dog?" he cried. "Do
thou cast off this dog! The dog goeth not to heaven! Great King, what
dost thou mean? Art thou mad? Thou, the most virtuous of the human race,
thou only canst go to heaven in thy body." "But he has been my devoted
companion through snow and ice. When all my brothers were dead, my queen
dead, he alone never left me. How can I leave him now?" "There is no
place in heaven for men with dogs. He has to be left behind. There is
nothing unrighteous in this." "I do not go to heaven," replied the king,
"without the dog. I shall never give up such a one who has taken refuge
with me, until my own life is at an end. I shall never swerve from
righteousness, nay, not even for the joys of heaven or the urging of a
god." "Then," said Indra, "on one condition the dog goes to heaven. You
have been the most virtuous of mortals and he has been a dog, killing
and eating animals; he is sinful, hunting, and taking other lives. You
can exchange heaven with him. "Agreed," says the king. "Let the dog go
to heaven."

At once, the scene changed. Hearing these noble words of Yudhishthira,
the dog revealed himself as Dharma; the dog was no other than Yama, the
Lord of Death and Justice. And Dharma exclaimed, "Behold, O King, no man
was ever so unselfish as thou, willing to exchange heaven with a little
dog, and for his sake disclaiming all his virtues and ready to go to
hell even for him. Thou art well born, O King of kings. Thou hast
compassion for all creatures, O Bhârata, of which this is a bright
example. Hence, regions of undying felicity are thine! Thou hast won
them, O King, and shine is a celestial and high goal."

Then Yudhishthira, with Indra, Dharma, and other gods, proceeds to
heaven in a celestial car. He undergoes some trials, bathes in the
celestial Ganga, and assumes a celestial body. He meets his brothers who
are now immortals, and all at last is bliss.

Thus ends the story of the Mahabharata, setting forth in a sublime poem
the triumph of virtue and defeat of vice.

In speaking of the Mahabharata to you, it is simply impossible for me to
present the unending array of the grand and majestic characters of the
mighty heroes depicted by the genius and master-mind of Vyasa. The
internal conflicts between righteousness and filial affection in the
mind of the god-fearing, yet feeble, old, blind King Dhritarashtra; the
majestic character of the grandsire Bhishma; the noble and virtuous
nature of the royal Yudhishthira, and of the other four brothers, as
mighty in valour as in devotion and loyalty; the peerless character of
Krishna, unsurpassed in human wisdom; and not less brilliant, the
characters of the women — the stately queen Gandhari, the loving mother
Kunti, the ever-devoted and all-suffering Draupadi — these and hundreds
of other characters of this Epic and those of the Ramayana have been the
cherished heritage of the whole Hindu world for the last several
thousands of years and form the basis of their thoughts and of their
moral and ethical ideas. In fact, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata are
the two encyclopaedias of the ancient Aryan life and wisdom, portraying
an ideal civilisation which humanity has yet to aspire after.

</div>
