---
title: THOUGHTS ON THE GITA

---
<div>

[←](the_mahabharata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_story_of_jada_bharata.htm)

  

## THOUGHTS ON THE GITA

During his sojourn in Calcutta in 1897, Swami Vivekananda used to stay
for the most part at the Math, the headquarters of the Ramakrisnna
Mission, located then at Alambazar. During this time several young men,
who had been preparing themselves for some time previously, gathered
round him and took the vows of Brahmacharya and Sannyâsa, and Swamiji
began to train them for future work, by holding classes on the Gitâ and
Vedanta, and initiating them into the practices of meditation. In one of
these classes he talked eloquently in Bengali on the Gita. The following
is the translation of the summary of the discourse as it was entered in
the Math diary:

The book known as the Gita forms a part of the Mahâbhârata. To
understand the Gita properly, several things are very important to know.
First, whether it formed a part of the Mahabharata, i.e. whether the
authorship attributed to Veda-Vyâsa was true, or if it was merely
interpolated within the great epic; secondly, whether there was any
historical personality of the name of Krishna; thirdly, whether the
great war of Kurukshetra as mentioned in the Gita actually took place;
and fourthly, whether Arjuna and others were real historical persons.

Now in the first place, let us see what grounds there are for such
inquiry. We know that there were many who went by the name of
Veda-Vyasa; and among them who was the real author of the Gita — the
Bâdarâyana Vyasa or Dvaipâyana Vyasa? "Vyasa" was only a title. Anyone
who composed a new Purâna was known by the name of Vyasa, like the word
Vikramâditya, which was also a general name. Another point is, the book,
Gita, had not been much known to the generality of people before
Shankarâchârya made it famous by writing his great commentary on it.
Long before that, there was current, according to many, the commentary
on it by Bodhâyana. If this could be proved, it would go a long way, no
doubt, to establish the antiquity of the Gita and the authorship of
Vyasa. But the Bodhayana Bhâshya on the *Vedânta Sutras* — from which
Râmânuja compiled his *Shri-Bhâshya*, which Shankaracharya mentions and
even quotes in part here and there in his own commentary, and which was
so greatly discussed by the Swami Dayânanda — not a copy even of that
Bodhayana Bhashya could I find while travelling throughout India. It is
said that even Ramanuja compiled his Bhashya from a worm-eaten
manuscript which he happened to find. When even this great Bodhayana
Bhashya on the *Vedanta-Sutras* is so much enshrouded in the darkness of
uncertainty, it is simply useless to try to establish the existence of
the Bodhayana Bhashya on the Gita. Some infer that Shankaracharya was
the author of the Gita, and that it was he who foisted it into the body
of the Mahabharata.

Then as to the second point in question, much doubt exists about the
personality of Krishna. In one place in the Chhândogya Upanishad we find
mention of Krishna, the son of Devaki, who received spiritual
instructions from one Ghora, a Yogi. In the Mahabharata, Krishna is the
king of Dwârakâ; and in the *Vishnu Purâna* we find a description of
Krishna playing with the Gopis. Again, in the *Bhâgavata*, the account
of his Râsalilâ is detailed at length. In very ancient times in our
country there was in vogue an Utsava called Madanotsava (celebration in
honour of Cupid). That very thing was transformed into Dola and thrust
upon the shoulders of Krishna. Who can be so bold as to assert that the
Rasalila and other things connected with him were not similarly fastened
upon him? In ancient times there was very little tendency in our country
to find out truths by historical research. So any one could say what he
thought best without substantiating it with proper facts and evidence.
Another thing: in those ancient times there was very little hankering
after name and fame in men. So it often happened that one man composed a
book and made it pass current in the name of his Guru or of someone
else. In such cases it is very hazardous for the investigator of
historical facts to get at the truth. In ancient times they had no
knowledge whatever of geography; imagination ran riot. And so we meet
with such fantastic creations of the brain as sweet-ocean, milk-ocean,
clarified-butter-ocean, curd-ocean, etc! In the Puranas, we find one
living ten thousand years, another a hundred thousand years! But the
Vedas say, शतायुर्वै पुरुषः — "Man lives a hundred years." Whom shall we
follow here? So, to reach a correct conclusion in the case of Krishna is
well-nigh impossible.

It is human nature to build round the real character of a great man all
sorts of imaginary superhuman attributes. As regards Krishna the same
must have happened, but it seems quite probable that he was a king.
Quite probable I say, because in ancient times in our country it was
chiefly the kings who exerted themselves most in the preaching of
Brahma-Jnâna. Another point to be especially noted here is that whoever
might have been the author of the Gita, we find its teachings the same
as those in the whole of the Mahabharata. From this we can safely infer
that in the age of the Mahabharata some great man arose and preached the
Brahma-Jnâna in this new garb to the then existing society. Another fact
comes to the fore that in the olden days, as one sect after another
arose, there also came into existence and use among them one new
scripture or another. It happened, too, that in the lapse of time both
the sect and its scripture died out, or the sect ceased to exist but its
scripture remained. Similarly, it was quite probable that the Gita was
the scripture of such a sect which had embodied its high and noble ideas
in this sacred book.

Now to the third point, bearing on the subject of the Kurukshetra War,
no special evidence in support of it can be adduced. But there is no
doubt that there was a war fought between the Kurus and the Panchâlas.
Another thing: how could there be so much discussion about Jnâna,
Bhakti, and Yoga on the battle-field, where the huge army stood in
battle array ready to fight, just waiting for the last signal? And was
any shorthand writer present there to note down every word spoken
between Krishna and Arjuna, in the din and turmoil of the battle-field?
According to some, this Kurukshetra War is only an allegory. When we sum
up its esoteric significance, it means the war which is constantly going
on within man between the tendencies of good and evil. This meaning,
too, may not be irrational.

About the fourth point, there is enough ground of doubt as regards the
historicity of Arjuna and others, and it is this: Shatapatha Brâhmana is
a very ancient book. In it are mentioned somewhere all the names of
those who were the performers of the Ashvamedha Yajna: but in those
places there is not only no mention, but no hint even of the names of
Arjuna and others, though it speaks of Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit
who was a grandson of Arjuna. Yet in the Mahabharata and other books it
is stated that Yudhishthira, Arjuna, and others celebrated the
Ashvamedha sacrifice.

One thing should be especially remembered here, that there is no
connection between these historical researches and our real aim, which
is the knowledge that leads to the acquirement of Dharma. Even if the
historicity of the whole thing is proved to be absolutely false today,
it will not in the least be any loss to us. Then what is the use of so
much historical research, you may ask. It has its use, because we have
to get at the truth; it will not do for us to remain bound by wrong
ideas born of ignorance. In this country people think very little of the
importance of such inquiries. Many of the sects believe that in order to
preach a good thing which may be beneficial to many, there is no harm in
telling an untruth, if that helps such preaching, or in other words, the
end justifies the means. Hence we find many of our Tantras beginning
with, "Mahâdeva said to Pârvati". But our duty should be to convince
ourselves of the truth, to believe in truth only. Such is the power of
superstition, or faith in old traditions without inquiry into its truth,
that it keeps men bound hand and foot, so much so, that even Jesus the
Christ, Mohammed, and other great men believed in many such
superstitions and could not shake them off. You have to keep your eye
always fixed on truth only and shun all superstitions completely.

Now it is for us to see what there is in the Gita. If we study the
Upanishads we notice, in wandering through the mazes of many irrelevant
subjects, the sudden introduction of the discussion of a great truth,
just as in the midst of a huge wilderness a traveller unexpectedly comes
across here and there an exquisitely beautiful rose, with its leaves,
thorns, roots, all entangled. Compared with that, the Gita is like these
truths beautifully arranged together in their proper places — like a
fine garland or a bouquet of the choicest flowers. The Upanishads deal
elaborately with Shraddhâ in many places, but hardly mention Bhakti. In
the Gita, on the other hand, the subject of Bhakti is not only again and
again dealt with, but in it, the innate spirit of Bhakti has attained
its culmination.

Now let us see some of the main points discussed in the Gita. Wherein
lies the originality of the Gita which distinguishes it from all
preceding scriptures? It is this: Though before its advent, Yoga, Jnana,
Bhakti, etc. had each its strong adherents, they all quarrelled among
themselves, each claiming superiority for his own chosen path; no one
ever tried to seek for reconciliation among these different paths. It
was the author of the Gita who for the first time tried to harmonise
these. He took the best from what all the sects then existing had to
offer and threaded them in the Gita. But even where Krishna failed to
show a complete reconciliation (Samanvaya) among these warring sects, it
was fully accomplished by Ramakrishna Paramahamsa in this nineteenth
century.

The next is, Nishkâma Karma, or work without desire or attachment.
People nowadays understand what is meant by this in various ways. Some
say what is implied by being unattached is to become purposeless. If
that were its real meaning, then heartless brutes and the walls would be
the best exponents of the performance of Nishkama Karma. Many others,
again, give the example of Janaka, and wish themselves to be equally
recognised as past masters in the practice of Nishkama Karma! Janaka
(lit. father) did not acquire that distinction by bringing forth
children, but these people all want to be Janakas, with the sole
qualification of being the fathers of a brood of children! No! The true
Nishkama Karmi (performer of work without desire) is neither to be like
a brute, nor to be inert, nor heartless. He is not Tâmasika but of pure
Sattva. His heart is so full of love and sympathy that he can embrace
the whole world with his love. The world at large cannot generally
comprehend his all-embracing love and sympathy.

The reconciliation of the different paths of Dharma, and work without
desire or attachment — these are the two special characteristics of the
Gita.

Let us now read a little from the second chapter.

सञ्जय उवाच॥  
  
तं तथा कृपयाविष्टमश्रुपूर्णाकुलेक्षणम् ।  
विषीदन्तमिदं वाक्यमुवाच मधुसूदनः ॥१॥  
  
  
श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥  
  
कुतस्त्वा कश्मलमिदं विषमे समुपस्थितम् ।  
अनार्यजुष्टमस्वर्ग्यमकीर्तिकरमर्जुन ॥२॥  
  
क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते ।  
क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप ॥३॥

"Sanjaya said:

To him who was thus overwhelmed with pity and sorrowing, and whose eyes
were dimmed with tears, Madhusudana spoke these words.

The Blessed Lord said:

In such a strait, whence comes upon thee, O Arjuna, this dejection,
un-Aryan-like, disgraceful, and contrary to the attainment of heaven?

Yield not to unmanliness, O son of Prithâ! Ill doth it become thee. Cast
off this mean faint-heartedness and arise, O scorcher of shine enemies!"

In the Shlokas beginning with तं तथा कृपयाविष्टं, how poetically, how
beautifully, has Arjuna's real position been painted! Then Shri Krishna
advises Arjuna; and in the words क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ etc., why is
he goading Arjuna to fight? Because it was not that the disinclination
of Arjuna to fight arose out of the overwhelming predominance of pure
Sattva Guna; it was all Tamas that brought on this unwillingness. The
nature of a man of Sattva Guna is, that he is equally calm in all
situations in life — whether it be prosperity or adversity. But Arjuna
was afraid, he was overwhelmed with pity. That he had the instinct and
the inclination to fight is proved by the simple fact that he came to
the battle-field with no other purpose than that. Frequently in our
lives also such things are seen to happen. Many people think they are
Sâttvika by nature, but they are really nothing but Tâmasika. Many
living in an uncleanly way regard themselves as Paramahamsas! Why?
Because the Shâstras say that Paramahamsas live like one inert, or mad,
or like an unclean spirit. Paramahamsas are compared to children, but
here it should be understood that the comparison is one-sided. The
Paramahamsa and the child are not one and non-different. They only
appear similar, being the two extreme poles, as it were. One has reached
to a state beyond Jnana, and the other has not got even an inkling of
Jnana. The quickest and the gentlest vibrations of light are both beyond
the reach of our ordinary vision; but in the one it is intense heat, and
in the other it may be said to be almost without any heat. So it is with
the opposite qualities of Sattva and Tamas. They seem in some respects
to be the same, no doubt, but there is a world of difference between
them. The Tamoguna loves very much to array itself in the garb of the
Sattva. Here, in Arjuna, the mighty warrior, it has come under the guise
of Dayâ (pity).

In order to remove this delusion which had overtaken Arjuna, what did
the Bhagavân say? As I always preach that you should not decry a man by
calling him a sinner, but that you should draw his attention to the
omnipotent power that is in him, in the same way does the Bhagavan speak
to Arjuna. नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते — "It doth not befit thee!" "Thou art
Atman imperishable, beyond all evil. Having forgotten thy real nature,
thou hast, by thinking thyself a sinner, as one afflicted with bodily
evils and mental grief, thou hast made thyself so — this doth not befit
thee!" — so says the Bhagavan: क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ — Yield not to
unmanliness, O son of Pritha. There is in the world neither sin nor
misery, neither disease nor grief; if there is anything in the world
which can be called sin, it is this — 'fear'; know that any work which
brings out the latent power in thee is Punya (virtue); and that which
makes thy body and mind weak is, verily, sin. Shake off this weakness,
this faintheartedness! क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ। —Thou art a hero, a
Vira; this is unbecoming of thee."

If you, my sons, can proclaim this message to the world — क्लैब्यं मा
स्म गमः पार्थ नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते — then all this disease, grief, sin,
and sorrow will vanish from off the face of the earth in three days. All
these ideas of weakness will be nowhere. Now it is everywhere — this
current of the vibration of fear. Reverse the current: bring in the
opposite vibration, and behold the magic transformation! Thou art
omnipotent — go, go to the mouth of the cannon, fear not.

Hate not the most abject sinner, fool; not to his exterior. Turn thy
gaze inward, where resides the Paramâtman. Proclaim to the whole world
with trumpet voice, "There is no sin in thee, there is no misery in
thee; thou art the reservoir of omnipotent power. Arise, awake, and
manifest the Divinity within!"

If one reads this one Shloka — क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ
नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते । क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप॥ —
one gets all the merits of reading the entire Gita; for in this one
Shloka lies imbedded the whole Message of the Gita.

</div>
