---
title: THE STORY OF PRAHLADA

---
<div>

[←](the_story_of_jada_bharata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_great_teachers_of_the_world.htm)

  

## THE STORY OF PRAHLADA

(*Delivered in California*)

Hiranyakashipu was the king of the Daityas. The Daityas, though born of
the same parentage as the Devas or gods, were always, at war with the
latter. The Daityas had no part in the oblations and offerings of
mankind, or in the government of the world and its guidance. But
sometimes they waxed strong and drove all the Devas from the heaven, and
seized the throne of the gods and ruled for a time. Then the Devas
prayed to Vishnu, the Omnipresent Lord of the universe, and He helped
them out of their difficulty. The Daityas were driven out, and once more
the gods reigned. Hiranyakashipu, king of the Daityas, in his turn,
succeeded in conquering his cousins, the Devas, and seated himself on
the throne of the heavens and ruled the three worlds — the middle world,
inhabited by men and animals; the heavens, inhabited by gods and godlike
beings; and the nether world, inhabited by the Daityas. Now,
Hiranyakashipu declared himself to be the God of the whole universe and
proclaimed that there was no other God but himself, and strictly
enjoined that the Omnipotent Vishnu should have no worship offered to
Him anywhere; and that all the worship should henceforth be given to
himself only.

Hiranyakashipu had a son called Prahlâda. Now, it so happened, that this
Prahlada from his infancy was devoted to God. He showed indications of
this as a child; and the king of the Daityas, fearing that the evil he
wanted to drive away from the world would crop up in his own family,
made over his son to two teachers called Shanda and Amarka, who were
very stern disciplinarians, with strict injunctions that Prahlada was
never to hear even the name of Vishnu mentioned. The teachers took the
prince to their home, and there he was put to study with the other
children of his age. But the little Prahlada, instead of learning from
his books, devoted all the time in teaching the other boys how to
worship Vishnu. When the teachers found it out, they were frightened,
for the fear of the mighty king Hiranyakashipu was upon them, and they
tried their best to dissuade the child from such teachings. But Prahlada
could no more stop his teaching and worshipping Vishnu than he could
stop breathing. To clear themselves, the teachers told the terrible fact
to the king, that his son was not only worshipping Vishnu himself, but
also spoiling all the other children by teaching them to worship Vishnu.

The monarch became very much enraged when he heard this and called the
boy to his presence. He tried by gentle persuasions to dissuade Prahlada
from the worship of Vishnu and taught him that he, the king, was the
only God to worship. But it was to no purpose. The child declared, again
and again, that the Omnipresent Vishnu, Lord of the universe, was the
only Being to be worshipped — for even he, the king, held his throne
only so long as it pleased Vishnu. The rage of the king knew no bounds,
and he ordered the boy to be immediately killed. So the Daityas struck
him with pointed weapons; but Prahlad's mind was so intent upon Vishnu
that he felt no pain from them.

When his father, the king, saw that it was so, he became frightened but,
roused to the worst passions of a Daitya, contrived various diabolical
means to kill the boy. He ordered him to be trampled under foot by an
elephant. The enraged elephant could not crush the body any more than he
could have crushed a block of iron. So this measure also was to no
purpose. Then the king ordered the boy to be thrown over a precipice,
and this order too was duly carried out; but, as Vishnu resided in the
heart of Prahlada, he came down upon the earth as gently as a flower
drops upon the grass. Poison, fire, starvation, throwing into a well,
enchantments, and other measures were then tried on the child one after
another, but to no purpose. Nothing could hurt him in whose heart dwelt
Vishnu.

At last, the king ordered the boy to be tied with mighty serpents called
up from the nether worlds, and then cast to the bottom of the ocean,
where huge mountains were to be piled high upon him, so that in course
of time, if not immediately, he might die; and he ordered him to be left
in this plight. Even though treated in this manner, the boy continued to
pray to his beloved Vishnu: "Salutation to Thee, Lord of the universe.
Thou beautiful Vishnu!" Thus thinking and meditating on Vishnu, he began
to feel that Vishnu was near him, nay, that He was in his own soul,
until he began to feel that he was Vishnu, and that he was everything
and everywhere.

As soon as he realised this, all the snake bonds snapped asunder; the
mountains were pulverised, the ocean upheaved, and he was gently lifted
up above the waves, and safely carried to the shore. As Prahlada stood
there, he forgot that he was a Daitya and had a mortal body: he felt he
was the universe and all the powers of the universe emanated from him;
there was nothing in nature that could injure him; he himself was the
ruler of nature. Time passed thus, in one unbroken ecstasy of bliss,
until gradually Prahlada began to remember that he had a body and that
he was Prahlada. As soon as he became once more conscious of the body,
he saw that God was within and without; and everything appeared to him
as Vishnu.

When the king Hiranyakashipu found to his horror that all mortal means
of getting rid of the boy who was perfectly devoted to his enemy, the
God Vishnu, were powerless, he was at a loss to know what to do. The
king had the boy again brought before him, and tried to persuade him
once more to listen to his advice, through gentle means. But Prahlada
made the same reply. Thinking, however, that these childish whims of the
boy would be rectified with age and further training, he put him again
under the charge of the teachers, Shanda and Amarka, asking them to
teach him the duties of the king. But those teachings did not appeal to
Prahlada, and he spent his time in instructing his schoolmates in the
path of devotion to the Lord Vishnu.

When his father came to hear about it, he again became furious with
rage, and calling the boy to him, threatened to kill him, and abused
Vishnu in the worst language. But Prahlada still insisted that Vishnu
was the Lord of the universe, the Beginningless, the Endless, the
Omnipotent and the Omnipresent, and as such, he alone was to be
worshipped. The king roared with anger and said: "Thou evil one, if thy
Vishnu is God omnipresent, why doth he not reside in that pillar
yonder?" Prahlada humbly submitted that He did do so. "If so," cried the
king, "let him defend thee; I will kill thee with this sword." Thus
saying the king rushed at him with sword in hand, and dealt a terrible
blow at the pillar. Instantly thundering voice was heard, and lo and
behold, there issued forth from the pillar Vishnu in His awful Nrisimha
form — half-lion, half-man! Panic-stricken, the Daityas ran away in all
directions; but Hiranyakashipu fought with him long and desperately,
till he was finally overpowered and killed.

Then the gods descended from heaven and offered hymns to Vishnu, and
Prahlada also fell at His feet and broke forth into exquisite hymns of
praise and devotion. And he heard the Voice of God saying, "Ask,
Prahlada ask for anything thou desires"; thou art My favourite child;
therefore ask for anything thou mayest wish." And Prahlada choked with
feelings replied, "Lord, I have seen Thee. What else can I want? Do thou
not tempt me with earthly or heavenly boons." Again the Voice said: "Yet
ask something, my son." And then Prahlada replied, "That intense love, O
Lord, which the ignorant bear to worldly things, may I have the same
love for Thee; may I have the same intensity of love for Thee, but only
for love's sake!"

Then the Lord said, "Prahlada, though My intense devotees never desire
for anything, here or hereafter, yet by My command, do thou enjoy the
blessings of this world to the end of the present cycle, and perform
works of religious merit, with thy heart fixed on Me. And thus in time,
after the dissolution of thy body, thou shalt attain Me." Thus blessing
Prahlada, the Lord Vishnu disappeared. Then the gods headed by Brahma
installed Prahlada on the throne of the Daityas and returned to their
respective spheres.

</div>
