---
title: ON LORD BUDDHA

---
<div>

[←](the_great_teachers_of_the_world.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](christ_the_messenger.htm)

  

## ON LORD BUDDHA

(*Delivered in Detroit*)

In every religion we find one type of self-devotion particularly
developed. The type of working without a motive is most highly developed
in Buddhism. Do not mistake Buddhism and Brâhminism. In this country you
are very apt to do so. Buddhism is one of our sects. It was founded by a
great man called Gautama, who became disgusted at the eternal
metaphysical discussions of his day, and the cumbrous rituals, and more
especially with the caste system. Some people say that we are born to a
certain state, and therefore we are superior to others who are not thus
born. He was also against the tremendous priestcraft. He preached a
religion in which there was no motive power, and was perfectly agnostic
about metaphysics or theories about God. He was often asked if there was
a God, and he answered, he did not know. When asked about right conduct,
he would reply, "Do good and be good." There came five Brâhmins, who
asked him to settle their discussion. One said, "Sir, my book says that
God is such and such, and that this is the way to come to God." Another
said, "That is wrong, for my book says such and such, and this is the
way to come to God"; and so the others. He listened calmly to all of
them, and then asked them one by one, "Does any one of your books say
that God becomes angry, that He ever injures anyone, that He is impure?"
"No, Sir, they all teach that God is pure and good." "Then, my friends,
why do you not become pure and good first, that you may know what God
is?"

Of course I do not endorse all his philosophy. I want a good deal of
metaphysics, for myself. I entirely differ in many respects, but,
because I differ, is that any reason why I should not see the beauty of
the man? He was the only man who was bereft of all motive power. There
were other great men who all said they were the Incarnations of God
Himself, and that those who would believe in them would go to heaven.
But what did Buddha say with his dying breath? "None can help you; help
yourself; work out your own salvation." He said about himself, "Buddha
is the name of infinite knowledge, infinite as the sky; I, Gautama, have
reached that state; you will all reach that too if you struggle for it."
Bereft of all motive power, he did not want to go to heaven, did not
want money; he gave up his throne and everything else and went about
begging his bread through the streets of India, preaching for the good
of men and animals with a heart as wide as the ocean.

He was the only man who was ever ready to give up his life for animals
to stop a sacrifice. He once said to a king, "If the sacrifice of a lamb
helps you to go to heaven, sacrificing a man will help you better; so
sacrifice me." The king was astonished. And yet this man was without any
motive power. He stands as the perfection of the active type, and the
very height to which he attained shows that through the power of work we
can also attain to the highest spirituality.

To many the path becomes easier if they believe in God. But the life of
Buddha shows that even a man who does not believe in God, has no
metaphysics, belongs to no sect, and does not go to any church, or
temple, and is a confessed materialist, even he can attain to the
highest. We have no right to judge him. I wish I had one infinitesimal
part of Buddha's heart. Buddha may or may not have believed in God; that
does not matter to me. He reached the same state of perfection to which
others come by Bhakti — love of God — Yoga, or Jnâna. Perfection does
not come from belief or faith. Talk does not count for anything. Parrots
can do that. Perfection comes through the disinterested performance of
action.

</div>
