---
title: CHRIST, THE MESSENGER

---
<div>

[←](on_lord_buddha.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](my_master.htm)

  

## CHRIST, THE MESSENGER

(*Delivered at Los Angeles, California, 1900*)

The wave rises on the ocean, and there is a hollow. Again another wave
rises, perhaps bigger than the former, to fall down again, similarly,
again to rise — driving onward. In the march of events, we notice the
rise and fall, and we generally look towards the rise, forgetting the
fall. But both are necessary, and both are great. This is the nature of
the universe. Whether in the world of our thoughts, the world of our
relations in society, or in our spiritual affairs, the same movement of
succession, of rises and falls, is going on. Hence great predominances
in the march of events, the liberal ideals, are marshalled ahead, to
sink down, to digest, as it were, to ruminate over the past — to adjust,
to conserve, to gather strength once more for a rise and a bigger rise.

The history of nations also has ever been like that. The great soul, the
Messenger we are to study this afternoon, came at a period of the
history of his race which we may well designate as a great fall. We
catch only little glimpses here and there of the stray records that have
been kept of his sayings and doings; for verily it has been well said,
that the doings and sayings of that great soul would fill the world if
they had all been written down. And the three years of his ministry were
like one compressed, concentrated age, which it has taken nineteen
hundred years to unfold, and who knows how much longer it will yet take!
Little men like you and me are simply the recipients of just a little
energy. A few minutes, a few hours, a few years at best, are enough to
spend it all, to stretch it out, as it were, to its fullest strength,
and then we are gone for ever. But mark this giant that came; centuries
and ages pass, yet the energy that he left upon the world is not yet
stretched, nor yet expended to its full. It goes on adding new vigour as
the ages roll on.

Now what you see in the life of Christ is the life of all the past. The
life of every man is, in a manner, the life of the past. It comes to him
through heredity, through surroundings, through education, through his
own reincarnation — the past of the race. In a manner, the past of the
earth, the past of the whole world is there, upon every soul. What are
we, in the present, but a result, an effect, in the hands of that
infinite past? What are we but floating waveless in the eternal current
of events, irresistibly moved forward and onward and incapable of rest?
But you and I are only little things, bubbles. There are always some
giant waves in the ocean of affairs, and in you and me the life of the
past race has been embodied only a little; but there are giants who
embody, as it were, almost the whole of the past and who stretch out
their hands for the future. These are the sign-posts here and there
which point to the march of humanity; these are verily gigantic, their
shadows covering the earth — they stand undying, eternal! As it has been
said by the same Messenger, "No man hath seen God at any time, but
through the Son." And that is true. And where shall we see God but in
the Son? It is true that you and I, and the poorest of us, the meanest
even, embody that God, even reflect that God. The vibration of light is
everywhere, omnipresent; but we have to strike the light of the lamp
before we can see the light. The Omnipresent God of the universe cannot
be seen until He is reflected by these giant lamps of the earth — The
Prophets, the man-Gods, the Incarnations, the embodiments of God.

We all know that God exists, and yet we do not see Him, we do not
understand Him. Take one of these great Messengers of light, compare his
character with the highest ideal of God that you ever formed, and you
will find that your God falls short of the ideal, and that the character
of the Prophet exceeds your conceptions. You cannot even form a higher
ideal of God than what the actually embodied have practically realised
and set before us as an example. Is it wrong, therefore, to worship
these as God? Is it a sin to fall at the feet of these man-Gods and
worship them as the only divine beings in the world? If they are really,
actually, higher than all our conceptions of God, what harm is there in
worshipping them? Not only is there no harm, but it is the only possible
and positive way of worship. However much you may try by struggle, by
abstraction, by whatsoever method you like, still so long as you are a
man in the world of men, your world is human, your religion is human,
and your God is human. And that must be so. Who is not practical enough
to take up an actually existing thing and give up an idea which is only
an abstraction, which he cannot grasp, and is difficult of approach
except through a concrete medium? Therefore, these Incarnations of God
have been worshipped in all ages and in all countries.

We are now going to study a little of the life of Christ, the
Incarnation of the Jews. When Christ was born, the Jews were in that
state which I call a state of fall between two waves; a state of
conservatism; a state where the human mind is, as it were, tired for the
time being of moving forward and is taking care only of what it has
already; a state when the attention is more bent upon particulars, upon
details, than upon the great, general, and bigger problems of life; a
state of stagnation, rather than a towing ahead; a state of suffering
more than of doing. Mark you, I do not blame this state of things. We
have no right to criticise it — because had it not been for this fall,
the next rise, which was embodied in Jesus of Nazareth would have been
impossible. The Pharisees and Sadducees might have been insincere, they
might have been doing things which they ought not to have done; they
might have been even hypocrites; but whatever they were, these factors
were the very cause, of which the Messenger was the effect. The
Pharisees and Sadducees at one end were the very impetus which came out
at the other end as the gigantic brain of Jesus of Nazareth.

The attention to forms, to formulas, to the everyday details of
religion, and to rituals, may sometimes be laughed at; but nevertheless,
within them is strength. Many times in the rushing forward we lose much
strength. As a fact, the fanatic is stronger than the liberal man. Even
the fanatic, therefore, has one great virtue, he conserves energy, a
tremendous amount of it. As with the individual so with the race, energy
is gathered to be conserved. Hemmed in all around by external enemies,
driven to focus in a centre by the Romans, by the Hellenic tendencies in
the world of intellect, by waves from Persia, India, and Alexandria —
hemmed in physically, mentally, and morally — there stood the race with
an inherent, conservative, tremendous strength, which their descendants
have not lost even today. And the race was forced to concentrate and
focus all its energies upon Jerusalem and Judaism. But all power when
once gathered cannot remain collected; it must expend and expand itself.
There is no power on earth which can be kept long confined within a
narrow limit. It cannot be kept compressed too long to allow of
expansion at a subsequent period.

This concentrated energy amongst the Jewish race found its expression at
the next period in the rise of Christianity. The gathered streams
collected into a body. Gradually, all the little streams joined
together, and became a surging wave on the top of which we find standing
out the character of Jesus of Nazareth. Thus, every Prophet is a
creation of his own times, the creation of the past of his race; he
himself is the creator of the future. The cause of today is the effect
of the past and the cause for the future. In this position stands the
Messenger. In him is embodied all that is the best and greatest in his
own race, the meaning, the life, for which that race has struggled for
ages; and he himself is the impetus for the future, not only to his own
race but to unnumbered other races of the world.

We must bear another fact in mind: that my view of the great Prophet of
Nazareth would be from the standpoint of the Orient. Many times you
forget, also, that the Nazarene himself was an Oriental of Orientals.
With all your attempts to paint him with blue eyes and yellow hair, the
Nazarene was still an Oriental. All the similes, the imageries, in which
the Bible is written — the scenes, the locations, the attitudes, the
groups, the poetry, and symbol, — speak to you of the Orient: of the
bright sky, of the heat, of the sun, of the desert, of the thirsty men
and animals; of men and women coming with pitchers on their heads to
fill them at the wells; of the flocks, of the ploughmen, of the
cultivation that is going on around; of the water-mill and wheel, of the
mill-pond, of the millstones. All these are to be seen today in Asia.

The voice of Asia has been the voice of religion. The voice of Europe is
the voice of politics. Each is great in its own sphere. The voice of
Europe is the voice of ancient Greece. To the Greek mind, his immediate
society was all in all: beyond that, it is Barbarian. None but the Greek
has the right to live. Whatever the Greeks do is right and correct;
whatever else there exists in the world is neither right nor correct,
nor should be allowed to live. It is intensely human in its sympathies,
intensely natural, intensely artistic, therefore. The Greek lives
entirely in this world. He does not care to dream. Even his poetry is
practical. His gods and goddesses are not only human beings, but
intensely human, with all human passions and feelings almost the same as
with any of us. He loves what is beautiful, but, mind you, it is always
external nature: the beauty of the hills, of the snows, of the flowers,
the beauty of forms and of figures, the beauty in the human face, and,
more often, in the human form — that is what the Greeks liked. And the
Greeks being the teachers of all subsequent Europeanism, the voice of
Europe is Greek.

There is another type in Asia. Think of that vast, huge continent, whose
mountain-tops go beyond the clouds, almost touching the canopy of
heaven's blue; a rolling desert of miles upon miles where a drop of
water cannot be found, neither will a blade of grass grow; interminable
forests and gigantic rivers rushing down into the sea. In the midst of
all these surroundings, the oriental love of the beautiful and of the
sublime developed itself in another direction. It looked inside, and not
outside. There is also the thirst for nature, and there is also the same
thirst for power; there is also the same thirst for excellence, the same
idea of the Greek and Barbarian, but it has extended over a larger
circle. In Asia, even today, birth or colour or language never makes a
race. That which makes a race is its religion. We are all Christians; we
are all Mohammedans; we are all Hindus, or all Buddhists. No matter if a
Buddhist is a Chinaman, or is a man from Persia, they think that they
are brothers, because of their professing the same religion. Religion is
the tie, unity of humanity. And then again, the Oriental, for the same
reason, is a visionary, is a born dreamer. The ripples of the
waterfalls, the songs of the birds, the beauties of the sun and moon and
the stars and the whole earth are pleasant enough; but they are not
sufficient for the oriental mind; He wants to dream a dream beyond. He
wants to go beyond the present. The present, as it were, is nothing to
him. The Orient has been the cradle of the human race for ages, and all
the vicissitudes of fortune are there — kingdoms succeeding kingdoms,
empires succeeding empires, human power, glory, and wealth, all rolling
down there: a Golgotha of power and learning. That is the Orient: a
Golgotha of power, of kingdoms, of learning. No wonder, the oriental
mind looks with contempt upon the things of this world and naturally
wants to see something that changeth not, something which dieth not,
something which in the midst of this world of misery and death is
eternal, blissful, undying. An oriental Prophet never tires of insisting
upon these ideals; and, as for Prophets, you may also remember that
without one exception, all the Messengers were Orientals.

We see, therefore, in the life of this area: Messenger of life, the
first watchword: "Not this life, but something higher"; and, like the
true son of the Orient, he is practical in that. You people of the West
are practical in your own department, in military affairs, and in
managing political circles and other things. Perhaps the Oriental is not
practical in those ways, but he is practical in his own field; he is
practical in religion. If one preaches a philosophy, tomorrow there are
hundreds who will struggle their best to make it practical in their
lives. If a man preaches that standing on one foot would lead one to
salvation, he will immediately get five hundred to stand on one foot.
You may call it ludicrous; but, mark you, beneath that is their
philosophy — that intense practicality. In the West, plans of salvation
mean intellectual gymnastics — plans which are never worked out, never
brought into practical life. In the West, the preacher who talks the
best is the greatest preacher.

So, we find Jesus of Nazareth, in the first place, the true son of the
Orient, intensely practical. He has no faith in this evanescent world
and all its belongings. No need of text-torturing, as is the fashion in
the West in modern times, no need of stretching out texts until the,
will not stretch any more. Texts are not India rubber, and even that has
its limits. Now, no making of religion to pander to the sense vanity of
the present day! Mark you, let us all be honest. If we cannot follow the
ideal, let us confess our weakness, but not degrade it; let not any try
to pull it down. One gets sick at heart at the different accounts of the
life of the Christ that Western people give. I do not know what he was
or what he was not! One would make him a great politician; another,
perhaps, would make of him a great military general; another, a great
patriotic Jew; and so on. Is there any warrant in the books for all such
assumptions? The best commentary on the life of a great teacher is his
own life. "The foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, but
the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." That is what Christ says
as they only way to salvation; he lays down no other way. Let us confess
in sackcloth and ashes that we cannot do that. We still have fondness
for "me and mine". We want property, money, wealth. Woe unto us! Let us
confess and not put to shame that great Teacher of Humanity! He had no
family ties. But do you think that, that Man had any physical ideas in
him? Do you think that, this mass of light, this God and not-man, came
down to earth, to be the brother of animals? And yet, people make him
preach all sorts of things. He had no sex ideas! He was a soul! Nothing
but a soul — just working a body for the good of humanity; and that was
all his relation to the body. In the soul there is no sex. The
disembodied soul has no relationship to the animal, no relationship to
the body. The ideal may be far away beyond us. But never mind, keep to
the ideal. Let us confess that it is our ideal, but we cannot approach
it yet.

He had no other occupation in life, no other thought except that one,
that he was a spirit. He was a disembodied, unfettered, unbound spirit.
And not only so, but he, with his marvellous vision, had found that
every man and woman, whether Jew or Gentile, whether rich or poor,
whether saint or sinner, was the embodiment of the same undying spirit
as himself. Therefore, the one work his whole life showed was to call
upon them to realise their own spiritual nature. Give up, he says, these
superstitious dreams that you are low and that you are poor. Think not
that you are trampled upon and tyrannised over as if you were slaves,
for within you is something that can never be tyrannised over, never be
trampled upon, never be troubled, never be killed. You are all Sons of
God, immortal spirit. "Know", he declared, "the Kingdom of Heaven is
within you." "I and my Father are one." Dare you stand up and say, not
only that "I am the Son of God", but I shall also find in my heart of
hearts that "I and my Father are one"? That was what Jesus of Nazareth
said. He never talks of this world and of this life. He has nothing to
do with it, except that he wants to get hold of the world as it is, give
it a push and drive it forward and onward until the whole world has
reached to the effulgent Light of God, until everyone has realised his
spiritual nature, until death is vanished and misery banished.

We have read the different stories that have been written about him; we
know the scholars and their writings, and the higher criticism; and we
know all that has been done by study. We are not here to discuss how
much of the New Testament is true, we are not here to discuss how much
of that life is historical. It does not matter at all whether the New
Testament was written within five hundred years of his birth, nor does
it matter even, how much of that life is true. But there is something
behind it, something we want to imitate. To tell a lie, you have to
imitate a truth, and that truth is a fact. You cannot imitate that which
never existed. You cannot imitate that which you never perceived. But
there must have been a nucleus, a tremendous power that came down, a
marvellous manifestation of spiritual power — and of that we are
speaking. It stands there. Therefore, we are not afraid of all the
criticisms of the scholars. If I, as an Oriental, have to worship Jesus
of Nazareth, there is only one way left to me, that is, to worship him
as God and nothing else. Have we no right to worship him in that way, do
you mean to say? If we bring him down to our own level and simply pay
him a little respect as a great man, why should we worship at all? Our
scriptures say, "These great children of Light, who manifest the Light
themselves, who are Light themselves, they, being worshipped, become, as
it were, one with us and we become one with them."

For, you see, in three ways man perceives God. At first the undeveloped
intellect of the uneducated man sees God as far away, up in the heavens
somewhere, sitting on a throne as a great Judge. He looks upon Him as a
fire, as a terror. Now, that is good, for there is nothing bad in it.
You must remember that humanity travels not from error to truth, but
from truth to truth; it may be, if you like it better, from lower truth
to higher truth, but never from error to truth. Suppose you start from
here and travel towards the sun in a straight line. From here the sun
looks only small in size. Suppose you go forward a million miles, the
sun will be much bigger. At every stage the sun will become bigger and
bigger. Suppose twenty thousand photographs had been taken of the same
sun, from different standpoints; these twenty thousand photographs will
all certainly differ from one another. But can you deny that each is a
photograph of the same sun? So all forms of religion, high or low, are
just different stages toward that eternal state of Light, which is God
Himself. Some embody a lower view, some a higher, and that is all the
difference. Therefore, the religions of the unthinking masses all over
the world must be, and have always been, of a God who is outside of the
universe, who lives in heaven, who governs from that place, who is a
punisher of the bad and a rewarder of the good, and so on. As man
advanced spiritually, he began to feel that God was omnipresent, that He
must be in him, that He must be everywhere, that He was not a distant
God, but dearly the Soul of all souls. As my soul moves my body, even so
is God the mover of my soul. Soul within soul. And a few individuals who
had developed enough and were pure enough, went still further, and at
last found God. As the New Testament says, "Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God." And they found at last that they and the
Father were one.

You find that all these three stages are taught by the Great Teacher in
the New Testament. Note the Common Prayer he taught: "Our Father which
art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name," and so on — a simple prayer, a
child's prayer. Mark you, it is the "Common Prayer" because it is
intended for the uneducated masses. To a higher circle, to those who had
advanced a little more, he gave a more elevated teaching: "I am in my
Father, and ye in me, and I in you." Do you remember that? And then,
when the Jews asked him who he was, he declared that he and his Father
were one, and the Jews thought that that was blasphemy. What did he mean
by that? This has been also told by your old Prophets, "Ye are gods and
all of you are children of the Most High." Mark the same three stages.
You will find that it is easier for you to begin with the first and end
with the last.

The Messenger came to show the path: that the spirit is not in forms,
that it is not through all sorts of vexations and knotty problems of
philosophy that you know the spirit. Better that you had no learning,
better that you never read a book in your life. These are not at all
necessary for salvation — neither wealth, nor position nor power, not
even learning; but what is necessary is that one thing, purity. "Blessed
are the pure in heart," for the spirit in its own nature is pure. How
can it be otherwise? It is of God, it has come from God. In the language
of the Bible, "It is the breath of God." In the language of the Koran,
"It is the soul of God." Do you mean to say that the Spirit of God can
ever be impure? But, alas, it has been, as it were, covered over with
the dust and dirt of ages, through our own actions, good and evil.
Various works which were not correct, which were not true, have covered
the same spirit with the dust and dirt of the ignorance of ages. It is
only necessary to clear away the dust and dirt, and then the spirit
shines immediately. "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God." "The Kingdom of Heaven is within you." Where goest thou to seek
for the Kingdom of God, asks Jesus of Nazareth, when it is there, within
you? Cleanse the spirit, and it is there. It is already yours. How can
you get what is not yours? It is yours by right. You are the heirs of
immortality, sons of the Eternal Father.

This is the great lesson of the Messenger, and another which is the
basis of all religions, is renunciation. How can you make the spirit
pure? By renunciation. A rich young man asked Jesus, "Good Master, what
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" And Jesus said unto him,
"One thing thou lackest; go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give
to the poor, and thou shalt have treasures in heaven: and come, take up
thy cross, and follow Me." And he was sad at that saying and went away
grieved; for he had great possessions. We are all more or less like
that. The voice is ringing in our ears day and night. In the midst of
our pleasures and joys, in the midst of worldly things, we think that we
have forgotten everything else. Then comes a moment's pause and the
voice rings in our ears "Give up all that thou hast and follow Me."
"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose
his life for My sake shall find it." For whoever gives up this life for
His sake, finds the life immortal. In the midst of all our weakness
there is a moment of pause and the voice rings: "Give up all that thou
hast; give it to the poor and follow me." This is the one ideal he
preaches, and this has been the ideal preached by all the great Prophets
of the world: renunciation. What is meant by renunciation? That there is
only one ideal in morality: unselfishness. Be selfless. The ideal is
perfect unselfishness. When a man is struck on the right cheek, he turns
the left also. When a man's coat is carried off, he gives away his cloak
also.

We should work in the best way we can, without dragging the ideal down.
Here is the ideal. When a man has no more self in him, no possession,
nothing to call "me" or "mine", has given himself up entirely, destroyed
himself as it were — in that man is God Himself; for in him self-will is
gone, crushed out, annihilated. That is the ideal man. We cannot reach
that state yet; yet, let us worship the ideal, and slowly struggle to
reach the ideal, though, maybe, with faltering steps. It may be
tomorrow, or it may be a thousand years hence; but that ideal has to be
reached. For it is not only the end, but also the means. To be
unselfish, perfectly selfless, is salvation itself; for the man within
dies, and God alone remains.

One more point. All the teachers of humanity are unselfish. Suppose
Jesus of Nazareth was teaching; and a man came and told him, "What you
teach is beautiful. I believe that it is the way to perfection, and I am
ready to follow it; but I do not care to worship you as the only
begotten Son of God." What would be the answer of Jesus of Nazareth?
"Very well, brother, follow the ideal and advance in your own way. I do
not care whether you give me the credit for the teaching or not. I am
not a shopkeeper. I do not trade in religion. I only teach truth, and
truth is nobody's property. Nobody can patent truth. Truth is God
Himself. Go forward." But what the disciples say nowadays is: "No matter
whether you practise the teachings or not, do you give credit to the
Man? If you credit the Master, you will be saved; if not, there is no
salvation for you." And thus the whole teaching of the Master is
degenerated, and all the struggle and fight is for the personality of
the Man. They do not know that in imposing that difference, they are, in
a manner, bringing shame to the very Man they want to honour — the very
Man that would have shrunk with shame from such an idea. What did he
care if there was one man in the world that remembered him or not? He
had to deliver his message, and he gave it. And if he had twenty
thousand lives, he would give them all up for the poorest man in the
world. If he had to be tortured millions of times for a million despised
Samaritans, and if for each one of them the sacrifice of his own life
would be the only condition of salvation, he would have given his life.
And all this without wishing to have his name known even to a single
person. Quiet, unknown, silent, would he world, just as the Lord works.
Now, what would the disciple say? He will tell you that you may be a
perfect man, perfectly unselfish; but unless you give the credit to our
teacher, to our saint, it is of no avail. Why? What is the origin of
this superstition, this ignorance? The disciple thinks that the Lord can
manifest Himself only once. There lies the whole mistake. God manifests
Himself to you in man. But throughout nature, what happens once must
have happened before, and must happen in future. There is nothing in
nature which is not bound by law; and that means that whatever happens
once must go on and must have been going on.

In India they have the same idea of the Incarnations of God. One of
their great Incarnations, Krishna, whose grand sermon, the
Bhagavad-Gitâ, some of you might have read, says, "Though I am unborn,
of changeless nature, and Lord of beings, yet subjugating My Prakriti, I
come into being by My own Mâyâ. Whenever virtue subsides and immorality
prevails, then I body Myself forth. For the protection of the good, for
the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of Dharma, I
come into being, in every age." Whenever the world goes down, the Lord
comes to help it forward; and so He does from time to time and place to
place. In another passage He speaks to this effect: Wherever thou
findest a great soul of immense power and purity struggling to raise
humanity, know that he is born of My splendour, that I am there working
through him.

Let us, therefore, find God not only in Jesus of Nazareth, but in all
the great Ones that have preceded him, in all that came after him, and
all that are yet to come. Our worship is unbounded and free. They are
all manifestations of the same Infinite God. They are all pure and
unselfish; they struggled and gave up their lives for us, poor human
beings. They each and all suffer vicarious atonement for every one of
us, and also for all that are to come hereafter.

In a sense you are all Prophets; every one of you is a Prophet, bearing
the burden of the world on your own shoulders. Have you ever seen a man,
have you ever seen a woman, who is not quietly, patiently, bearing his
or her little burden of life? The great Prophets were giants — they bore
a gigantic world on their shoulders. Compared with them we are pigmies,
no doubt, yet we are doing the same task; in our little circles, in our
little homes, we are bearing our little crosses. There is no one so
evil, no one so worthless, but he has to bear his own cross. But with
all our mistakes, with all our evil thoughts and evil deeds, there is a
bright spot somewhere, there is still somewhere the golden thread
through which we are always in touch with the divine. For, know for
certain, that the moment the touch of the divine is lost there would be
annihilation. And because none can be annihilated, there is always
somewhere in our heart of hearts, however low and degraded we may be, a
little circle of light which is in constant touch with the divine.

Our salutations go to all the past Prophets whose teachings and lives we
have inherited, whatever might have been their race, clime, or creed!
Our salutations go to all those Godlike men and women who are working to
help humanity, whatever be their birth, colour, or race! Our salutations
to those who are coming in the future — living Gods — to work
unselfishly for our descendants.

</div>
