---
title: MY MASTER

---
<div>

[←](christ_the_messenger.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](indian_religious_thought.htm)

  

## MY MASTER

(Two lectures delivered in New York and England in 1896 were combined
subsequently under the present heading.)

"Whenever virtue subsides and vice prevails, I come down to help
mankind," declares Krishna, in the Bhagavad-Gitâ. Whenever this world of
ours, on account of growth, on account of added circumstances, requires
a new adjustment, a wave of power comes; and as a man is acting on two
planes, the spiritual and the material, waves of adjustment come on both
planes. On the one side, of the adjustment on the material plane, Europe
has mainly been the basis during modern times; and of the adjustment on
the other, the spiritual plane, Asia has been the basis throughout the
history of the world. Today, man requires one more adjustment on the
spiritual plane; today when material ideas are at the height of their
glory and power, today when man is likely to forget his divine nature,
through his growing dependence on matter, and is likely to be reduced to
a mere money-making machine, an adjustment is necessary; the voice has
spoken, and the power is coming to drive away the clouds of gathering
materialism. The power has been set in motion which, at no distant date,
will bring unto mankind once more the memory of its real nature; and
again the place from which this power will start will be Asia.

This world of ours is on the plan of the division of labour. It is vain
to say that one man shall possess everything. Yet how childish we are!
The baby in its ignorance thinks that its doll is the only possession
that is to be coveted in this whole universe. So a nation which is great
in the possession of material power thinks that that is all that is to
be coveted, that that is all that is meant by progress, that that is all
that is meant by civilisation, and if there are other nations which do
not care for possession and do not possess that power, they are not fit
to live, their whole existence is useless! On the other hand, another
nation may think that mere material civilisation is utterly useless.
From the Orient came the voice which once told the world that if a man
possesses everything that is under the sun and does not possess
spirituality, what avails it? This is the oriental type; the other is
the occidental type.

Each of these types has its grandeur, each has its glory. The present
adjustment will be the harmonising, the mingling of these two ideals. To
the Oriental, the world of spirit is as real as to the Occidental is the
world of senses. In the spiritual, the Oriental finds everything he
wants or hopes for; in it he finds all that makes life real to him. To
the Occidental he is a dreamer; to the Oriental the Occidental is a
dreamer playing with ephemeral toys, and he laughs to think that
grown-up men and women should make so much of a handful of matter which
they will have to leave sooner or later. Each calls the other a dreamer.
But the oriental ideal is as necessary for the progress of the human
race as is the occidental, and I think it is more necessary. Machines
never made mankind happy and never will make. He who is trying to make
us believe this will claim that happiness is in the machine; but it is
always in the mind. That man alone who is the lord of his mind can
become happy, and none else. And what, after all, is this power of
machinery? Why should a man who can send a current of electricity
through a wire be called a very great man and a very intelligent man?
Does not nature do a million times more than that every moment? Why not
then fall down and worship nature? What avails it if you have power over
the whole of the world, if you have mastered every atom in the universe?
That will not make you happy unless you have the power of happiness in
yourself, until you have conquered yourself. Man is born to conquer
nature, it is true, but the Occidental means by "nature" only physical
or external nature. It is true that external nature is majestic, with
its mountains, and oceans, and rivers, and with its infinite powers and
varieties. Yet there is a more majestic internal nature of man, higher
than the sun, moon, and stars, higher than this earth of ours, higher
than the physical universe, transcending these little lives of ours; and
it affords another field of study. There the Orientals excel, just as
the Occidentals excel in the other. Therefore it is fitting that,
whenever there is a spiritual adjustment, it should come from the
Orient. It is also fitting that when the Oriental wants to learn about
machine-making, he should sit at the feet of the Occidental and learn
from him. When the Occident wants to learn about the spirit, about God,
about the soul, about the meaning and the mystery of this universe, he
must sit at the feet of the Orient to learn.

I am going to present before you the life of one man who has put in
motion such a wave in India. But before going into the life of this man,
I will try to present before you the secret of India, what India means.
If those whose eyes have been blinded by the glamour of material things,
whose whole dedication of life is to eating and drinking and enjoying,
whose ideal of possession is lands and gold, whose ideal of pleasure is
that of the senses, whose God is money, and whose goal is a life of ease
and comfort in this world and death after that, whose minds never look
forward, and who rarely think of anything higher than the sense-objects
in the midst of which they live — if such as these go to India, what do
they see? Poverty, squalor, superstition, darkness, hideousness
everywhere. Why? Because in their minds enlightenment means dress,
education, social politeness. Whereas occidental nations have used every
effort to improve their material position, India has done differently.
There live the only men in the world who, in the whole history of
humanity, never went beyond their frontiers to conquer anyone, who never
coveted that which belonged to anyone else, whose only fault was that
their lands were so fertile, and they accumulated wealth by the hard
labour of their hands, and so tempted other nations to come and despoil
them. They are contented to be despoiled, and to be called barbarians;
and in return they want to send to this world visions of the Supreme, to
lay bare for the world the secrets of human nature, to rend the veil
that conceals the real man, because they know the dream, because they
know that behind this materialism lives the real, divine nature of man
which no sin can tarnish, no crime can spoil, no lust can taint, which
fire cannot burn, nor water wet, which heat cannot dry nor death kill.
And to them this true nature of man is as real as is any material object
to the senses of an Occidental.

Just as you are brave to jump at the mouth of a cannon with a hurrah,
just as you are brave in the name of patriotism to stand up and give up
your lives for your country, so are they brave in the name of God. There
it is that when a man declares that this is a world of ideas, that it is
all a dream, he casts off clothes and property to demonstrate that what
he believes and thinks is true. There it is that a man sits on the bank
of a river, when he has known that life is eternal, and wants to give up
his body just as nothing, just as you can give up a bit of straw.
Therein lies their heroism, that they are ready to face death as a
brother, because they are convinced that there is no death for them.
Therein lies the strength that has made them invincible through hundreds
of years of oppression and foreign invasion and tyranny. The nation
lives today, and in that nation even in the days of the direst disaster,
spiritual giants have, never failed to arise. Asia produces giants in
spirituality, just as the Occident produces giants in politics, giants
in science. In the beginning of the present century, when Western
influence began to pour into India, when Western conquerors, sword in
hand, came to demonstrate to the children of the sages that they were
mere barbarians, a race of dreamers, that their religion was but
mythology, and god and soul and everything they had been struggling for
were mere words without meaning, that the thousands of years of
struggle, the thousands of years of endless renunciation, had all been
in vain, the question began to be agitated among young men at the
universities whether the whole national existence up to then had been a
failure, whether they must begin anew on the occidental plan, tear up
their old books, burn their philosophies, drive away their preachers,
and break down their temples. Did not the occidental conqueror, the man
who demonstrated his religion with sword and gun, say that all the old
ways were mere superstition and idolatry? Children brought up and
educated in the new schools started on the occidental plan, drank in
these ideas, from their childhood; and it is not to be wondered at that
doubts arose. But instead of throwing away superstition and making a
real search after truth, the test of truth became, "What does the West
say?" The priests must go, the Vedas must be burned, because the West
has said so. Out of the feeling of unrest thus produced, there arose a
wave of so-called reform in India.

If you wish to be a true reformer, three things are necessary. The first
is to feel. Do you really feel for your brothers? Do you really feel
that there is so much misery in the world, so much ignorance and
superstition? Do you really feel that men are your brothers? Does this
idea come into your whole being? Does it run with your blood? Does it
tingle in your veins? Does it course through every nerve and filament of
your body? Are you full of that idea of sympathy? If you are, that is
only the first step. You must think next if you have found any remedy.
The old ideas may be all superstition, but in and round these masses of
superstition are nuggets of gold and truth. Have you discovered means by
which to keep that gold alone, without any of the dross? If you have
done that, that is only the second step; one more thing is necessary.
What is your motive? Are you sure that you are not actuated by greed of
gold, by thirst for fame or power? Are you really sure that you can
stand to your ideals and work on, even if the whole world wants to crush
you down? Are you sure you know what you want and will perform your
duty, and that alone, even if your life is at stake? Are you sure that
you will persevere so long as life endures, so long as there is one
pulsation left in the heart? Then you are a real reformer, you are a
teacher, a Master, a blessing to mankind. But man is so impatient, so
short-sighted! He has not the patience to wait, he has not the power to
see. He wants to rule, he wants results immediately. Why? He wants to
reap the fruits himself, and does not really care for others. Duty for
duty's sake is not what he wants. "To work you have the right, but not
to the fruits thereof," says Krishna. Why cling to results? Ours are the
duties. Let the fruits take care of themselves. But man has no patience.
He takes up any scheme. The larger number of would-be reformers all over
the world can be classed under this heading.

As I have said, the idea of reform came to India when it seemed as if
the wave of materialism that had invaded her shores would sweep away the
teachings of the sages. But the nation had borne the shocks of a
thousand such waves of change. This one was mild in comparison. Wave
after wave had flooded the land, breaking and crushing everything for
hundreds of years. The sword had flashed, and "Victory unto Allah" had
rent the skies of India; but these floods subsided, leaving the national
ideals unchanged.

The Indian nation cannot be killed. Deathless it stands, and it will
stand so long as that spirit shall remain as the background, so long as
her people do not give up their spirituality. Beggars they may remain,
poor and poverty-stricken, dirt and squalor may surround them perhaps
throughout all time, but let them not give up their God, let them not
forget that they are the children of the sages. Just as in the West,
even the man in the street wants to trace his descent from some
robber-baron of the Middle Ages, so in India, even an Emperor on the
throne wants to trace his descent from some beggar-sage in the forest,
from a man who wore the bark of a tree, lived upon the fruits of the
forest and communed with God. That is the type of descent we want; and
so long as holiness is thus supremely venerated, India cannot die.

Many of you perhaps have read the article by Prof. Max Müller in a
recent issue of the *Nineteenth Century*, headed "A Real Mahâtman". The
life of Shri Ramakrishna is interesting, as it was a living illustration
of the ideas that he preached. Perhaps it will be a little romantic for
you who live in the West in an atmosphere entirely different from that
of India. For the methods and manners in the busy rush of life in the
West vary entirely from those of India. Yet perhaps it will be of all
the more interest for that, because it will bring into a newer light,
things about which many have already heard.

It was while reforms of various kinds were being inaugurated in India
that a child was born of poor Brâhmin parents on the eighteenth of
February, 1836, in one of the remote villages of Bengal. The father and
mother were very orthodox people. The life of a really orthodox Brahmin
is one of continuous renunciation. Very few things can he do; and over
and beyond them the orthodox Brahmin must not occupy himself with any
secular business. At the same time he must not receive gifts from
everybody. You may imagine how rigorous that life becomes. You have
heard of the Brahmins and their priestcraft many times, but very few of
you have ever stopped to ask what makes this wonderful band of men the
rulers of their fellows. They are the poorest of all the classes in the
country; and the secret of their power lies in their renunciation. They
never covet wealth. Theirs is the poorest priesthood in the world, and
therefore the most powerful. Even in this poverty, a Brahmin's wife will
never allow a poor man to pass through the village without giving him
something to eat. That is considered the highest duty of the mother in
India; and because she is the mother it is her duty to be served last;
she must see that everyone is served before her turn comes. That is why
the mother is regarded as God in India. This particular woman, the
mother of our subject, was the very type of a Hindu mother. The higher
the caste, the greater the restrictions. The lowest caste people can eat
and drink anything they like. But as men rise in the social scale, more
and more restrictions come; and when they reach the highest caste, the
Brahmin, the hereditary priesthood of India, their lives, as I have
said, are very much circumscribed. Compared to Western manners, their
lives are of continuous asceticism. The Hindus are perhaps the most
exclusive nation in the world. They have the same great steadiness as
the English, but much more amplified. When they get hold of an idea they
carry it out to its very conclusion, and they, keep hold of it
generation after generation until they make something out of it. Once
give them an idea, and it is not easy to take it back; but it is hard to
make them grasp a new idea.

The orthodox Hindus, therefore, are very exclusive, living entirely
within their own horizon of thought and feeling. Their lives are laid
down in our old books in every little detail, and the least detail is
grasped with almost adamantine firmness by them. They would starve
rather than eat a meal cooked by the hands of a man not belonging to
their own small section of caste. But withal, they have intensity and
tremendous earnestness. That force of intense faith and religious life
occurs often among the orthodox Hindus, because their very orthodoxy
comes from a tremendous conviction that it is right. We may not all
think that what they hold on to with such perseverance is right; but to
them it is. Now, it is written in our books that a man should always be
charitable even to the extreme. If a man starves himself to death to
help another man, to save that man's life, it is all right; it is even
held that a man ought to do that. And it is expected of a Brahmin to
carry this idea out to the very extreme. Those who are acquainted with
the literature of India will remember a beautiful old story about this
extreme charity, how a whole family, as related in the Mahâbhârata,
starved themselves to death and gave their last meal to a beggar. This
is not an exaggeration, for such things still happen. The character of
the father and the mother of my Master was very much like that. Very
poor they were, and yet many a time the mother would starve herself a
whole day to help a poor man. Of them this child was born; and he was a
peculiar child from very boyhood. He remembered his past from his birth
and was conscious for what purpose he came into the world, and every
power was devoted to the fulfilment of that purpose.

While he was quite young, his father died; and the boy was sent to
school. A Brahmin's boy must go to school; the caste restricts him to a
learned profession only. The old system of education in India, still
prevalent in many parts of the country, especially in connection with
Sannyasins, is very different from the modern system. The students had
not to pay. It was thought that knowledge is so sacred that no man ought
to sell it. Knowledge must be given freely and without any price. The
teachers used to take students without charge, and not only so, most of
them gave their students food and clothes. To support these teachers the
wealthy families on certain occasions, such as a marriage festival, or
at the ceremonies for the dead, made gifts to them. They were considered
the first and foremost claimants to certain gifts; and they in their
turn had to maintain their students. So whenever there is a marriage,
especially in a rich family, these professors are invited, and they
attend and discuss various subjects. This boy went to one of these
gatherings of professors, and the professors were discussing various
topics, such as logic or astronomy, subjects much beyond his age. The
boy was peculiar, as I have said, and he gathered this moral out of it:
"This is the outcome of all their knowledge. Why are they fighting so
hard? It is simply for money; the man who can show the highest learning
here will get the best pair of cloth, and that is all these people are
struggling for. I will not go to school any more." And he did not; that
was the end of his going to school. But this boy had an elder brother, a
learned professor, who took him to Calcutta, however, to study with him.
After a short time the boy became fully convinced that the aim of all
secular learning was mere material advancement, and nothing more, and he
resolved to give up study and devote himself solely to the pursuit of
spiritual knowledge. The father being dead, the family was very poor;
and this boy had to make his own living. He went to a place near
Calcutta and became a temple priest. To become a temple priest is
thought very degrading to a Brahmin. Our temples are not churches in
your sense of the word, they are not places for public worship; for,
properly speaking, there is no such thing as public worship in India.
Temples are erected mostly by rich persons as a meritorious religious
act.

If a man has much property, he wants to build a temple. In that he puts
a symbol or an image of an Incarnation of God, and dedicates it to
worship in the name of God. The worship is akin to that which is
conducted in Roman Catholic churches, very much like the mass, reading
certain sentences from the sacred books, waving a light before the
image, and treating the image in every respect as we treat a great man.
This is all that is done in the temple. The man who goes to a temple is
not considered thereby a better man than he who never goes. More
properly, the latter is considered the more religious man, for religion
in India is to each man his own private affair. In the house of every
man there is either a little chapel, or a room set apart, and there he
goes morning and evening, sits down in a corner, and there does his
worship. And this worship is entirely mental, for another man does not
hear or know what he is doing. He sees him only sitting there, and
perhaps moving his fingers in a peculiar fashion, or closing his
nostrils and breathing in a peculiar manner. Beyond that, he does not
know what his brother is doing; even his wife, perhaps, will not know.
Thus, all worship is conducted in the privacy of his own home. Those who
cannot afford to have a chapel go to the banks of a river, or a lake, or
the sea if they live at the seaside, but people sometimes go to worship
in a temple by making salutation to the image. There their duty to the
temple ends. Therefore, you see, it has been held from the most ancient
times in our country, legislated upon by Manu, that it is a degenerating
occupation to become a temple priest. Some of the books say it is so
degrading as to make a Brahmin worthy of reproach. Just as with
education, but in a far more intense sense with religion, there is the
other idea behind it that the temple priests who take fees for their
work are making merchandise of sacred things. So you may imagine the
feelings of that boy when he was forced through poverty to take up the
only occupation open to him, that of a temple priest.

There have been various poets in Bengal whose songs have passed down to
the people; they are sung in the streets of Calcutta and in every
village. Most of these are religious songs, and their one central idea,
which is perhaps peculiar to the religions of India, is the idea of
realisation. There is not a book in India on religion which does not
breathe this idea. Man must realise God, feel God, see God, talk to God.
That is religion. The Indian atmosphere is full of stories of saintly
persons having visions of God. Such doctrines form the basis of their
religion; and all these ancient books and scriptures are the writings of
persons who came into direct contact with spiritual facts. These books
were not written for the intellect, nor can any reasoning understand
them, because they were written by men who saw the things of which they
wrote, and they can be understood only by men who have raised themselves
to the same height. They say there is such a thing as realisation even
in this life, and it is open to everyone, and religion begins with the
opening of this faculty, if I may call it so. This is the central idea
in all religions, and this is why we may find one man with the most
finished oratorical powers, or the most convincing logic, preaching the
highest doctrines and yet unable to get people to listen to him, while
we may find another, a poor man, who scarcely can speak the language of
his own motherland, yet half the nation worships him in his own lifetime
as God. When in India the idea somehow or other gets abroad that a man
has raised himself to that state of realisation, that religion is no
more a matter of conjecture to him, that he is no more groping in the
dark in such momentous questions as religion, the immortality of the
soul, and God, people come from all quarters to see him and gradually
they begin to worship him.

In the temple was an image of the "Blissful Mother". This boy had to
conduct the worship morning and evening, and by degrees this one idea
filled his mind: "Is there anything behind this images? Is it true that
there is a Mother of Bliss in the universe? Is it true that She lives
and guides the universe, or is it all a dream? Is there any reality in
religion?"

This scepticism comes to the Hindu child. It is the scepticism of our
country: Is this that we are doing real? And theories will not satisfy
us, although there are ready at hand almost all the theories that have
ever been made with regard to God and soul. Neither books nor theories
can satisfy us, the one idea that gets hold of thousands of our people
is this idea of realisation. Is it true that there is a God? If it be
true, can I see Him? Can I realise the truth? The Western mind may think
all this very impracticable, but to us it is intensely practical. For
this their lives. You have just heard how from the earliest times there
have been persons who have given up all comforts and luxuries to live in
caves, and hundreds have given up their homes to weep bitter tears of
misery, on the banks of sacred rivers, in order to realise this idea —
not to know in the ordinary sense of the word, not intellectual
understanding, not a mere rationalistic comprehension of the real thing,
not mere groping in the dark, but intense realisation, much more real
than this world is to our senses. That is the idea. I do not advance any
proposition as to that just now, but that is the one fact that is
impressed upon them. Thousands will be killed, other thousands will be
ready. So upon this one idea the whole nation for thousands of years
have been denying and sacrificing themselves. For this idea thousands of
Hindus every year give up their homes, and many of them die through the
hardships they have to undergo. To the Western mind this must seem most
visionary, and I can see the reason for this point of view. But though I
have resided in the West, I still think this idea the most practical
thing in life.

Every moment I think of anything else is so much loss to me — even the
marvels of earthly sciences; everything is vain if it takes me away from
that thought. Life is but momentary, whether you have the knowledge of
an angel or the ignorance of an animal. Life is but momentary, whether
you have the poverty of the poorest man in rags or the wealth of the
richest living person. Life is but momentary, whether you are a
downtrodden man living in one of the big streets of the big cities of
the West or a crowned Emperor ruling over millions. Life is but
momentary, whether you have the best of health or the worst. Life is but
momentary, whether you have the most poetical temperament or the most
cruel. There is but one solution of life, says the Hindu, and that
solution is what they call God and religion. If these be true, life
becomes explained, life becomes bearable, becomes enjoyable. Otherwise,
life is but a useless burden. That is our idea, but no amount of
reasoning can demonstrate it; it can only make it probable, and there it
rests. The highest demonstration of reasoning that we have in any branch
of knowledge can only make a fact probable, and nothing further. The
most demonstrable facts of physical science are only probabilities, not
facts yet. Facts are only in the senses. Facts have to be perceived, and
we have to perceive religion to demonstrate it to ourselves. We have to
sense God to be convinced that there is a God. We must sense the facts
of religion to know that they are facts. Nothing else, and no amount of
reasoning, but our own perception can make these things real to us, can
make my belief firm as a rock. That is my idea, and that is the Indian
idea.

This idea took possession of the boy and his whole life became
concentrated upon that. Day after day he would weep and say, "Mother, is
it true that Thou existest, or is it all poetry? Is the Blissful Mother
an imagination of poets and misguided people, or is there such a
Reality?" We have seen that of books, of education in our sense of the
word, he had none, and so much the more natural, so much the more
healthy, was his mind, so much the purer his thoughts, undiluted by
drinking in the thoughts of others. Because he did not go to the
university, therefore he thought for himself. Because we have spent half
our lives in the university we are filled with a collection of other
people's thoughts. Well has Prof. Max Müller said in the article I have
just referred to that this was a clean, original man; and the secret of
that originality was that he was not brought up within the precincts of
a university. However, this thought — whether God can be seen — which
was uppermost in his mind gained in strength every day until he could
think of nothing else. He could no more conduct the worship properly,
could no more attend to the various details in all their minuteness.
Often he would forget to place the food-offering before the image,
sometimes he would forget to wave the light; at other times he would
wave it for hours, and forget everything else.

And that one idea was in his mind every day: "Is it true that Thou
existest, O Mother? Why cost Thou not speak? Art Thou dead?" Perhaps
some of us here will remember that there are moments in our lives when,
tired of all these ratiocinations of dull and dead logic, tired of
plodding through books — which after all teach us nothing, become
nothing but a sort of intellectual opium-eating — we must have it at
stated times or we die — tired with all this, the heart of our hearts
sends out a wail: "Is there no one in this universe who can show me the
light? If Thou art, show the light unto me. Why dost Thou not speak? Why
dost Thou make Thyself so scarce, why send so many Messengers and not
Thyself come to me? In this world of fights and factions whom am I to
follow and believe? If Thou art the God of every man and woman alike,
why comest Thou not to speak to Thy child and see if he is not ready?"
Well, to us all come such thoughts in moments of great depression; but
such are the temptations surrounding us, that the next moment we forget.
For the moment it seemed that the doors of the heavens were going to be
opened, for the moment it seemed as if we were going to plunge into the
light effulgent; but the animal man again shakes off all these angelic
visions. Down we go, animal man once more eating and drinking and dying,
and dying and drinking and eating again and again. But there are
exceptional minds which are not turned away so easily, which once
attracted can never be turned back, whatever may be the temptation in
the way, which want to see the Truth knowing that life must go. They
say, let it go in a noble conquest, and what conquest is nobler than the
conquest of the lower man, than this solution of the problem of life and
death, of good and evil?

At last it became impossible for him to serve in the temple. He left it
and entered into a little wood that was near and lived there. About this
part of his life, he told me many times that he could not tell when the
sun rose or set, or how he lived. He lost all thought of himself and
forgot to eat. During this period he was lovingly watched over by a
relative who put into his mouth food which he mechanically swallowed.

Days and nights thus passed with the boy. When a whole day would pass,
towards the evening when the peal of bells in the temples, and the
voices singing, would reach the wood, it would make the boy very sad,
and he would cry, "Another day is gone in vain, Mother, and Thou hast
not come. Another day of this short life has gone, and I have not known
the Truth." In the agony of his soul, sometimes he would rub his face
against the ground and weep, and this one prayer burst forth: "Do Thou
manifest Thyself in me, Thou Mother of the universe! See that I need
Thee and nothing else!" Verily, he wanted to be true to his own ideal.
He had heard that the Mother never came until everything had been given
up for Her. He had heard that the Mother wanted to come to everyone, but
they would not have Her, that people wanted all sorts of foolish little
idols to pray to, that they wanted their own enjoyments, and not the
Mother, and that the moment they really wanted Her with their whole
soul, and nothing else, that moment She would come. So he began to break
himself into that idea; he wanted to be exact, even on the plane of
matter. He threw away all the little property he had, and took a vow
that he would never touch money, and this one idea, "I will not touch
money", became a part of him. It may appear to be something occult, but
even in after-life when he was sleeping, if I touched him with a piece
of money his hand would become bent, and his whole body would become, as
it were, paralysed. The other idea that came into his mind was that lust
was the other enemy. Man is a soul, and soul is sexless, neither man nor
woman. The idea of sex and the idea of money were the two things, he
thought, that prevented him from seeing the Mother. This whole universe
is the manifestation of the Mother, and She lives in every woman's body.
"Every woman represents the Mother; how can I think of woman in mere sex
relation?" That was the idea: Every woman was his Mother, he must bring
himself to the state when he would see nothing but Mother in every
woman. And he carried it out in his life.

This is the tremendous thirst that seizes the human heart. Later on,
this very man said to me, "My child, suppose there is a bag of gold in
one room, and a robber in the next room; do you think that the robber
can sleep? He cannot. His mind will be always thinking how to get into
that room and obtain possession of that gold. Do you think then that a
man, firmly persuaded that there is a Reality behind all these
appearances, that there is a God, that there is One who never dies, One
who is infinite bliss, a bliss compared with which these pleasures of
the senses are simply playthings, can rest contented without struggling
to attain It? Can he cease his efforts for a moment? No. He will become
mad with longing." This divine madness seized the boy. At that time he
had no teacher, nobody to tell him anything, and everyone thought that
he was out of his mind. This is the ordinary condition of things. If a
man throws aside the vanities of the world, we hear him called mad. But
such men are the salt of the earth. Out of such madness have come the
powers that have moved this world of ours, and out of such madness alone
will come the powers of the future that are going to move the world.

So days, weeks, months passed in continuous struggle of the soul to
arrive at truth. The boy began to see visions, to see wonderful things;
the secrets of his nature were beginning to open to him. Veil after veil
was, as it were, being taken off. Mother Herself became the teacher and
initiated the boy into the truths he sought. At this time there came to
this place a woman of beautiful appearance, learned beyond compare.
Later on, this saint used to say about her that she was not learned, but
was the embodiment of learning; she was learning itself, in human form.
There, too, you find the peculiarity of the Indian nation. In the midst
of the ignorance in which the average Hindu woman lives, in the midst of
what is called in Western countries her lack of freedom, there could
arise a woman of supreme spirituality. She was a Sannyâsini; for women
also give up the world, throw away their property, do not marry, and
devote themselves to the worship of the Lord. She came; and when she
heard of this boy in the grove, she offered to go and see him; and hers
was the first help he received. At once she recognised what his trouble
was, and she said to him. "My son blessed is the man upon whom such
madness comes. The whole of this universe is mad — some for wealth, some
for pleasure, some for fame, some for a hundred other things. They are
mad for gold, or husbands, or wives, for little trifles, mad to
tyrannise over somebody, mad to become rich, mad for every foolish thing
except God. And they can understand only their own madness. When another
man is mad after gold, they have fellow-feeling and sympathy for him,
and they say he is the right man, as lunatics think that lunatics alone
are sane. But if a man is mad after the Beloved, after the Lord, how can
they understand? They think he has gone crazy; and they say, 'Have
nothing to do with him.' That is why they call you mad; but yours is the
right kind of madness. Blessed is the man who is mad after God. Such men
are very few." This woman remained near the boy for years, taught him
the forms of the religions of India, initiated him into the different
practices of Yoga, and, as it were, guided and brought into harmony this
tremendous river of spirituality.

Later, there came to the same grove a Sannyasin, one of the begging
friars of India, a learned man, a philosopher. He was a peculiar man, he
was an idealist. He did not believe that this world existed in reality;
and to demonstrate that, he would never go under a roof, he would always
live out of doors, in storm and sunshine alike. This man began to teach
the boy the philosophy of the Vedas; and he found very soon, to his
astonishment, that the pupil was in some respects wiser than the master.
He spent several months with the boy, after which he initiated him into
the order of Sannyasins, and took his departure.

When as a temple priest his extraordinary worship made people think him
deranged in his head, his relatives took him home and married him to a
little girl, thinking that that would turn his thoughts and restore the
balance of his mind. But he came back and, as we have seen, merged
deeper in his madness. Sometimes, in our country, boys are married as
children and have no voice in the matter; their parents marry them. Of
course such a marriage is little more than a betrothal. When they are
married they still continue to live with their parents, and the real
marriage takes place when the wife grows older, Then it is customary for
the husband to go and bring his bride to his own home. In this case,
however, the husband had entirely forgotten that he had a wife. In her
far off home the girl had heard that her husband had become a religious
enthusiast, and that he was even considered insane by many. She resolved
to learn the truth for herself, so she set out and walked to the place
where her husband was. When at last she stood in her husband's presence,
he at once admitted her right to his life, although in India any person,
man or woman, who embraces a religious life, is thereby freed from all
other obligations. The young man fell at the feet of his wife and said,
"As for me, the Mother has shown me that She resides in every woman, and
so I have learnt to look upon every woman as Mother. That is the one
idea I can have about you; but if you wish to drag me into the world, as
I have been married to you, I am at your service."

The maiden was a pure and noble soul and was able to understand her
husband's aspirations and sympathise with them. She quickly told him
that she had no wish to drag him down to a life of worldliness; but that
all she desired was to remain near him, to serve him, and to learn of
him. She became one of his most devoted disciples, always revering him
as a divine being. Thus through his wife's consent the last barrier was
removed, and he was free to lead the life he had chosen.

The next desire that seized upon the soul of this man as to know the
truth about the various religions. Up to that time he had not known any
religion but his own. He wanted to understand what other religions were
like. So he sought teachers of other religions. By teachers you must
always remember what we mean in India, not a bookworm, but a man of
realisation, one who knows truth a; first hand and not through an
intermediary. He found a Mohammedan saint and placed himself under him;
he underwent the disciplines prescribed by him, and to his astonishment
found that when faithfully carried out, these devotional methods led him
to the same goal he had already attained. He gathered similar experience
from following the true religion of Jesus the Christ. He went to all the
sects he could find, and whatever he took up he went into with his whole
heart. He did exactly as he was told, and in every instance he arrived
at the same result. Thus from actual experience, he came to know that
the goal of every religion is the same, that each is trying to teach the
same thing, the difference being largely in method and still more in
language. At the core, all sects and all religions have the same aim;
and they were only quarrelling for their own selfish purposes — they
were not anxious about the truth, but about "my name" and "your name".
Two of them preached the same truth, but one of them said, "That cannot
be true, because I have not put upon it the seal of my name. Therefore
do not listen to him." And the other man said, "Do not hear him,
although he is preaching very much the same thing, yet it is not true
because he does not preach it in my name."

That is what my Master found, and he then set about to learn humility,
because he had found that the one idea in all religions is, "not me, but
Thou", and he who says, "not me", the Lord fills his heart. The less of
this little "I" the more of God there is in him. That he found to be the
truth in every religion in the world, and he set himself to accomplish
this. As I have told you, whenever he wanted to do anything he never
confined himself to fine theories, but would enter into the practice
immediately; We see many persons talking the most wonderfully fine
things about charity and about equality and the rights of other people
and all that, but it is only in theory. I was so fortunate as to find
one who was able to carry theory into practice. He had the most
wonderful faculty of carrying everything into practice which he thought
was right.

Now, there was a family of Pariahs living near the place. The Pariahs
number several millions in the whole of India and are a sect of people
so low that some of our books say that if a Brahmin coming out from his
house sees the face of a Pariah, he has to fast that day and recite
certain prayers before he becomes holy again. In some Hindu cities when
a Pariah enters, he has to put a crow's feather on his head as a sign
that he is a Pariah, and he has to cry aloud, "Save yourselves, the
Pariah is passing through the street", and you will find people flying
off from him as if by magic, because if they touch him by chance, they
will have to change their clothes, bathe, and do other things. And the
Pariah for thousands of years has believed that it is perfectly right;
that his touch will make everybody unholy. Now my Master would go to a
Pariah and ask to be allowed to clean his house. The business of the
Pariah is to clean the streets of the cities and to keep houses clean.
He cannot enter the house by the front door; by the back door he enters;
and as soon as he has gone, the whole place over which he has passed is
sprinkled with and made holy by a little Gangâ water. By birth the
Brahmin stands for holiness, and the Pariah for the very reverse. And
this Brahmin asked to be allowed to do the menial services in the house
of the Pariah. The Pariah of course could not allow that, for they all
think that if they allow a Brahmin to do such menial work it will be an
awful sin, and they will become extinct. The Pariah would not permit it;
so in the dead of night, when all were sleeping, Ramakrishna would enter
the house. He had long hair, and with his hair he would wipe the place,
saying, "Oh, my Mother, make me the servant of the Pariah, make me feel
that I am even lower than the Pariah." "They worship Me best who worship
My worshippers. These are all My children and your privilege is to serve
them" — is the teaching of Hindu scriptures.

There were various other preparations which would take a long time to
relate, and I want to give you just a sketch of his life. For years he
thus educated himself. One of the Sâdhanâs was to root out the sex idea.
Soul has no sex, it is neither male nor female. It is only in the body
that sex exists, and the man who desires to reach the spirit cannot at
the same time hold to sex distinctions. Having been born in a masculine
body, this man wanted to bring the feminine idea into everything. He
began to think that he was a woman, he dressed like a woman, spoke like
a woman, gave up the occupations of men, and lived in the household
among the women of a good family, until, after years of this discipline,
his mind became changed, and he entirely forgot the idea of sex; thus
the whole view of life became changed to him.

We hear in the West about worshipping woman, but this is usually for her
youth and beauty. This man meant by worshipping woman, that to him every
woman's face was that of the Blissful Mother, and nothing but that. I
myself have seen this man standing before those women whom society would
not touch, and falling at their feet bathed in tears, saying, "Mother,
in one form Thou art in the street, and in another form Thou art the
universe. I salute Thee, Mother, I salute Thee." Think of the
blessedness of that life from which all carnality has vanished, which
can look upon every woman with that love and reverence when every
woman's face becomes transfigured, and only the face of the Divine
Mother, the Blissful One, the Protectress of the human race, shines upon
it! That is what we want. Do you mean to say that the divinity back of a
woman can ever be cheated? It never was and never will be, It always
asserts itself. Unfailingly it detects fraud, it detects hypocrisy,
unerringly it feels the warmth of truth, the light of spirituality, the
holiness of purity. Such purity is absolutely necessary if real
spirituality is to be attained.

This rigorous, unsullied purity came into the life of that man. All the
struggles which we have in our lives were past for him. His hard-earned
jewels of spirituality, for which he had given three-quarters of his
life, were now ready to be given to humanity, and then began his
mission. His teaching and preaching were peculiar. In our country a
teacher is a most highly venerated person, he is regarded as God
Himself. We have not even the same respect for our father and mother.
Father and mother give us our body, but the teacher shows us the way to
salvation. We are his children, we are born in the spiritual line of the
teacher. All Hindus come to pay respect to an extraordinary teacher,
they crowd around him. And here was such a teacher, but the teacher had
no thought whether he was to be respected or not, he had not the least
idea that he was a great teacher, he thought that it was Mother who was
doing everything and not he. He always said, "If any good comes from my
lips, it is the Mother who speaks; what have I to do with it?" That was
his one idea about his work, and to the day of his death he never gave
it up. This man sought no one. His principle was, first form character,
first earn spirituality and results will come of themselves. His
favourite illustration was, "When the lotus opens, the bees come of
their own accord to seek the honey; so let the lotus of your character
be full-blown, and the results will follow." This is a great lesson to
learn.

My Master taught me this lesson hundreds of times, yet I often forget
it. Few understand the power of thought. If a man goes into a cave,
shuts himself in, and thinks one really great thought and dies, that
thought will penetrate the walls of that cave, vibrate through space,
and at last permeate the whole human race. Such is the power of thought;
be in no hurry therefore to give your thoughts to others. First have
something to give. He alone teaches who has something to give, for
teaching is not talking, teaching is not imparting doctrines, it is
communicating. Spirituality can be communicated just as really as I can
give you a flower. This is true in the most literal sense. This idea is
very old in India and finds illustration in the West in the theory, in
the belief, of apostolic succession. Therefore first make character —
that is the highest duty you can perform. Know Truth for yourself, and
there will be many to whom you can teach it after wards; they will all
come. This was the attitude of nay Master. He criticised no one. For
years I lived with that man, but never did I hear those lips utter one
word of condemnation for any sect. He had the same sympathy for all
sects; he had found the harmony between them. A man may be intellectual,
or devotional, or mystic, or active; the various religions represent one
or the other of these types. Yet it is possible to combine all the four
in one man, and this is what future humanity is going to do. That was
his idea. He condemned no one, but saw the good in all.

People came by thousands to see and hear this wonderful man who spoke in
a *patois* every word of which was forceful and instinct with light. For
it is not what is spoken, much less the language in which it is spoken,
but it is the personality of the speaker which dwells in everything he
says that carries weight. Every one of us feels this at times. We hear
most splendid orations, most wonderfully reasoned-out discourses, and we
go home and forget them all. At other times we hear a few words in the
simplest language, and they enter into our lives, become part and parcel
of ourselves and produce lasting results. The words of a man who can put
his personality into them take effect, but he must have tremendous
personality. All teaching implies giving and taking, the teacher gives
and the taught receives, but the one must have something to give, and
the other must be open to receive.

This man came to live near Calcutta, the capital of India, the most
important university town in our country which was sending out sceptics
and materialists by the hundreds every year. Yet many of these
university men — sceptics and agnostics — used to come and listen to
him. I heard of this man, and I went to hear him. He looked just like an
ordinary man, with nothing remarkable about him. He used the most simple
language, and I thought "Can this man be a great teacher?"— crept near
to him and asked him the question which I had been asking others all my
life: "Do you believe in God, Sir?" "Yes," he replied. "Can you prove
it, Sir?" "Yes." "How?" "Because I see Him just as I see you here, only
in a much intenser sense." That impressed me at once. For the first time
I found a man who dared to say that he saw God that religion was a
reality to be felt, to be sensed in an infinitely more intense way than
we can sense the world. I began to go to that man, day after day, and I
actually saw that religion could be given. One touch, one glance, can
change a whole life. I have read about Buddha and Christ and Mohammed,
about all those different luminaries of ancient times, how they would
stand up and say, "Be thou whole", and the man became whole. I now found
it to be true, and when I myself saw this man, all scepticism was
brushed aside. It could be done; and my Master used to say, "Religion
can be given and taken more tangibly, more really than anything else in
the world." Be therefore spiritual first; have something to give and
then stand before the world and give it. Religion is not talk, or
doctrines, or theories; nor is it sectarianism. Religion cannot live in
sects and societies. It is the relation between the soul and God; how
can it be made into a society? It would then degenerate into business,
and wherever there are business and business principles in religion,
spirituality dies. Religion does not consist in erecting temples, or
building churches, or attending public worship. It is not to be found in
books, or in words, or in lectures, or in organisations. Religion
consists in realisation. As a fact, we all know that nothing will
satisfy us until we know the truth for ourselves. However we may argue,
however much we may hear, but one thing will satisfy us, and that is our
own realisation; and such an experience is possible for every one of us
if we will only try. The first ideal of this attempt to realise religion
is that of renunciation. As far as we can, we must give up. Darkness and
light, enjoyment of the world and enjoyment of God will never go
together. "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." Let people try it if they
will, and I have seen millions in every country who have tried; but
after all, it comes to nothing. If one word remains true in the saying,
it is, give up every thing for the sake of the Lord. This is a hard and
long task, but you can begin it here and now. Bit by bit we must go
towards it.

The second idea that I learnt from my Master, and which is perhaps the
most vital, is the wonderful truth that the religions of the world are
not contradictory or antagonistic. They are but various phases of one
eternal religion. That one eternal religion is applied to different
planes of existence, is applied to the opinions of various minds and
various races. There never was my religion or yours, my national
religion or your national religion; there never existed many religions,
there is only the one. One infinite religion existed all through
eternity and will ever exist, and this religion is expressing itself in
various countries in various ways. Therefore we must respect all
religions and we must try to accept them all as far as we can. Religions
manifest themselves not only according to race and geographical
position, but according to individual powers. In one man religion is
manifesting itself as intense activity, as work. In another it is
manifesting itself as intense devotion, in yet another, as mysticism, in
others as philosophy, and so forth. It is wrong when we say to others,
"Your methods are not right." Perhaps a man, whose nature is that of
love, thinks that the man who does good to others is not on the right
road to religion, because it is not his own way, and is therefore wrong.
If the philosopher thinks, "Oh, the poor ignorant people, what do they
know about a God of Love, and loving Him? They do not know what they
mean," he is wrong, because they may be right and he also.

To learn this central secret that the truth may be one and yet many at
the same time, that we may have different visions of the same truth from
different standpoints, is exactly what must be done. Then, instead of
antagonism to anyone, we shall have infinite sympathy with all. Knowing
that as long as there are different natures born in this world, the same
religious truth will require different adaptations, we shall understand
that we are bound to have forbearance with each other. Just as nature is
unity in variety — an infinite variation in the phenomenal — as in and
through all these variations of the phenomenal runs the Infinite, the
Unchangeable, the Absolute Unity, so it is with every man; the microcosm
is but a miniature repetition of the macrocosm; in spite of all these
variations, in and through them all runs this eternal harmony, and we
have to recognise this. This idea, above all other ideas, I find to be
the crying necessity of the day. Coming from a country which is a hotbed
of religious sects — and to which, through its good fortune or ill
fortune, everyone who has a religious idea wants to send an
advance-guard — I have been acquainted from my childhood with the
various sects of the world. Even the Mormons come to preach in India.
Welcome them all! That is the soil on which to preach religion. There it
takes root more than in any other country. If you come and teach
politics to the Hindus, they do not understand; but if you come to
preach religion, however curious it may be, you will have hundreds and
thousands of followers in no time, and you have every chance of becoming
a living God in your lifetime. I am glad it is so, it is the one thing
we want in India.

The sects among the Hindus are various, a great many in number, and some
of them apparently hopelessly contradictory. Yet they all tell you they
are but different manifestations of religion. "As different rivers,
taking their start from different mountains, running crooked or
straight, all come and mingle their waters in the ocean, so the
different sects, with their different points of vied, at last all come
unto Thee." This is not a theory, it has to be recognised, but not in
that patronising way which we see with some people: "Oh yes, there are
some very good things in it. These are what we call the ethnical
religions. These ethnical religions have some good in them." Some even
have the most wonderfully liberal idea that other religions are all
little bits of a prehistoric evolution, but "ours is the fulfilment of
things". One man says, because his is the oldest religion, it is the
best: another makes the same claim, because his is the latest.

We have to recognise that each one of them has the same saving power as
the other. What you have heard about their difference, whether in the
temple or in the church, is a mass of superstition. The same God answers
all; and it is not you, or I, or any body of men that is responsible for
the safety and salvation of the least little bit of the soul; the same
Almighty God is responsible for all. I do not understand how people
declare themselves to be believers in God, and at the same time think
that God has handed over to a little body of men all truth, and that
they are the guardians of the rest of humanity. How can you call that
religion? Religion is realisation; but mere talk — mere trying to
believe, mere groping in darkness, mere parroting the words of ancestors
and thinking it is religion, mere making a political something out of
the truths of religion — is not religion at all. In every sect — even
among the Mohammedans whom we always regard as the most exclusive — even
among them we find that wherever there was a man trying to realise
religion, from his lips have come the fiery words: "Thou art the Lord of
all, Thou art in the heart of all, Thou art the guide of all, Thou art
the Teacher of all, and Thou caress infinitely more for the land of Thy
children than we can ever do." Do not try to disturb the faith of any
man. If you can, give him something better; if you can, get hold of a
man where he stands and give him a push upwards; do so, but do not
destroy what he has. The only true teacher is he who can convert
himself, as it were, into a thousand persons at a moment's notice. The
only true teacher is he who can immediately come down to the level of
the student, and transfer his soul to the student's soul and see through
the student's eyes and hear through his ears and understand through his
mind. Such a teacher can really teach and none else. All these negative,
breaking-down, destructive teachers that are in the world can never do
any good.

In the presence of my Master I found out that man could be perfect, even
in this body. Those lips never cursed anyone, never even criticised
anyone. Those eyes were beyond the possibility of seeing evil, that mind
had lost the power of thinking evil. He saw nothing but good. That
tremendous purity, that tremendous renunciation is the one secret of
spirituality. "Neither through wealth, nor through progeny, but through
renunciation alone, is immortality to be reached", say the Vedas. "Sell
all that thou hast and give to the poor, and follow me", says the
Christ. So all great saints and Prophets have expressed it, and have
carried it out in their lives. How can great spirituality come without
that renunciation? Renunciation is the background of all religious
thought wherever it be, and you will always find that as this idea of
renunciation lessens, the more will the senses creep into the field of
religion, and spirituality will decrease in the same ratio.

That man was the embodiment of renunciation. In our country it is
necessary for a man who becomes a Sannyasin to give up all worldly
wealth and position, and this my Master carried out literally. There
were many who would have felt themselves blest if he would only have
accepted a present from their hands, who would gladly have given him
thousands of rupees if he would have taken them, but these were the only
men from whom he would turn away. He was a triumphant example, a living
realisation of the complete conquest of lust and of desire for money. He
was beyond all ideas of either, and such men are necessary for this
century. Such renunciation is necessary in these days when men have
begun to think that they cannot live a month without what they call
their "necessities", and which they are increasing out of all
proportion. It is necessary in a time like this that a man should arise
to demonstrate to the sceptics of the world that there yet breathes a
man who does not care a straw for all the gold or all the fame that is
in the universe. Yet there are such men.

The other idea of his life was intense love for others. The first part
of my Master's life was spent in acquiring spirituality, and the
remaining years in distributing it. People in our country have not the
same customs as you have in visiting a religious teacher or a Sannyasin.
Somebody would come to ask him about something, some perhaps would come
hundreds of miles, walking all the way, just to ask one question, to
hear one word from him, "Tell me one word for my salvation." That is the
way they come. They come in numbers, unceremoniously, to the place where
he is mostly to be found; they may find him under a tree and question
him; and before one set of people has gone, others have arrived. So if a
man is greatly revered, he will sometimes have no rest day or night. He
will have to talk constantly. For hours people will come pouring in, and
this man will be teaching them.

So men came in crowds to hear him, and he would talk twenty hours in the
twenty-four, and that not for one day, but for months and months until
at last the body broke down under the pressure of this tremendous
strain. His intense love for mankind would not let him refuse to help
even the humblest of the thousands who sought his aid. Gradually, there
developed a vital throat disorder and yet he could not be persuaded to
refrain from these exertions. As soon as he heard that people were
asking to see him, he would insist upon having them admitted and would
answer all their questions. When expostulated with, he replied, "I do
not care. I will give up twenty thousand such bodies to help one man. It
is glorious to help even one man." There was no rest for him. Once a man
asked him, "Sir, you are a great Yogi. Why do you not put your mind a
little on your body and cure your disease? "At first he did not answer,
but when the question had been repeated, he gently said, "My friend, I
thought you were a sage, but you talk like other men of the world. This
mind has been given to the Lord. Do you mean to say that I should take
it back and put it upon the body which is but a mere cage of the soul?"

So he went on preaching to the people, and the news spread that his body
was about to pass away, and the people began to flock to him in greater
crowds than ever. You cannot imagine the way they come to these great
religious teachers in India, how they crowd round them and make gods of
them while they are yet living. Thousands wait simply to touch the hem
of their garments. It is through this appreciation of spirituality in
others that spirituality is produced. Whatever man wants and
appreciates, he will get; and it is the same with nations. If you go to
India and deliver a political lecture, however grand it may be, you will
scarcely find people to listen to you but just go and teach religion,
*live* it, not merely talk it, and hundreds will crowd just to look at
you, to touch your feet. When the people heard that this holy man was
likely to go from them soon, they began to come round him more than
ever, and my Master went on teaching them without the least regard for
his health. We could not prevent this. Many of the people came from long
distances, and he would not rest until he had answered their questions.
"While I can speak, I must teach them," he would say, and he was as good
as his word. One day, he told us that he would lay down the body that
day, and repeating the most sacred word of the Vedas he entered into
Samâdhi and passed away.

His thoughts and his message were known to very few capable of giving
them out. Among others, he left a few young boys who had renounced the
world, and were ready to carry on his work. Attempts were made to crush
them. But they stood firm, having the inspiration of that great life
before them. Having had the contact of that blessed life for years, they
stood their ground. These young men, living as Sannyasins, begged
through the streets of the city where they were born, although some of
them came from high families. At first they met with great antagonism,
but they persevered and went on from day to day spreading all over India
the message of that great man, until the whole country was filled with
the ideas he had preached. This man, from a remote village of Bengal,
without education, by the sheer force of his own determination, realised
the truth and gave it to others, leaving only a few young boys to keep
it alive.

Today the name of Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa is known all over India
to its millions of people. Nay, the power of that man has spread beyond
India; and if there has ever been a word of truth, a word of
spirituality, that I have spoken anywhere in the world, I owe it to my
Master; only the mistakes are mine.

This is the message of Shri Ramakrishna to the modern world: "Do not
care for doctrines, do not care for dogmas, or sects, or churches, or
temples; they count for little compared with the essence of existence in
each man which is spirituality; and the more this is developed in a man,
the more powerful is he for good. Earn that first, acquire that, and
criticise no one, for all doctrines and creeds have some good in them.
Show by your lives that religion does not mean words, or names, or
sects, but that it means spiritual realisation. Only those can
understand who have felt. Only those who have attained to spirituality
can communicate it to others, can be great teachers of mankind. They
alone are the powers of light."

The more such men are produced in a country, the more that country will
be raised; and that country where such men absolutely do not exist is
simply doomed nothing can save it. Therefore my Master's message to
mankind is: "Be spiritual and realise truth for Yourself." He would have
you give up for the sake of your fellow-beings. He would have you cease
talking about love for your brother, and set to work to prove your
words. The time has come for renunciation, for realisation, and then you
will see the harmony in all the religions of the world. You will know
that there is no need of any quarrel. And then only will you be ready to
help humanity. To proclaim and make clear the fundamental unity
underlying all religions was the mission of my Master. Other teachers
have taught special religions which bear their names, but this great
teacher of the nineteenth century made no claim for himself. He left
every religion undisturbed because he had realised that in reality they
are all part and parcel of the one eternal religion.

</div>
