---
title: THE BASIS FOR PSYCHIC OR SPIRITUAL RESEARCH

---
<div>

[←](indian_religious_thought.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_art_in_india.htm)

  

## THE BASIS FOR PSYCHIC OR SPIRITUAL RESEARCH

It was not often that Swami Vivekananda, while in the West, took part in
debates. One such occasion in London when he did so was during the
discussion of a lecture on, "Can Psychic Phenomena be proved from a
Scientific Basis?" Referring first to a remark which he had heard in the
course of this debate, not for the first time in the West, he said:

One point I want to remark upon. It is a mistaken statement that has
been made to us that the Mohammedans do not believe that women have
souls. I am very sorry to say it is an old mistake among Christian
people, and they seem to like the mistake. That is a peculiarity in
human nature, that people want to say something very bad about others
whom they do not like. By the by, you know I am not a Mohammedan, but
yet I have had opportunity for studying this religion, and there is not
one word in the Koran which says that women have no souls, but in fact
it says they have.

About the psychical things that have been the subject of discussion, I
have very little to say here, for in the first place, the question is
whether psychical subjects are capable of scientific demonstration. What
do you mean by this demonstration? First of all, there will be the
subjective and the objective side necessary. Taking chemistry and
physics, with which we are so familiar, and of which we have read so
much, is it true that everyone in this world is able to understand the
demonstration even of the commonest subjects? Take any boor and show him
one of your experiments. What will he understand of it? Nothing. It
requires a good deal of previous training to be brought up to the point
of understanding an experiment. Before that he cannot understand it at
all. That is a area difficulty in the way. If scientific demonstration
mean bringing down certain facts to a plane which is universe for all
human beings, where all beings can understand it I deny that there can
be any such scientific demonstration for any subject in the world. If it
were so, all our universities and education would be in vain. Why are we
educated if by birth we can understand everything scientific? Why so
much study? It is of no use whatsoever. So, on the face of it, it is
absurd if this be the meaning of scientific demonstration, the bringing
down of intricate facts to the plane on which we are now. The next
meaning should be the correct one, perhaps, that certain facts should be
adduced as proving certain more intricate facts. There are certain more
complicated intricate phenomena, which we explain by less intricate
ones, and thus get, perhaps, nearer to them; in this way they are
gradually brought down to the plane of our present ordinary
consciousness. But even this is very complicated and very difficult, and
means a training also, a tremendous amount of education. So an I have to
say is that in order to have scientific explanation of psychical
phenomena, we require not only perfect evidence on the side of the
phenomena themselves, but a good deal of training on the part of those
who want to see. All this being granted, we shall be in a position to
say yea or nay, about the proof or disproof of any phenomena which are
presented before us. But, before that, the most remarkable phenomena or
the most oft-recorded phenomena that have happened in human society, in
my opinion, would be very hard indeed to prove even in an offhand
manner.

Next, as to those hasty explanations that religions are the outcome of
dreams, those who have made a particular study of them would think of
them but as mere guesses. We have no reason to suppose that religions
were the outcome of dreams as has been so easily explained. Then it
would be very easy indeed to take even the agnostic's position, but
unfortunately the matter cannot be explained so easily. There are many
other wonderful phenomena happening, even at the present time, and these
have all to be investigated, and not only have to be, but have been
investigated all along. The blind man says there is no sun. That does
not prove that there is no sun. These phenomena have been investigated
years before. Whole races of mankind have trained themselves for
centuries to become fit instruments for discovering the fine workings of
the nerves; their records have been published ages ago, colleges have
been created to study these subjects, and men and women there are still
who are living demonstrations of these phenomena. Of course I admit that
there is a good deal of hoax in the whole thing, a good deal of what is
wrong and untrue in these things; but with what is this not the case?
Take any common scientific phenomenon; there are two or three facts
which either scientists or ordinary men may regard as absolute truths,
and the rest as mere frothy suppositions. Now let the agnostic apply the
same test to his own science which he would apply to what he does not
want to believe. Half of it would be shaken to its foundation at once.
We are bound to live on suppositions. We cannot live satisfied where we
are; that is the natural growth of the human soul. We cannot become
agnostics on this side and at the same time go about seeking for
anything here; we have to pick. And, for this reason, we have to get
beyond our limits, struggle to know what seems to be unknowable; and
this struggle must continue.

In my opinion, therefore, I go really one step further than the
lecturer, and advance the opinion that most of the psychical phenomena —
not only little things like spirit-rappings or table-rappings which are
mere child's play, not merely little things like telepathy which I have
seen boys do even — most of the psychical phenomenal which the last
speaker calls the higher clairvoyance, but which I would rather beg to
call the experiences of the superconscious state of the mind, are the
very stepping-stones to real psychological investigation. The first
thing to be; seen is whether the mind can attain to that state or not.
My explanation would, of course, be a little different from his, but we
should probably agree when we explain terms. Not much depends on the
question whether this present consciousness continues after death or
not, seeing that this universe, as it is now, is not bound to this state
of consciousness. Consciousness is not co-existent with existence. In my
own body, and in all of our bodies, we must all admit that we are
conscious of very little of the body, and of the greater part of it we
are unconscious. Yet it exists. Nobody is ever conscious of his brain,
for example. I never saw my brain, and I am never conscious of it. Yet I
know that it exists. Therefore we may say that it is not consciousness
that we want, but the existence of something which is not this gross
matter; and that that knowledge can be gained even in this life, and
that that knowledge has been gained and demonstrated, as far as any
science has been demonstrated, is a fact. We have to look into these
things, and I would insist on reminding those who are here present on
one other point. It is well to remember that very many times we are
deluded on this. Certain people place before us the demonstration of a
fact which is not ordinary to the spiritual nature, and we reject that
fact because we say we cannot find it to be true. In many cases the fact
may not be correct. but in many cases also we forget to consider whether
we are fit to receive the demonstration or not, whether we have
permitted our bodies and our minds to become fit subjects for their
discovery.

</div>
