---
title: IS INDIA A BENIGHTED COUNTRY?

---
<div>

[←](on_art_in_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_claims_of_religion.htm)

  

## IS INDIA A BENIGHTED COUNTRY?

The following is a report of a lecture at Detroit, United States,
America, with the editorial comments of the *Boston Evening Transcript*,
5th April, 1894:

Swami Vivekananda has been in Detroit recently and made a proofed
impression there. All classes flocked to hear him, and professional men
in particular were greatly interested in his logic and his soundness of
thought. The opera-house alone was large enough for his audience. He
speaks English extremely well, and he is as handsome as he is good. The
Detroit newspapers have devoted much space to the reports of his
lectures. An editorial in the *Detroit Evening News* says: Most people
will be inclined to think that Swami Vivekananda did better last night
in his opera-house lecture than he did in any of his former lectures in
this city. The merit of the Hindu's utterances last night lay in their
clearness. He drew a very sharp line of distinction between Christianity
and Christianity, and told his audience plainly wherein he himself is a
Christian in one sense and not a Christian in another sense. He also
drew a sharp line between Hinduism and Hinduism, carrying the
implication that he desired to be classed as a Hindu only in its better
sense. Swami Vivekananda stands superior to all criticism when he says,
"We want missionaries of Christ. Let such come to India by the hundreds
and thousands. Bring Christ's life to us and let it permeate the very
core of society. Let him be preached in every village and corner of
India."

When a man is as sound as that on the main question, all else that he
may say must refer to the subordinate details. There is infinite
humiliation in this spectacle of a pagan priest reading lessons of
conduct and of life to the men who have assumed the spiritual
supervision of Greenland's icy mountains and India's coral strand; but
the sense of humiliation is the *sine qua non* of most reforms in this
world. Having said what he did of the glorious life of the author of the
Christian faith, Vivekananda has the right to lecture the way he has the
men who profess to represent that life among the nations abroad. And
after all, how like the Nazarene that sounds: "Provide neither gold nor
silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither
two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; for the workman is worthy of
his meat." Those who have become at all familiar with the religious,
literature of India before the advent of Vivekananda are best prepared
to understand the utter abhorrence of the Orientals of our Western
commercial spirit — or what Vivekananda calls, "the shopkeeper's spirit"
— in all that we do even in our very religion.

Here is a point for the missionaries which they cannot afford to ignore.
They who would convert the Eastern world of paganism must live up to
what they preach, in contempt for the kingdoms of this world and all the
glory of them.

Brother Vivekananda considers India the most moral nation in the world.
Though in bondage, its spirituality still endures. Here are extracts
from the notices of some of his recent Detroit addresses: At this point
the lecturer struck the great moral keynote of his discourse stating
that with his people it was the belief that all non-self is good and all
self is bad. This point was emphasised throughout the evening and might
be termed the text of the address. "To build a home is selfish, argues
the Hindu, so he builds it for the worship of God and for the
entertainment of guests. To cook food is selfish, so he cooks it for the
poor; he will serve himself last if any hungry stranger applies; and
this feeling extends throughout the length and breadth of the land. Any
man can ask for food and shelter and any house will be opened to him.

"The caste system has nothing to do with religion. A man's occupation is
hereditary — a carpenter is born a carpenter: a goldsmith, a goldsmith;
a workman, a workman: and a priest, a priest.

"Two gifts are especially appreciated, the gift of learning and the gift
of life. But the gift of learning takes precedence. One may save a man's
life, and that is excellent; one may impart to another knowledge, and
that is better. To instruct for money is an evil, and to do this would
bring opprobrium upon the head of the man who barters learning for gold
as though it were an article of trade. The Government makes gifts from
time to time to the instructors, and the moral effect is better than it
would be if the conditions were the same as exist in certain alleged
civilised countries." The speaker had asked throughout the length and
breadth of the land what was the definition of "civilization", and he
had asked the question in many countries. Sometimes the reply has been,
"What we are, that is civilization." He begged to differ in the
definition of the word. A nation may conquer the waves, control the
elements, develop the utilitarian problems of life seemingly to the
utmost limits, and yet not realise that in the individual, the highest
type of civilization is found in him who has learned to conquer self.
This condition is found more in India than in any other country on
earth, for there the material conditions are subservient to the
spiritual, and the individual looks to the soul manifestations in
everything that has life, studying nature to this end. Hence that gentle
disposition to endure with indomitable patience the flings of what
appears unkind fortune, the while there is a full consciousness of a
spiritual strength and knowledge greater than that possessed by any
other people. Therefore the existence of a country and people from which
flows an unending stream that attracts the attention of thinkers far and
near to approach and throw from their shoulders an oppressive earthly
burden.

This lecture was prefaced with the statement that the speaker had been
asked many questions. A number of these he preferred to answer
privately, but three he had selected for reasons, which would appear, to
answer from the pulpit. They were:  "Do the people of India throw their
children into the jaws of the crocodiles?" "Do they kill themselves
beneath the wheels of Jagannâtha?" "Do they burn widows with their
husbands?" The first question the lecturer treated in the same vein as
an American abroad would in answering inquiries about Indians running
round in the streets of New York and similar myths which are even today
entertained by many persons on the Continent. The statement was too
ludicrous to give a serious response to it. When asked by certain
well-meaning but ignorant people why they gave only female children to
the crocodiles, he could only ironically reply that probably it was
because they were softer and more tender and could be more easily
masticated by the inhabitants of the river in that benighted country.
Regarding the Jagannatha legend, the lecturer explained the old practice
of the Car-festival in the sacred city, and remarked that possibly a few
pilgrims in their zeal to grasp the rope and participate in the drawing
of the Car slipped and fell and were so destroyed. Some such mishaps had
been exaggerated into the distorted versions from which the good people
of other countries shrank with horror. Vivekananda denied that people
burned widows. It was true, however, that widows had burned themselves.
In the few cases where this had happened, they had been urged not to do
so by holy men, who were always opposed to suicide. Where the devoted
widows insisted, stating that they desired to accompany their husbands
in the transformation that had taken place, they were obliged to submit
themselves to the fiery tests. That is, they thrust Her hands within the
flames, and if they permitted them to be consumed, no further opposition
was placed in the way of the fulfilment of their desires. But India is
not the only country where women, who have loved, have followed
immediately the beloved one to the realms of immortality; suicides in
such cases have occurred in every land. It is an uncommon bit of
fanaticism in any country — as unusual in India as elsewhere. "No," the
speaker repeated, "the people do not burn women in India; nor have they
ever burned witches."

This latter touch is decidedly acute by way of reflection. No analysis
of the philosophy of the Hindu monk need be attempted here, except to
say that it is based in general on the struggle of the soul to
individually attain Infinity. One learned Hindu opened the Lowell
Institute Course this year. What Mr. Mozoomdar began, might worthily be
ended by Brother Vivekananda. This new visitor has by far the most
interesting personality, although in the Hindu philosophy, of course,
personality is not to be taken into consideration. At the Parliament of
Religions they used to keep Vivekananda until the end of the programme
to make people stay until the end of the session. On a warm day, when a
prosy speaker talked too long and people began going home by hundreds,
the Chairman would get up and announce that Swami Vivekananda would make
a short address just before the benediction. Then he would have the
peaceable hundreds perfectly in tether. The four thousand fanning people
in the Hall of Columbus would sit smiling and expectant, waiting for an
hour or two of other men's speeches, to listen to Vivekananda for
fifteen minutes. The Chairman knew the old rule of keeping the best
until the last.

</div>
