---
title: THE CLAIMS OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](is_india_a_benighted_country.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](concentration.htm)

  

## THE CLAIMS OF RELIGION

(*Sunday, 5th January*)

(Portions of this lecture were published in [Vol.
III](../../volume_3/lectures_and_discourses/unity_the_goal_of_religion.htm),
The published portions are reproduced here in small type. The year of
the lecture is not known.)

Many of you remember the thrill of joy with which in your childhood you
saw the glorious rising sun; all of you, sometimes in your life, stand
and gaze upon the glorious setting sun, and at least in imagination, try
to pierce through the beyond. This, in fact, is at the bottom of the
whole universe — this rising from and this setting into the beyond, this
whole universe coming up out of the unknown, and going back again into
the unknown, crawling in as a child out of darkness, and crawling out
again as an old man into darkness.

This universe of ours, the universe of the senses, the rational, the
intellectual, is bounded on both sides by the illimitable, the
unknowable, the ever unknown. Herein is the search, herein art the
inquiries, here are the facts; from this comes the light which is known
to the world as religion. Essentially, however, religion belongs to the
supersensuous and not to the sense plane. It is beyond all reasoning,
and not on the plane of intellect. It is a vision, an inspiration, a
plunge into the unknown and unknowable making the unknowable more than
known, for it can never be "known". This search has been in the human
mind, as I believe from the very beginning of humanity. There cannot
have been human reasoning and intellect in any period of the world's
history without this struggle, this search beyond. In our little
universe this human mind, we see a thought arise. Whence it rises we do
not know, and when it disappears, where it goes, we know not either. The
macrocosm and the microcosm are, as it were in the same groove, passing
through the same stages, vibrating in the same key.

I shall try to bring before you the Hindu theory that religions do not
come from without, but from within. It is my belief that religious
thought is in man's very constitution, so much so that it is impossible
for him to give up religion until he can give up his mind and body,
until he can stop thought and life. As long as a man thinks, this
struggle must go on, and so long man must have some form of religion.
Thus we see various forms of religion in the world. It is a bewildering
study; but it is not, as many of us think, a vain speculation. Amidst
this chaos there is harmony, throughout these discordant sounds there is
a note of concord; and he who is prepared to listen to it, will catch
the tone.

The great question of all questions at the present time is this: Taking
for granted that the knowable and the known are bounded on both sides by
the unknowable and the infinitely unknown, why struggle for that
unknown? Why shall we not be content with the known? Why shall we not
rest satisfied with eating, drinking, and doing a little good to
society? This idea is in the air. From the most learned professor to the
prattling baby, we are told, "Do good to the world, that is all of
religion, and don't bother your head about questions of the beyond." So
much so is this the case that it has become a truism.

But fortunately we *must* inquire into the beyond. This present, this
expressed, is only one part of that unexpressed. The sense universe is,
as it were, only one portion, one bit of that infinite spiritual
universe projected into the plane of sense consciousness. How can this
little bit of projection be explained, be understood, without knowing
that which is beyond? It is said of Socrates that one day while
lecturing at Athens, he met a Brâhmana who had travelled into Greece,
and Socrates told the Brahmana that the greatest study for mankind is
man. And the Brahmana sharply retorted, "How can you know man until you
know God?" This God, this eternally Unknowable, or Absolute, or
Infinite, or without name — you may call Him by what name you like — is
the rationale, the only explanation, the *raison d'etre* of that which
is known and knowable, this present life. Take anything before you, the
most material thing — take any one of these most materialistic sciences,
such as chemistry or physics, astronomy or biology — study it, push the
study forward and forward, and the gross forms will begin to melt and
become finer and finer, until they come to a point where you are bound
to make a tremendous leap from these material things into the
immaterial. The gross melts into the fine, physics into metaphysics in
every department of knowledge.

So with everything we have — our society, our relations With each other,
our religion, and what you call ethics. There are attempts at producing
a system of ethics from mere grounds of utility. I challenge any man to
produce such a rational system of ethics. Do good to others. Why?
Because it is the highest utility. Suppose a man says, "I do not care
for utility; I want to cut the throats of others and make myself rich."
What will you answer? It is out-Heroding Herod! But where is the utility
of my doing good to the world? Am I a fool to work my life out that
others may be happy? Why shall I myself not be happy, if there is no
other sentiency beyond society, no other power in the universe beyond
the five senses? What prevents me from cutting the throats of my
brothers so long as I can make myself safe from the police, and make
myself happy. What will you answer? You are bound to show some utility.
When you are pushed from your ground you answer, "My friend, it is good
to be good." What is the power in the human mind which says, "It is good
to do good", which unfolds before us in glorious view the grandeur of
the soul, the beauty of goodness, the all attractive power of goodness,
the infinite power of goodness? That is what we call God. Is it not?

Secondly, I want to tread on a little more delicate ground. I want your
attention, and ask you not to make any hasty conclusions from what I
say. We cannot do much good to this world. Doing good to the world is
very good. But can we do much good to the world? Have we done much good
these hundreds of years that we have been struggling — have we increased
the sum total of the happiness in the world? Thousands of means have
been created every day to conduce to the happiness of the world, and
this has been going on for hundreds and thousands of years. I ask you:
Is the sum total of the happiness in the world today more than what it
divas a century ago? It cannot be. Each wave that rises in the ocean
must be at the expense of a hollow some where. If one nation becomes
rich and powerful, it must be at the expense of another nation
somewhere. Each piece of machinery that is invented will make twenty
people rich and a twenty thousand people poor. It is the law of
competition throughout. The sum total of the energy displayed remains
the same throughout. It is, too, a foolhardy task. It is unreasonable to
state that we can have happiness without misery. With the increase of
all these means, you are increasing the want of the world, and increased
wants mean insatiable thirst which will never be quenched. What can fill
this want, this thirst? And so long as there is this thirst, misery is
inevitable. It is the very nature of life to be happy and miserable by
turns. Then again is this world left to you to do good to it? Is there
no other power working in this universe? Is God dead and gone, leaving
His universe to you and me — the Eternal, the Omnipotent the
All-merciful, the Ever-awakened, the One who never sleeps when the
universe is sleeping, whose eyes never blink? This infinite sky is, as
it were, His ever-open eye. Is He dead and gone? Is He not acting in
this universe? It is going on; you need not be in a hurry; you need not
make yourself miserable.

\[The Swami here told the story of the man who wanted a ghost to work
for him, but who, when he had the ghost, could not keep him employed,
until he gave him a curly dog's tail to straighten.\]

Such is the case with us, with this doing good to the universe. So, my
brothers, we are trying to straighten out the tail of the dog these
hundreds and thousands of years. It is like rheumatism. You drive it out
from the feet, and it goes to the head; you drive it from the head, and
it goes somewhere else.

This will seem to many of you to be a terrible, pessimistic view of the
world, but it is not. Both pessimism and optimism are wrong. Both are
taking up the extremes. So long as a man has plenty to eat and drink,
and good clothes to wear, he becomes a great optimist; but that very
man, when he loses everything, becomes a great pessimist. When a man
loses all his money and is very poor, then and then alone, with the
greatest force come to him the ideas of brotherhood of humanity. This is
the world, and the more I go to different countries and see of this
world, and the older I get, the more I am trying to avoid both these
extremes of optimism and pessimism. This world is neither good nor evil.
It is the Lord's world. It is beyond both good and evil, perfect in
itself. His will is going on, showing all these different pictures; and
it will go on without beginning and without end. It is a great gymnasium
in which you and I, and millions of souls must come and get exercises,
and make ourselves strong and perfect. This is what it is for. Not that
God could not make a perfect universe; not that He could not help the
misery of the world. You remember the story of the young lady and the
clergyman, who were both looking at the moon through the telescope, and
found the moon spots. And the clergyman said, "I am sure they are the
spires of some churches." "Nonsense," said the young lady, "I am sure
they are the young lovers kissing each other." So we are doing with this
world. When we are inside, we think we are seeing the inside. According
to the plane of existence in which we are, we see the universe. Fire in
the kitchen is neither good nor bad. When it cooks a meal for you, you
bless the fire, and say, "How good it is!" And when it burns your
finger, you say, "What a nuisance it is!" It would be equally correct
and logical to say: This universe is neither good nor evil. The world is
the world, and will be always so. If we open ourselves to it in such a
manner that the action of the world is beneficial to us, we call it
good. If we put ourselves in the position in which it is painful, we
call it evil. So you will always find children, who are innocent and
joyful and do not want to injure anyone, are very optimistic. They are
dreaming golden dreams. Old men who have all the desires in their hearts
and not the means to fulfil them, and especially those who have been
thumped and bumped by the world a good deal, are very pessimistic.
Religion wants to know the truth. And the first thing it has discovered
is that without a knowledge of this truth there will be no life worth
living.

Life will be a desert, human life will be vain, it we cannot know the
beyond. It is very good to say: Be contented with the things of the
present moment. The cows and the dogs are, and so are all animals, and
that is what makes them animals. So if man rests content with the
present and gives up all search into the beyond, mankind will all have
to go back to the animal plane again. It is religion, this inquiry into
the beyond, that makes the difference between man and an animal. Well
has it been said that man is the only animal that naturally looks
upwards; every other animal naturally looks down. That looking upward
and going upward and seeking perfection are what is called salvation,
and the sooner a man begins to go higher, the sooner he raises himself
towards this idea of truth as salvation. It does not consist in the
amount of money in your pocket, or the dress you wear, or the house You
live in, but in the wealth of spiritual thought in your brain. That is
what makes for human progress; that is the source of all material and
intellectual progress, the motive power behind, the enthusiasm that
pushes mankind forward.

What again is the goal of mankind? Is it happiness, sensuous pleasure?
They used to say in the olden time that in heaven they will play on
trumpets and live round a throne; in modern time I find that they think
this ideal is very weak, and they have improved upon it and say that
they will have marriages and all these things there. If there is any
improvement in these two things, the second is an improvement for the
worse. All these various theories of heaven that are being put forward
show weakness in the mind. And that weakness is here: First, they think
that sense happiness is the goal of life. Secondly, they cannot conceive
of anything that is beyond the five senses. They are as irrational as
the Utilitarians. Still they are much better than the modern Atheistic
Utilitarians, at any rate. Lastly, this Utilitarian position is simply
childish. What right have you to say, "Here is my standard, and the
whole universe must be governed by my standard?" What right have you to
say that every truth shall be judged by this standard of yours — the
standard that preaches mere bread, and money, and clothes as God?

Religion does not live in bread, does not dwell in a house. Again and
again you hear this objection advanced: "What good can religion do? Can
it take away the poverty of the poor and give them more clothes?"
Supposing it cannot, would that prove the untruth of religion? Suppose a
baby stands up among you, when you are trying to demonstrate an
astronomical theory, and says, "Does it bring gingerbread?" "No, it does
not," you answer. "Then," says the baby, "it is useless." Babies judge
the whole universe from their own standpoint, that of producing
gingerbread, and so do the babies of the world.

Sad to say at the later end of this nineteenth century that these are
passing for the learned, the most rational, the most logical, the most
intelligent crowd ever seen on this earth.

We must not judge of higher things from this low standpoint of ours.
Everything must be judged by its own standard, and the infinite must be
judged by the standard of infinity. Religion permeates the whole of
man's life, not only the present, but the past, present, and future. It
is therefore the eternal relation between the eternal Soul, and the
eternal God. Is it logical to measure its value by its action upon five
minutes of human life? Certainly not. But these are all negative
arguments.

Now comes the question: Can religion really do anything? It can.

Can religion really bring bread and clothes? It does. It is always doing
so, and it does infinitely more than that; it brings to man eternal
life. It has made man what he is, and will make of this human animal a
God. That is what religion can do. Take off religion from human society,
what will remain? Nothing but a forest of brutes. As I have just tried
to show you that it is absurd to suppose that sense happiness is the
goal of humanity, we find as a conclusion that knowledge is the goal of
all life. I have tried to show to you that in these thousands of years
of struggle for the search of truth and the benefit of mankind, we have
scarcely made the least appreciable advance. But mankind has made
gigantic advance in knowledge. The highest utility of this progress lies
not in the creature comforts that it brings, but in manufacturing a god
out of this animal man. Then, with knowledge, naturally comes bliss.
Babies think that the happiness of the senses is the highest thing they
can have. Most of you know that there is a keener enjoyment in man in
the intellect, than in the senses. No one of you can feel the same
pleasure in eating as a dog does. You can mark that. Where does the
pleasure come from in man? Not that whole-souled enjoyment of eating
that the pig or the dog has. See how the pig eats. It is unconscious of
the universe while it is eating; its whole soul is bound up in the food.
It may be killed but it does not care when it has food. Think of the
intense enjoyment that the pig has! No man has that. Where is it gone?
Man has changed it into intellectual enjoyment. The pig cannot enjoy
religious lectures. That is one step higher and keener yet than
intellectual pleasures, and that is the spiritual plane, spiritual
enjoyment of things divine, soaring beyond reason and intellect. To
procure that we shall have to lose all these sense-enjoyments. This is
the highest utility. Utility is what I enjoy, and what everyone enjoys,
and we run for that.

We find that man enjoys his intellect much more than an animal enjoys
his senses, and we see that man enjoys his spiritual nature even more
than his rational nature. So the highest wisdom must be this spiritual
knowledge. With this knowledge will come bliss. All these things of this
world are but the shadows, the manifestations in the third or fourth
degree of the real Knowledge and Bliss.

It is this Bliss that comes to you through the love of humanity; the
shadow of this spiritual Bliss is this human love, but do not confound
it with that human bliss. There is that great error: We are always
mistaking the: love that we have — this carnal, human love, this
attachment for particles, this electrical attraction for human beings in
society — for this spiritual Bliss. We are apt to mistake this for that
eternal state, which it is not. For want of any other name in English, I
would call it Bliss, which is the same as eternal knowledge — and that
is our goal. Throughout the world, wherever there has been a religion,
and wherever there will be a religion, they have all sprung and will all
spring out of one source, called by various names in various countries;
and that is what in the Western countries you call "inspiration". What
is this inspiration? Inspiration is the only source of religious
knowledge. We have seen that religion essentially belongs to the plane
beyond the senses. It is "where the eyes cannot go, or the ears, where
the mind cannot reach, or what words cannot express". That is the field
and goal of religion, and from this comes that which we call
inspiration. It naturally follows, therefore, that there must be some
way to go beyond the senses. It is perfectly true that our reason cannot
go beyond the senses; all reasoning is within the senses, and reason is
based upon the facts which the senses reach. But can a man go beyond the
senses? Can a man know the unknowable? Upon this the whole question of
religion is to be and has been decided. From time immemorial there was
that adamantine wall, the barrier to the senses; from time immemorial
hundreds and thousands of men and women haven't dashed themselves
against this wall to penetrate beyond. Millions have failed, and
millions have succeeded. This is the history of the world. Millions more
do not believe that anyone ever succeeded; and these are the sceptics of
the present day. Man succeeds in going beyond this wall if he only
tries. Man has not only reason, he has not only senses, but there is
much in him which is beyond the senses. We shall try to explain it a
little. I hope you will feel that it is within you also.

I move my hand, and I feel and I know that I am moving my hand. I call
it consciousness. I am conscious that I am moving my hand. But my heart
is moving. I am not conscious of that; and yet who is moving the heart?
It must be the same being. So we see that this being who moves the hands
and speaks, that is to say, acts consciously, also acts unconsciously.
We find, therefore, that this being can act upon two planes — one, the
plane of consciousness, and the other, the plane below that. The
impulsions from the plane of unconsciousness are what we call instinct,
and when the same impulsions come from the plane of consciousness, we
call it reason. But there is a still higher plane, superconsciousness in
man. This is apparently the same as unconsciousness, because it is
beyond the plane of consciousness, but it is above consciousness and not
below it. It is not instinct, it is inspiration. There is proof of it.
Think of all these great prophets and sages that the world has produced,
and it is well known how there will be times in their lives, moments in
their existence, when they will be apparently unconscious of the
external world; and all the knowledge that subsequently comes out of
them, they claim, was gained during this state of existence. It is said
of Socrates that while marching with the army, there was a beautiful
sunrise, and that set in motion in his mind a train of thought; he stood
there for two days in the sun quite unconscious. It was such moments
that gave the Socratic knowledge to the world. So with all the great
preachers and prophets, there are moments in their lives when they, as
it were, rise from the conscious and go above it. And when they come
back to the plane of consciousness, they come radiant with light; they
have brought news from the beyond, and they are the inspired seers of
the world.

But there is a great danger. Any man may say he is inspired; many times
they say that. Where is the test? During sleep we are unconscious; a
fool goes to sleep; he sleeps soundly for three hours; and when he comes
back from that state, he is the same fool if not worse. Jesus of
Nazareth goes into his transfiguration, and when he comes out, he has
become Jesus the Christ. That is all the difference. One is inspiration,
and the other is instinct. The one is a child, and the other is the old
experienced man. This inspiration is possible for everyone of us. It is
the source of all religions, and will ever be the source of all higher
knowledge. Yet there are great dangers in the way. Sometimes fraudulent
people try to impose themselves upon mankind. In these days it is
becoming all too prevalent. A friend of mine had a very fine picture.
Another gentleman who was rather religiously inclined, and a rich man,
had his eyes upon this picture; but my friend would not sell it. This
other gentleman one day comes and says to my friend, I have an
inspiration and I have a message from God. "What is your message?" my
friend asked. "The message is that you must deliver that picture to me."
My friend was up to his mark; he immediately added, "Exactly so; how
beautiful! I had exactly the same inspiration, that I should have to
deliver to you the picture. Have you brought your cheque?" "Cheque? What
cheque?' "Then", said my friend, "I don't think your inspiration was
right. My inspiration was that I must give the picture to the man who
brought a cheque for $100,000. You must bring the cheque first." The
other man found he was caught, and gave up the inspiration theory. These
are the dangers. A man came to me in Boston and said he had visions in
which he had been talked to in the Hindu language. I said, "If I can see
what he says I will believe it." But he wrote down a lot of nonsense. I
tried my best to understand it, but I could not. I told him that so far
as my knowledge went, such language never was and never will be in
India. They had not become civilised enough to have such a language as
that. He thought of course that I was a rogue and sceptic, and went
away; and I would not be surprised next to hear that he was in a lunatic
asylum. These are the two dangers always in this world — the danger from
frauds, and the danger from fools. But that need not deter us, for all
great things in this world are fraught with danger. At the same time we
must take a little precaution. Sometimes I find persons perfectly
wanting in logical analysis of anything. A man comes and says, "I have a
message from such and such a god", and asks, "Can you deny it? Is it not
possible that there will be such and such a god, and that he will give
such a message? And 90 per cent of fools will swallow it. They think
that that is reason enough. But one thing you ought to know, that it is
possible for anything to happen - quite possible that the earth may come
into contact with the Dog star in the next year and go to pieces. But if
I advance this proposition, you have the right to stand up and ask me to
prove it to you. What the lawyers call the *onus probandi* is on the man
who made the proposition. It is not your duty to prove that I got my
inspiration from a certain god, but mine, because I produced the
proposition to you. If I cannot prove it, I should better hold my
tongue. Avoid both these dangers, and you can get anywhere you please.
Many of us get many messages in our lives, or think we get them, and as
long as the message is regarding our own selves, go on doing what you
please; but when it is in regard to our contact with and behaviour to
others, think a hundred times before you act upon it; and then you will
be safe.

We find that this inspiration is the only source of religion; yet it has
always been fraught with many dangers; and the last and worst of all
dangers is excessive claims. Certain men stand up and say they have a
communication from God, and they are the mouthpiece of God Almighty, and
no one else has the right to have that communication. This, on the face
of it, is unreasonable. If there is anything in the universe, it must be
universal; there is not one movement here that is not universal, because
the whole universe is governed by laws. It is systematic and harmonious
all through. Therefore what is anywhere must be everywhere. Each atom in
the universe is built on the same plan as the biggest sun and the stars.
If one man was ever inspired, it is possible for each and every one of
us to be inspired, and that is religion. Avoid all these dangers,
illusions and delusions, and fraud and making excessive claims, but come
face to face with religious facts, and come into direct contact with the
science of religion. Religion does not consist in believing any number
of doctrines or dogmas, in going to churches or temples, in reading
certain books. Have you seen God? Have you seen the soul? If not, are
you struggling for it? It is here and now, and you have not to wait for
the future. What is the future but the present illimitable? What is the
whole amount of time but one second repeated again and again? Religion
is here and now, in this present life.

One question more: What is the goal? Nowadays it is asserted that man is
progressing infinitely, forward and forward, and there is no goal of
perfection to attain to. Ever approaching, never attaining, whatever
that may mean, and however wonderful it may be, it is absurd on the face
of it. Is there any motion in a straight line? A straight line
infinitely projected becomes a circle, it returns back to the starting
point. You must end where you begin; and as you began in God, you must
go back to God. What remains? Detail work. Through eternity you have to
do the detail work.

Yet another question: Are we to discover new truths of religion as we go
on? Yea and nay. In the first place, we cannot know anything more of
religion; it has been all known. In all the religions of the world you
will find it claimed that there is a unity within us. Being one with the
Divinity, there cannot be any further progress in that sense. Knowledge
means Ending this unity in variety. I see you as men and women, and this
is variety. It becomes scientific knowledge when I group you together
and call you hyenas beings. Take the science of chemistry, for instance.
Chemists are seeking to resolve all known substances into their original
elements, and if possible, to find the one element from which all these
are derived. The time may come when they will find the one element. That
is the source of all other elements. Reaching that, they can go no
further; the science of chemistry will have become perfect. So it is
with the science of religion. If we can discover this perfect unity,
then there cannot be any further progress.

When it was discovered that "I and my Father are one", the last word was
said of religion. Then there only remained detail work. In true religion
there is no faith or belief in the sense of blind faith. No great
preacher ever preached that. That only comes with degeneracy. Fools
pretend to be followers of this or that spiritual giant, and although
they may be without power, endeavour to teach humanity to believe
blindly. Believe what? To believe blindly is to degenerate the human
soul. Be an atheist if you want, but do not believe in anything
unquestioningly. Why degrade the soul to the level of animals? You not
only hurt yourselves thereby, but you injure society, and make danger
for those that come after you. Stand up and reason out, having no blind
faith. Religion is a question of being and becoming, not of believing.
This is religion, and when you have attained to that you have religion.
Before that you are no better than the animals. "Do not believe in what
you have heard," says the great Buddha, "do not believe in doctrines
because they have been handed down to you through generations; do not
believe in anything because it is followed blindly by many; do not
believe because some old sage makes a statement; do not believe in
truths to which you have become attached by habit; do not believe merely
on the authority of your teachers and elders. Have deliberation and
analyse, and when the result agrees with reason and conduces to the good
of one and all, accept it and live up to it."

</div>
