+++
title = "Prakīrṇaviṣayāḥ: Life, brains, warfare andxa0society"

+++
**1 On big brains**  
An occidentally conditioned person remarked that “we were making bad use
of the great brains we have evolved. Instead of using it for human
betterment, we were expending it on killing each other with
sophisticated weapons.” I could not but help smiling for we have long
held that t[he recent explosive growth of brain size in humans is a
likely signal of evolution due to biological
conflict](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/05/07/the-upper-story-in-a-few-pictures/).
Thus, we posit (like others who have independently done so) that
intraspecific and interspecific (e.g. with australopithecines, *Homo
naledi*, Neanderthals, Denisovans and the like over time) conflict led
to the escalation of brain growth in human lineages. After we emerged as
victors against our related species and eventually settled down as
farmers, we began a transition to domestication along with the animals
we had allowed to survive as domesticates for our needs. In course of
this domestication, it looks as though our brain size came down a notch.
Paralleling this, domestication in other animals also appears to have
caused a reduction in their brain sizes. In some cases, we see strong
evidence that this arose from the reduction in conflict. This
possibility was noticed early on by Charles Darwin himself: “ …no animal
is more difficult to tame than the young of the wild rabbit; scarcely
any animal is tamer than the young of the tame rabbit…” This has since
been confirmed by a modern study, which showed that the domestication of
the rabbit resulted in: 1) reduction in brain size relative to body
size; 2) a reduction in the amygdala and an enlargement of the medial
prefrontal cortex; 3) reduction in white matter throughout the brain
\[footnote 1\]. These changes have been proposed to result in a
decreased flight response in the domestic rabbit. Similarly, the
domestic pig and probably also the domestic cat and dog have smaller
brains than their wild counterparts. We saw a poignant illustration of
this in the form of a domesticated white lab mouse that had escaped from
the lab was savoring its newfound freedom. However, its lack of smarts
for life in the wild quickly made it a victim for a crow couple. Thus,
if the brain of an organism is an instrument in an arms-race, the
brain-size and the level of ambient biological conflict have a
positively correlated relationship. More generally, “losing the martial
edge” from domestication has also been seen on a civilizational scale —
for example, among the steppe peoples who transitioned to a sedentary
existence.

We do not as yet fully understand all the reasons why large-brained
organisms arose repeatedly among those with smaller brains. But once it
is in place, biological conflict can keep it growing in size. Several
birds on islands are renowned for their intelligence and might have even
bigger brains than their mainland counterparts \[footnote 2\]. At the
face of it, it might look paradoxical — an island usually has less
danger from predation and related conflicts than the mainland: think of
the flightlessness of the dodo or the solitaire. One hypothesis that
explains this is the opening of new niches on the island to the
colonizer, which increases intra-specific competition as its population
expands. Given the potential habitat and resource diversity, or
difficulty in accessing the latter on the island, the plasticity of
behavior and therefore a larger brain can be decisive in the
intra-specific conflict. An example of the use of a larger brain in
exploiting difficult resources is seen in the case of the cane toad
introduced to Australia. The toxic toad kills species like the
*Varanus*lizard that eat it resulting in a major decline in their
populations. On the other hand, the big-brained Torresian crow has
learned to rip it apart and eat it from the ventral side and thus avoid
its poison glands. Thus, the rise of smarter birds on islands via
intra-specific conflict could be related to the phenomenon that drove
the expansion of the human brain.

Recent studies providing constraints on the distribution of earth-like
exo-planets suggest that there must be ![\\le 6 \\times
10^9](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cle+6+%5Ctimes+10%5E9&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002 "\le 6 \times 10^9")
stars with Earth-like planets in the Milky Way. This is a large enough
number that it brings home the reality of Fermi’s paradox: “If there are
extra-solar system civilizations why have we not heard from them yet?”
One noted astronomer suggested that this might mean that human-type
intelligence is likely to be exceptional across the Milky Way. We take a
slightly more nuanced view informed by biology with regards to the
reality of Fermi’s paradox. It is clear that most organisms that
profoundly modify their host planet might not do so with any intention
of signaling to life forms on other planets. For example, cyanobacteria
altered the earth and made its atmosphere oxidizing resulting in a whole
lot of new dioxygen chemistry that made organisms like ourselves
possible. Cyanobacterial metabolites might signal the presence of life
to an observer on another planet, but this is hardly intentional.
Similarly, William Hamilton, just before his death, proposed that the
bacteria might have \`caused’ the emergence of atmospheric clouds to
disperse themselves or their spores. While this might seem far-fetched
at first sight, since the work by Sands we have known that bacteria can
nucleate clouds and ice (e.g. *Pseudomonas syringae*). More recently,
the role of marine bacteria in seeding Arctic clouds has been
demonstrated \[Footnote 3\]. Thus, there might be an “agency” on part of
the bacteria in visibly modifying the planetary atmosphere to facilitate
their spread. However, while it is likely that bacteria-like forms can
effectively signal the presence of life on a planet through more than
one means, they do not seem to be doing so with the intent of informing
aliens. This kind of signaling seems to need a large centralized brain
of the kind we have. Such brains are only present in animals among
earthly life and have evolved only a few times in the past 700-1000
million years animals have been on this earth: cephalopods, some
lineages of avian dinosaurs, some placental mammals. While we might not
fully understand why a lineage evolves a bigger brain than its sister
groups in the first place, a major driver of escalating growth appears
to be biological conflicts. Thus, on other planets too we expect
brain-like structures to evolve if they were to provide an edge in the
arms race rather than for signaling to aliens. Its growth will be driven
by the arms race and not the need for space exploration. Further, if
auto-domestication happens as a consequence it might eventually decline
in size. Thus, auto-domestication might be seen like how yogin-s
described siddhi-s — they come as byproducts but focusing on them can
take you down from the goal of yoga.

We have had the unique distinction of being born in the age of space
exploration. Some people, inspired by the excitement of it, have
remarked that space exploration might provide selective advantages by
allowing the colonization of new planets; hence, intelligent life should
eventually turn to such an endeavor. We take a dimmer view. First, we
believe such colonization might be an option for the basal
prokaryote-like life forms that are likely to widely populate the
universe. It might not be necessarily intentional but, like the seeding
of clouds and ice on earth by bacteria, certain adaptations might have
facilitated such escape and transmission especially in the earlier days
of the solar star cluster, and its cognates throughout the Milky Way.
However, for larger big-brained organisms like ourselves both the
physics and the biology make such prospects of such a gain fairly
unlikely. For the most part, space exploration is a byproduct of the
development of weapon delivery and surveillance systems, like rockets
and satellites, which actually mean something for the conflicts (i.e.
dual-use technology). Once the utility of space exploration for the main
product declines, the interest in space exploration for its own sake
will also be limited. In the best case, we could have many intelligent
civilizations that are “mining” nearby planetary bodies for various
resources that give them an edge. Thus, we would say that Fermi’s
paradox should be taken as the null hypothesis because theory predicts
that the primary driver of big brain-like structures would be biological
conflicts on the host planet, and space exploration would merely be its
rare sideshow.

Finally, we should note that a big brain is also a big memetic ecosystem
where viral [pathological memes can take
root](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/).
This probably goes hand-in-hand with domestication, which releases some
of the strong survival pressure that an organism faces in a natural
environment. For instance, on the wild steppe one has to ensure that
food is available to tide through the harsh winter months. This cuts out
a lot of the avenue for slacking. In contrast, in a city with a
well-provisioned supermarket supplying soft syrupy viands at an arm’s
reach and a low price takes the mind away from survival and allows for
slacking. Against this background, the emergence of diseases, like
[American
Naxalism](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/06/08/pandemic-days-the-fizz-is-out-of-the-bottle/),
which would otherwise reduce survivorship, can take root and thrive.
These new diseases of the mind along with their ancestral versions, i.e.
the unmāda-s from West Asia can eventually recycle the civilizational
state back to a more basic condition. Thus, the civilizational state we
are in would cycle up and down without for the most part reaching out to
life on other planets. The same would hold for them too.

**2 The parasite within**  
Small genomes, like those of small RNA or DNA viruses (e.g. the SV40
virus), are lean and mean. They code for little else beyond a minimal
apparatus to replicate their own nucleic acid and the bare essential
apparatus to take hold of the host systems for producing more of
themselves. In contrast, large viruses, like say a poxvirus, a
mimivirus, a pithovirus or a *Bacillus* virus G have giant genomes. In
addition to the replication apparatus, they code for a transcription
system, and have a degree of self-sufficiency and independence from the
host systems. They code for several elaborate means to more subtly
hijack and control the host in several ways. While the former class
primarily depends on fast replication of their little genomes to
overwhelm the host or at least get some copies of themselves made before
the host immunity overwhelms them, the latter is a different type of
player. They do not replicate as fast but compete hard with the host
while taking their own time to replicate their relatively large genomes
accurately. This means that they code for a diverse array of capacities
to keep the host immunity at bay even as they assemble their elaborate
copy-making machinery inside the host cell. A curious thing about such
larger viral genomes is that they invariable carry parasites within
their own genomes. These may take the form of introns, inteins, and
other mobile parasitic genetic elements that invade the genome and the
genes of the bigger viruses. The inteins and introns have been selected
to mediate their own splicing either at the level of the protein or the
RNA transcript. Thus, they do not fatally cripple their host. However,
they lodge themselves in genes like the DNA polymerase; hence, the
host-virus simply cannot get rid of these genomic parasites. Thus, it is
given that as genome sizes grow beyond a certain point, where they shift
to the paradigm of slower replication and harder competition, parasitic
elements make their home in them.

We have wondered if this phenomenon extends beyond nucleic acid
replicators. The bloated Microsoft and Adobe Software come to mind.
Another possible example is the growth of the LaTeX system. Thus, one
would expect that large complexes of memes are likely to be invaded by
smaller memetic parasites that they cannot get rid of. Similarly,
generationally transmitted social structures and strategies (overlapping
with memes) could also become home to freeloading smaller parasitic
systems. We first got a hint of its wider relevance from governmental
bureaucracies, where you find various, “inserts” whose absence would
make little difference to the functioning of the system. We then
observed the same within the otherwise robust structure of religions.
This would appear to be particularly so to a pure mīmāṃsaka for whom
every word in religion goes towards a ritual injunction. Thus, the
presence of extraneous stuff, what he may dismiss as “arthavāda”, would
be seen mostly as such textual freeloaders transmitting themselves much
like an intron or an intein in a genome. This comparison led us to
realize that even as the larger genomes might not be able to rid
themselves of such freeloading genetic material, these other systems
like texts or bureaucracies might also not be able to do so. Why? one
might ask, should selection not purge them? First, as we saw with the
inteins in the DNA polymerase, the cost of purging them might be higher
than letting them remain if some kind of “compromise” is reached.
Sometimes a cost against purging is imposed by an “addiction module”
(e.g. in toxin-antitoxin systems). Here, the intein splices itself and
thus make sure the DNA polymerase is functional after all. Second, the
robustness of the invaded systems might smear the effect of selection
into a band rather than a discrete line — therefore within that given
band, the variability (e.g. presence or absence of a freeloading genetic
parasite) results in no selectable difference in fitness. This implies
that the freeloaders can stay on as long as the cost imposed by their
persistence mechanisms does not exceed the allowed bandwidth. While we
began our example by comparing large viral genomes to small ones, this
is taken to an extreme in cellular genomes. The self-splicing machinery
of the introns was built into a more complex spliceosomal machinery that
confers a certain resistance to introns for the cellular genomes. On the
intron side, it allowed them to spread relatively benignly — freeloaders
but not imposing a cost enough to derail the system. In ciliates, we see
another such “compromise arrangement” taken to an extreme. The cellular
RNAi machinery together with the transposases from some of the
freeloading elements ensure that a functional “cellular genome” from
which they are excised is put together in the macronucleus. However,
they are passed on for posterity via the micronucleus where they remain
intact but inert.

The relationship between the selfish elements and the cellular genomes
is even more complicated: we have shown that transcription factors that
regulate gene expression and transcription regulatory elements to which
they bind repeatedly evolve from the freeloading mobile elements. So
over evolution, they offer raw material for innovation. Sometimes they
provide new weaponry for pathogenic organisms and new defensive
strategies for cells against other invaders. On the other side, they
might breakout to give rise to new viruses. Thus, viruses like
retroviruses share an ultimate common ancestry with freeloaders like
introns. Other mobile genomic parasites have similarly given rise to
viruses such as adenoviruses. Thus, over evolutionary time these
freeloaders come with both downsides and upsides. In an environment
where the system robustness allows them to be accommodated within the
bandwidth allowed by selection, they will persist and end up conferring
some advantages to the host genomes that maintain them as opposed to
those that do not.

We wondered if the social analogs of genetic systems might have a
similar two-sided relationship with respect to freeloaders. One might
protest that memes are fine but how can social systems be analogized? We
say that even if the mapping is not exact, these can be usefully brought
into the orbit of generalized genetic systems (much like the proposed
replication of clays). While we are not sufficiently motivated to
describe this in full here, we try to illustrate it by example. In
essence, it may be seen as a meme or its variant. Take a social system
like a government. Various positions interact in a network like a
network of genes in different functional ensembles: the Department of
Defense, the Department of Biotechnology, the Judiciary, etc. which
house within them various positions. Now, the individuals occupying a
given position can be seen as fungible, e.g. a judge position can be
filled by another person, but the position remains. So, it can be seen
as copying itself on that fungible substrate. It can expand too: the
same organization can be reproduced recursively from state to state. In
the least, the comparison made us realize that certain things that
people get very worked up by, such as apparently non-functional and
corrupt positions in a bureaucracy, are likely to arise organically and
will not go away easily. They might possess “addiction modules” like
toxin-antitoxin systems that bring the system down if an eviction is
attempted. Further, if there is strong selection that forces them to
become extinct it might also bring down other aspects of the
organization that are considered useful. We cannot rule out that over
evolutionary time some of the social freeloading positions (e.g.
positions relating to some branches of the humanities academia) offer
selective advantages to the system in certain environments. On the other
hand, such social positions can also provide the raw material for the
emergence of destructive elements that are more like viruses (e.g.
certain policing, religious and academic positions in society).

**3 War and innovation**  
There is a fractal structure to the organization of space. As a result,
we have few blue whales and elephants and lots and lots of bacteria.
Consequently, many more biological conflicts play out among bacteria —
there is a non-stop warfare between different bacteria and also between
bacteria and their viruses. These battles are life-and-death struggles —
as an old English tyrant gleefully remarked about how no quarter was
offered to the Hindus in the war of 1857 CE, so it is in these battles
fought by bacteria — “kill or get killed’’ is the name of the game. As a
result, natural selection has produced an extraordinary repertoire of
weaponry. We have shown that these bacterial conflicts are at the root
of all innovation in biology. The origin of eukaryotes was marked by
some revolutionary structural adaptations that rendered them immune to
some of the weaponry used in these conflicts. For example, the dominance
of the tailed bacteriophage was passé in eukaryotes. Eukaryotes mostly
do without weaponry like restriction-modification and CRISPR systems.
Thus, the armaments of the old-world suddenly came to a stop in the
eukaryotic realm. Notable, the eukaryotic reorganization also meant that
they were going to less innovative not just in terms of weaponry but
more generally in terms of inventing new stuff. Yet, eukaryotes show
remarkable systems innovations: where does this come from? What we found
was that they get most of their innovation from the “weapons systems” of
bacteria through lateral gene transfer and reuse them mostly as
“peacetime technology” for various cellular systems like their chromatin
structure, RNA-processing, signaling inside and between cells,
multicellularity, etc. and also their own defense needs. This brought
home an important point that without the pressure of warfare there will
be no fancy peacetime technology.

In human endeavor, we see this in the form of various technologies,
including space exploration and medicine, being driven by the military
needs as the engine of innovation. Hence, we suggest that the utopian
society of peaceniks would cease to innovate meaningful technology.
However, it is conceivable it turns its mind towards making technology
that is primarily of the form of addictions that might eventually render
it supine before a more robust culture from within or without.

**4 The eternal struggle**  
One major difference between the Abrahamistic counter-religions of the
Messianic variety and the Indo-European religions is the single endpoint
utopianism preached by the former. This is the driving force behind its
secular mutations, including that in whose grip the modern Occident is
currently convulsing. In contrast, at least since the breakup between us
and our Iranian cousins (of the Zoroastrian flavor), both sides had
ingrained in them the concept of the eternal or repeated episodic
struggle of the deva-s and asura-s. It probably was already present in
the ancestral matrix of the religion. On the Iranian side, Zarathustra
caricatures it in the form of the lands the āirya-s being repeatedly
invaded by Angra Mainyu. In fact, this dualism is very important to the
philosophy of the Zoroastrian branch of the Iranians. On our side, the
Mahābhārata and the purāṇa-s emphasize the repeated cycles of the
devāsura-saṃgrāma with neither side gaining total victory. Individual
victories might be achieved: Namuci, Vṛtra, Naraka, Prahlāda, Andhaka,
and so on might be eliminated but new ones arise. Most importantly,
right from the brāhmaṇa texts, we have the emphasis on different upāya-s
being used by either side to gain victory; in each new round, a new
upāya is needed for victory. Through the teachings of the diverse
upāya-s, the brāhmaṇa texts lay out important teachings for humans in
daily life. We hold that the devāsura-saṃgrāma is one of the most
important teachings of our tradition and a mythic codification of one of
the highest realizations of the Indo-Iranians. It essentially tells us
the truth of nature — the eternal struggle — like between prey and
predator or virus and host or producer and consumer. For example,
[T4-like bacteriophages and bacteria have been fighting it out for more
than 2 billion
years](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/),
which from long before the Pleiades existed in the sky. Thus, this
battle is eternal, and each round can be won by a new upāya which
becomes part of the genetic record, much the upāya-s recorded in the
brāhmaṇa passages. New ūpāya-s may be discovered which supersede old
ones, much like the brāhmaṇa telling us of how the old performance of a
ritual might be replaced by a new brahmavāda. The Hindu-s need to pay
heed to this teaching. Just as cellular life and the viruses are locked
in eternal conflict, so also are we with counter-religious viruses of
the mind. They will mutate and new forms will arise, and we have to keep
trying new upāya-s. There will be losses, but the end goal is not to
become extinct — one cannot avoid losses entirely. Thus, rather than
hoping for a utopia to be ushered in, like that wished for by our
enemies upon our total destruction under a leader like the āmir al
momīn, we have to be prepared for round after round of saṁgrāma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnote 1 <https://www.pnas.org/content/115/28/7380>  
Footnote 2 <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-05280-8>  
Footnote 3 10.1029/2019GL083039
