+++
title = "Leaves from the scrapbook"

+++
There were extensive memoirs in the form of electronic scrapbooks of
Somakhya, Lootika and some members of their circle. Those in the know
read the available excerpts due to matters of considerable interest
being recorded in them. Other parts were written in a cryptic language
that most could not understand what was really in them. These leaves are
from the record of Lootika; some of what is contained in them might have
a parallel version in Somakhya’s record.

Entry 22; mārgavakra-mīna, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle: These summer
days Vrishchika and I sleep on the terrace. We are often up late talking
and duly wake up late too, much to our parents dislike. We watch with
awe the starry vault turn above us, looking out for meteors, Ulka-s,
which are pratyakṣa-s of the dreadful elephant-headed Vināyaka deva-s,
four in number created by the mighty Skanda. We often try to catch the
faintest objects on good nights. Vrishchika fills me in on the work she
is  doing on the genetics of subtler visible quantitative traits in
humans and we break our heads about the many problems in our
investigation before lapsing into a pleasant sleep dreaming of being in
the embrace of our kāmin-s against their firm chests. Many aspects of
such a study have been surprisingly neglected as it was derided as no
better than disreputable things like phrenology, physiognomy, racism and
the like. While with my assistance Vrishchika has a good handle of how
to study and understand the actual sequence variation at various loci,
we are hard-pressed with many aspects of the quantitative genetics.
Somakhya has a long distance friend named Indrasena with whom he is
close and often in touch though he has seen him only once or twice. He
is from the distant city of Udyānapurīṣa where Somakhya’s cousins
Mandara and Saumanasa live. This Indrasena is a jack of many trades and
I would love to do intellectual battle with him and over all emerge his
superior. But he is quite a master of quantitative genetics and Somakhya
has introduced Vrishchika to him to get to help with her roadblocks. I
suspect Vrishchika has taken quite a fancy for him and might even
combine forces with him against me if such a battle were to be joined.
In any case they are now able to detect some interesting signals in our
data which we could investigate further.

My classmate Sumalla (Sumallā) is considered very beautiful and desired
by many males in my class and beyond. However, Vrishchika identified
certain subtle physiognomic traits that made her infer based on her
current analysis that Sumalla would develop a metabolic condition
starting as early as her 25th year that will ruin her good looks and
even make her less desirable by the time she nears her 30th year. She
volunteered to be a data point and Vrishchika has remarkably detected
four informative polymorphisms in the transcription factor-encoding
genes NKX2-6, SMAD6, and MEIS1 and the neuropeptide gene NMU, which make
it likely indeed that Sumalla would develop the condition Vrishchika has
prognosticated. I wondered how the news should be broken to her but
Vrishchika seemed quite happy to handle that – after all she’s the one
who is going to be a physician. This brings me back to an interesting
evolutionary angle which I had discussed at some length with Somakhya:
why is it that such variation has survived? Perhaps the earlier age of
mating allowed such variation to pass through is one hypothesis. An
alternative is that in the past the extent of food availability selected
for these traits that are deleterious in today’s dietary landscape. A
further alternative is they were protective against infectious
disease(s) that are no longer as threatening to fitness as the metabolic
condition these variations facilitate. I wonder if Indrasena will have
any success at all in obtaining DNA from skeletons he has identified in
a cemetery that he believes comes form a time before the coming of the
ārya-s to India.

Entry 23; madhu-biḍāla, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle: Vrishchika is
making clones for making recombinant Neuromedin (NMU). I have asked her
to also make a clone of a CDC123-like ATP-grasp enzyme from
*Legionella*, which I intend using in the ambitious protein “stapling”
experiment. For the past several nights we have seen a new star appear
in Cygnus between the stars forming base of the neck and the head of the
goose. As a result Vrishchika and I had a tangential conversation on
what the beings on various planets around stars along the Milky Way
stretching above us might be thinking even as they look out into their
skies. Whether there would be beings out there wondering, just as we
are, if someone is watching their star from a planet around another
star. It made me feel that one area where we have a deeply limiting
lacuna in our knowledge is the range of forms life and intelligence on
other worlds might assume.

Entry 24; cala-saṃkhya, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle: I wished to
learn about the new star we had seen appear in Cygnus; so I went to meet
Somakhya. He too was excited about it and informed me that that it was a
pulsating red giant called
![\\chi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cchi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\chi") Cygni having reached its maximum. It is a Mira-type variable,
whose prototypical star Mira in Cetus he had shown me few years earlier.
Thereafter, I had such a engrossing session with Somakhya. It all began
when I asked Somakhya about the variability of the star
![\\eta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ceta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\eta") Aquilae which we had noted waiting for sleep to overtake us. He
informed me that it was a pulsating star called a Cepheid. From there we
moved on to a discussion of oscillators other than the ![\\sin
(x)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csin+%28x%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sin (x)")-like functions. Somakhya had taught me the van der Pol
equation a couple of years ago when explaining how one numerically
solves differential equations but I had not paid much attention to its
specifics. Today he showed me how some forms of the vdP equation
produced oscillations which could show a bit of chaotic behavior. Forms
of the vdP are good simulators of the curves of (semi)regular pulsating
variables and we played with them a little trying to recapitulate what
Somakhya explained to me as being the Blazhko phenomenon in Cepheid
variability i.e. the periodic modulation of the basic mode of pulsation.

Entry 25; cala-stṛ, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle:

![reaction\_kinetics](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/reaction_kinetics.png?w=640)

*Simple reaction kinetics*

The session I had with Somakhya was so exciting that I had to try to
relay all I had learned to my sisters. To give them some background I
began by explaining simple chemical kinetics using simple differential
equations. Even little Jhilli was able grasp much of it suggesting she
is coming of age. It was a good revision for me; hence, I am recording
the highlights here. After we had discussed the vdP equation Somakhya
and I had segued into other types of oscillations in nature. I am quite
conversant with the simple prey-predator population dynamics model: the
prey is growing at an exponential rate depending on its population size
at time t in a food-rich environment. When prey and predator meet the
prey is killed, so its population growth rate is negatively affected by
this interaction, which scales as the product of the prey and predator
population sizes. In the case of the prey its population grows when it
gets food so its growth rate scales as the product of the prey and
predator populations while it decreases due on death from inter-predator
conflict and migration which are proportional to prey population at time
t. This gives us the well-known Lotka-Volterra equation.

![lv](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/lv.png?w=640)

*Lotka-Volterra prey-predator population oscillations*

Then Somakhya introduced me to two interesting equation systems that
have been discovered by mathematicians \[Footnote 1\] which can be seen
as different variants of the simple LV equation that describes in
population oscillations of prey and predator locked in conflict.

![lv\_chaos](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/lv_chaos.png?w=640)

*Emergence of chaotic population dynamics in a simple system of 3
complexly interacting species*

The first of these can be seen as a model describing population dynamics
of 3 complexly interacting species X, Y and Z. X, like in the LV system,
grows at an exponential rate proportional to its population at time t.
Its growth rate is also similarly proportional to another symbiotic
species Z, which might be producing metabolites useful for its growth.
In contrast, its growth rate is depressed by its encounter with a
parasite Y; thus the decrease in growth rate is proportional to the
product of the X and Y populations as in the simple LV system. Like in
the simple LV system it grows at a rate proportional to encountering the
species X and directly deriving nutrition from it; thus its growth rate
is proportional to product of the X and Y populations. Additionally, the
growth of Y benefits from metabolites which X produces even without Y
directly feeding on X. As a result the total positive dependency of the
growth rate of Y is proportional
![X^2Y](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=X%5E2Y&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"X^2Y"). Like in the simple LV equation Y again loses individuals to
death and migration arising from inter-parasite conflict at a rate which
is proportional to its own population at time t. Y has no interaction
with Z; hence its growth rate shows no direct dependency on it. Now
species Z needs to directly interact with X to grow; hence, its growth
rate is positively correlated to product of the populations of X and Z.
On the other hand the increase of X by itself results in loss of
resources for Z’s growth, so its growth rate shows a further negative
dependency on population of X by itself and Z too loses a certain part
of its population to death and migration at a rate proportional to its
current population size. Remarkably, this system has a notable range of
parameters where the populations X, Y and Z vary chaotically. As a
result their population maps produce strange attractors similar to the
famous Rössler or Lorenz attractors.

![logistic\_4species\_chaos](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/logistic_4species_chaos.png?w=640)

*Chaotic population dynamics of four competing species with a basic
logistic growth*

The second model which Somakhya introduced me to was one where multiple
species are growing in an environment with a fixed carrying capacity,
i.e. logistic growth under the Verhulst equation. Additionally, they
also negatively interact with each other, i.e. compete with each other
as per the standard LV model. In such a model chaotic population
dynamics can emerge even with just 4 competing species. While with 4
species the chaotic picture is seen in a relatively small parameter
range, with more species chaos becomes much more common. What this tells
us is that chaotic dynamics are likely a regular feature of nature. One
of the species in this model under certain starting conditions seems
almost certainly prone to extinction before it makes a dramatic
oscillatory come back which would never have been expected unless you
had learned of such dynamics.

Entry 26; ugra, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle: I reflected with my
sisters on the general implications of what we had learned about chaotic
behavior in nature. It could produce many impressions some simultaneous
and some exclusive in the same or different persons. 1) Even among those
without much conceptual grasp or generative capability the strange
attractors could produce an aesthetic experience. Somakhya conjectured
that randomness does not produce an aesthetic experience in most people
– indeed few would call a random scatter of points as aesthetic. In
completely convergent attractors like an ellipse or the oblongs produced
by LV solutions several more people might have an aesthetic experience
but still it might not be very widespread. But with the strange
attractors certainly many more would have such an experience – something
which might be related to their fractal dimension. Perhaps, this is the
reason why the devāyatana-s of our ancestors tended towards increasingly
fractal states. We will have to explore this more but even this
aesthetic experience is perhaps much more in people who can grasp the
rahasya-s. 2) In the person characterized by quantitative arrogance, it
might produce a belief of being able to prognosticate complex systems.
Such a person might think that they could produce models to sufficiently
predict high degrees of complexity. 3) In a person who has studied
nature it might produce simultaneously a sense of insight and humility.
It makes one aware that behind the seemingly disordered state lie laws.
Chaos in itself should be seen as a given in nature, so there could be
selection for systems that factor in chaos. 4) For the historian trying
to prognosticate the fate of nations it produces a strange paradox. The
possibility of such chaotic behavior being common place has an almost
seductive hold for those who see it in action. Like in the case of one
with quantitative arrogance, one might think this is the way going
forward with even more complex equation systems being able to ultimately
predict history. Yet for all the swirling chaos in its undergirding
macro-history does seem far less chaotic – hence one might ask why?

Entry 27; harivāhana, Rākṣasa year of the first cycle: The dreadful box
returns: the red ellipse and the red hyperbola. All this began years ago
when we were in school. I have hitherto only recorded bits and pieces
out of fear of the thing. But now that it thrust itself back into my
existence I am moved to record the whole story supplemented by
Somakhya’s own records on the mathematical curiosities that surround
it.

It was shortly after I and my sisters had transferred to the new school,
an event which was to have a momentous impact on my existence.
Intentionally or unintentionally it seemed as if I had rather quickly
acquired some notoriety in my class and soon I had a lot of classmates
giving me company at almost every free moment in school. At lunch break
my classmates Vidrum and Hemalinga came to me and said they had a method
to trisect any angle with just a compass and a ruler. I had heard from
Somakhya that this was not generally possible and told them so. But they
showed me a construction which really seemed to trisect the angle when I
checked it using my protractor. I asked them as to how they had
discovered it. Vidrum said that he had this great geometry box whose
instruments would almost magically guide him towards drawing various
figures. Curiously, Vidrum nearly lost that box a month before that
incident and Vrishchika and I had found it and restored it to him. That
morning Vidrum drew one such a figure and was puzzling over it when
Hemalinga studied it and realized that it was a solution for the
trisection of the angle with just a compass and a straightedge
\[Footnote 2\].

![trisection\_approx](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/trisection_approx.png?w=640&h=551)

*Construction to approximately trisect a given angle*

Just then I caught Somakhya going to eat his lunch at a secluded spot
away from everyone else. I called him over and soon Vidrum and Hemalinga
described their construction with a triumphant laugh. Somakhya
half-smiled and said they were certainly wrong. Over the rest of the
lunch break he pored over the figure and proved using some geometry that
it was not a true trisector but a saw-tooth like function of the form:  
![y=\\arctan \\left(\\dfrac{2\\sin \\left(\\frac{x}{2}\\right)}{1+2\\cos
\\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}\\right)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Carctan+%5Cleft%28%5Cdfrac%7B2%5Csin+%5Cleft%28%5Cfrac%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D%5Cright%29%7D%7B1%2B2%5Ccos+%5Cleft%28%5Cdfrac%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D%5Cright%29%7D%5Cright%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"y=\\arctan \\left(\\dfrac{2\\sin \\left(\\frac{x}{2}\\right)}{1+2\\cos \\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}\\right)")  
He called it the approximate trisector and showed that it rather closely
approximated
![y=\\dfrac{x}{3}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Cdfrac%7Bx%7D%7B3%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"y=\\dfrac{x}{3}") in the domain ![-\\dfrac{4\\pi}{3} \\leq x \\leq
\\dfrac{4\\pi}{3}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=-%5Cdfrac%7B4%5Cpi%7D%7B3%7D+%5Cleq+x+%5Cleq+%5Cdfrac%7B4%5Cpi%7D%7B3%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"-\\dfrac{4\\pi}{3} \\leq x \\leq \\dfrac{4\\pi}{3}")

![trisection\_approx\_function](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/trisection_approx_function.png?w=640)

*The approx-trisector function*

Using this function he established that at ![x \\approx
124.3^o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=x+%5Capprox+124.3%5Eo&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"x \\approx 124.3^o") the difference between the real and this
approximate trisection was
![-1^o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=-1%5Eo&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"-1^o"). Thus, for the angles we had tried it was close or below the
resolution of my protractor. Hemalinga, who was known in the school for
his prodigious mathematical capacity, seemed a bit red-faced and
Somakhya rubbed it in a bit further after calculating the first term of
the Maclaurin series of approx trisector showing it was
![y=\\dfrac{x}{3}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Cdfrac%7Bx%7D%7B3%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"y=\\dfrac{x}{3}") thus proving why it seemed to work. Two years ago
Hemalinga ran into us, and as though to make a point to Somakhya, showed
us that he had integrated by hand the approx trisector function –
something which filled a whole page. He felt very pleased when Somakhya
remarked that he could never done that without a computer.

That incident aside, coming back to the the matter at hand, by the end
of that school day both Somakhya and I were feeling strangely unwell. I
remarked that it might because we had not eaten since morning having
skipped lunch due to the pursuit of the approx trisector. However, it
did not go away and we were mysteriously unwell for 3 days without any
apparent cause and during that illness had a disturbed sleep from the
repeated apparition of a saw shaped like the approx-trisector function
cutting through us. In course of the summer vacations that year Somakhya
smashed his own finger due to my closing his eyes shortly after
establishing the properties of a geometric figure which Vidrum had
drawn. Early the next year a girl in our class to whom Vidrum was close
had died mysteriously right in cemetery near his house. I distinctly
remember Vidrum picking up his geometry box from her desk the day after
the two great kṣatriya-s who respectively delight in svāhā and svadhā
had visited her.

Sometime around the middle of that semester with the boring exams
temporarily past us, Somakhya pointed to a purple velvet bag lying on
the parapet below the window beside which his desk was stationed at
school. He used to be curious about its contents. Hence, one day after
school he climbed on to the compound wall and jumped forward to hold on
to the parapet and clamber on to it. Thus, he reached the bag that
intrigued him so much. But even as he picked it up the whole parapet
came crashing down. Luckily, other than being dusted up he was not hurt
and our land unlike that of the mleccha-s had no surveillance device for
anyone other than me and Vrishchika to know what had really happened.
From the bag he retrieved a sturdy geometry box which had elegant
instruments, a slide rule with fine calibrations and stencils of
ellipses, circles and hexagons and a remarkably smooth curve-fitting
tape. I immediately recognized this distinctive box as being that of
Vidrum and informed Somakhya that it was so. He decided to repatriate it
to Vidrum the next day. To my utter surprise Vidrum refused to take it
and even denied that the distinctive box was his. I was utterly puzzled
by his denial but Somakhya was more than happy to keep it as its finder.
There was a śūlapuruṣīya inscription indicating that the box was made in
the Śarmaṇyadeśa – indeed modern Hindus never produced anything of that
quality and robustness.

Now this box was a strange one indeed. Somakhya remarked that the
curve-fitting tape would eerily take the shape of the locus he was
setting out to draw. I recalled Vidrum’s weird statement of how it would
almost magically draw figures for him. Somakhya had procured a nice
drawing board and a roll of math-paper to go with it. It was then that
he introduced me to recreational geometry and kindled my interest for
the first time in the subject. Notably, Vidrum had entirely lost
interest in drawing geometric figures thereafter and for that matter any
interest in geometry beyond passing the exams. Unlike in the past he
would ask us as to why we found it so interesting. One day Somakhya
presented me a simple geometrical challenge: to draw a conic given its
eccentricity. He had told me how his father had figured that one for
himself when he was 10 years of age but did not give Somakhya the
solution urging him to figure it out for himself. Still being daft at
geometry, I struggled to figure it out and as I was thinking about it I
lifted my hand to my forehead, still holding the compass from that box.
Then, I thought I had an idea and at that moment I flicked my hand off
my forehead. Somehow the compass had hooked my spectacles and as I did
so it pulled them off and hurled them against the wall with great force
damaging it. My parents were very angry with me that day as it was the
second set of glasses I had wrecked that month, having lost the first
while playing table tennis with Abhirosha.

The next day I was still fighting with the construction when Somakhya
gave me a hint: “The eccentricity of a conic is the tangent of an angle
between 0 to
![\\dfrac{\\pi}{2}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdfrac%7B%5Cpi%7D%7B2%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\dfrac{\\pi}{2}").” This immediately fired the light bulb in my head
and I took that geometry box and drew out the construction. As I placed
the curve-fitting tape to draw out the ellipse, it neatly folded into an
elliptical path almost magically. I was amazed and drew a nice ellipse
with the red pen which looked like an egg of the goddess Vinatā bearing
the aquiline god. I next drew a parabola with the angle set at
![\\dfrac{\\pi}{4}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdfrac%7B%5Cpi%7D%7B4%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\dfrac{\\pi}{4}") I wanted to show this construction to my family, so
I carefully placed it in my file so that it might not get folded. That
night I explained the construction to my father and drew out the sheet
to show it him when to my anguish and embarrassment the parabola and the
ellipse had vanished even though the rest of the construction was
intact. The next day I showed it to Somakhya who was also surprised by
how cleanly the conics had vanished. He had seen them himself and
wondered how that could be. He brought out the red pen and drew them
again himself. We ensured they were there and I again put the sheet into
my file. That afternoon just before leaving home I checked the sheet
again and the conics had vanished again. Startled I just threw sheet
away and went home.

Some days later Somakhya had shown me how to genuinely trisect any angle
using a hyperbola. He had again constructed a red hyperbola and
demonstrated the construction to me. He was then talking of some
peculiar properties of a related parabola and ellipse which were
approximate dividers of the angle in certain ratios. He then gave the
sheet with the construction for me to repeat it with my own substandard
instruments. That evening after school Somakhya was approached by a
classmate whose name I do not recall clearly. He belonged to a community
previously classified as a depressed class and his dark grayish yellow
complexion and facial features suggested that most of his ancestry
derived from the mysterious tribal peoples who inhabited India before
the coming of the later waves of humans. That guy hardly had any
intellectual proclivities to be able hold even a limited conversation
with Somakhya but he was perhaps the only guy in the class who had a
deep fancy for the paper objects that Somakhya made following the
Japanese way (Some of our teachers verily hated Somakhya for his love
for this art which was compounded by his utter disdain towards some of
them). Indeed, Somakhya used to remark that this paper folding technique
of the easterner islanders marked them as a people of great creativity.
Hence, whenever that guy would come with sheets of paper Somakhya would
indulge him and fold those objects, like an eagle, a bear, a starfish, a
walrus and boxes of different types. That guy for his part would collect
and neatly preserve Somakhya’s creations in a large box. Thus, that day
as Somakhya was folding paper, a lout who was also in our class, whom we
knew as Sphichmukh, surreptitiously stole his bag with the geometry box
and his drawing board and swiftly made away.

Somakhya was utterly disappointed and the next day he asked me for he
sheet of paper on which he had drawn the hyperbolic trisection of an
angle, perhaps with a longing for the stolen box. I took it out and we
looked at each other in horror: the hyperbola had utterly vanished\! I
could read Somakhya’s mind that he was beginning to have conflicting
feelings about the box. However, he could not take the theft lying down.
Via several inquiries he obtained evidence that the thief was
Sphichmukh. He decided to recover the stuff and said that he was setting
out with Sharvamanyu and Vidrum to punish Sphichmukh and seize the
stolen stuff. I saw them mount their bikes and tail Sphichmukh after
school. Knowing that Sphichmukh was a lout with other hoodlums as
friends they had armed themselves for the exploit. Somakhya had a
bicycle chain, Vidrum a nunchaku, and Sharvamanyu a knife. Seeing all
this I felt a mixture of fear, curiosity, and excitement and followed
them on my bike at a safe distance to see what would happen. As they
closed in on Sphichmukh he realized that his game was up, but given his
usual temperament he furiously rode to the edge of a pond and threw the
bag with the geometry box and Somakhya’s drawing board into the murky
waters where buffaloes bathed. The three were livid with fury and it
seemed they would have give Sphichmukh himself a jalasamādhi; I feared
they could land in prison themselves from that. So I pedaled hard to
quickly reach the three of them and suggested that rather than smiting
Sphichmukh or shoving him into the pond they should complain to the
school authorities and I volunteered as an additional witness for
Sphichmukh’s crime. For some reason Vidrum then rather passionately
asked Somakhya to let go off the box and forget about it.

Perhaps, a bit mollified by my sight they desisted from a direct attack
and Somakhya complained as suggested. However, poor Somakhya had little
traction with the school authorities; much to his chagrin, they informed
him that since the constructions he was drawing and the board were not
part of the curriculum, which was being taught at school they would not
take any remedial action. They let off Sphichmukh after mildly lecturing
him about the impoliteness of taking others things. Somakhya revealed to
me then that more than the loss of the box which he had himself obtained
for free he had lost something more precious with it. In the same bag he
had kept a khārkhoḍā with the yantra of the pūrvāṃnāya with the trident
and the three bhairavī-s and the 3 supine bhairava-s. With the loss of
the bag he also lost his siddhi of the mantra-s of the pūrvāṃnāya.

Now we come back to the present. Starting this week we have changed our
schedule due to much haranguing by our parents. All four of us get up
earlier and bike to the pond and run thrice around it. Thereafter
Vrishchika and Varoli return home because they spend a couple of hours
preparing for their respective entrance exams before continuing with all
the fun science we are doing. They seem more sincere in this business
than I ever was. However, I and little Jhilli, being more carefree, go
to the adjacent hall to play table-tennis for some time along with
Abhirosha. Abhirosha is attempting a difficult exam for whatever she
wished to do, which was quite removed from my path of life.
Nevertheless, that exam had several stiff mathematical tests. I had
trained her the previous year for her university entrance exam and knew
that she was quite capable of surviving the impending tests in algebra,
calculus and numbers. But she does not have much of flourish in geometry
so she is back to consult me. Thus, I and Jhilli decided to look at her
problems. There was a problem of polygons whose areas and circumferences
approximate
![\\pi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cpi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\pi"). I remembered that Somakhya’s father had once posed that to me
and Vrishchika – he wanted to see for himself if we were really what
what people said about us. I let Jhilleeka solve that one. Then she took
out a sheet of math-paper and showed a failed attempt of a construction
of what should have been a Cartesian oval on it. As she showed it she
pointed to some unnecessary lines and remarked: “Hell, where did these
vertical lines come from out of the blue\! This is is spooky.” Just then
I caught sight of her geometry box and my jaw literally dropped: “How on
earth did you get that box?” Abhirosha: “Actually, that’s bit strange. I
found it by chance on the bank of the pond sometime ago.” I looked at it
more closely and asked Abhirosha: “Did it come with a bag?” Abhirosha:
“Not it was all by itself dented and worn but the instruments inside
were intact. Seems like the famous German engineering.” I noticed that
the dent corresponded to it being trampled by the hoof of a buffalo. Now
I was not surprised by the strange lines that seemed to have appeared by
themselves. More Abhirosha told me of it, it was apparent that our old
box had come back into our lives again. I have sent an email to Somakhya
detailing these strange events. I also sent one to Vidrum inquiring
about the box. He responded rather quickly saying : “You guys dabble
with such things anyhow. You can take care of him and please don’t get
me into this matter again. I believe he was perhaps a civil engineer
from a town among the Karṇāṭa-s known as Hiriyuru.

:::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: e.g. works of Sprott and the like

Footnote 2: The construction goes thus:  
1\) To trisect angle A in this case
![57^o](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=57%5Eo&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"57^o") draw circular arc BC cutting the two rays of the angle at B and
C.  
2\) Then bisect angle A to intersect ![\\widehat{BC}
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cwidehat%7BBC%7D+&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\widehat{BC} ") at point D. Connect Point D to point B and C to get
segments
![\\overline{DB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BDB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{DB}") and
![\\overline{DC}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BDC%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{DC}").  
3\) Trisect
![\\overline{DB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BDB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{DB}") to get point H as the beginning of the 3rd segment of
trisected
![\\overline{DB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BDB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{DB}").  
4\) Join point A to H to get
![\\overrightarrow{AH}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverrightarrow%7BAH%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overrightarrow{AH}"). ![\\angle{BAH} \\approx \\dfrac{\\angle
BAC}{3}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%7BBAH%7D+%5Capprox+%5Cdfrac%7B%5Cangle+BAC%7D%7B3%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle{BAH} \\approx \\dfrac{\\angle BAC}{3}").  
Let the approximate trisection of ![\\angle
BAC=x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle+BAC%3Dx&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle BAC=x") be ![\\angle BAH=
\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle+BAH%3D+%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle BAH= \\beta"). From construction ![\\angle BAD =\\dfrac
{x}{2}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle+BAD+%3D%5Cdfrac+%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle BAD =\\dfrac {x}{2}") and ![\\angle BAD =\\dfrac
{x}{2}-\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle+BAD+%3D%5Cdfrac+%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D-%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle BAD =\\dfrac {x}{2}-\\beta"). In
![\\triangle{ABD}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle%7BABD%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\triangle{ABD}") we get from construction ![\\angle ABD=\\angle
BDA](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle+ABD%3D%5Cangle+BDA&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle ABD=\\angle BDA"). Using sine rule we get:  
![\\dfrac{\\sin(\\beta)}{\\overline{BH}}=\\dfrac {\\sin
(ABH)}{\\overline{AH}}=\\dfrac
{\\sin(x/2-\\beta)}{\\overline{DH}}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdfrac%7B%5Csin%28%5Cbeta%29%7D%7B%5Coverline%7BBH%7D%7D%3D%5Cdfrac+%7B%5Csin+%28ABH%29%7D%7B%5Coverline%7BAH%7D%7D%3D%5Cdfrac+%7B%5Csin%28x%2F2-%5Cbeta%29%7D%7B%5Coverline%7BDH%7D%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\dfrac{\\sin(\\beta)}{\\overline{BH}}=\\dfrac {\\sin (ABH)}{\\overline{AH}}=\\dfrac {\\sin(x/2-\\beta)}{\\overline{DH}}")

From the construction we get ![\\overline{BH}=2
\\overline{DH}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BBH%7D%3D2+%5Coverline%7BDH%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{BH}=2 \\overline{DH}")  
Thus we have: ![\\sin (\\beta)=2\\sin
(x/2-\\beta)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csin+%28%5Cbeta%29%3D2%5Csin+%28x%2F2-%5Cbeta%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sin (\\beta)=2\\sin (x/2-\\beta)")

![\\sin (\\beta)=2\\left(\\sin (x/2)\\cos
(\\beta)-\\cos(x/2)\\sin(\\beta)\\right)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csin+%28%5Cbeta%29%3D2%5Cleft%28%5Csin+%28x%2F2%29%5Ccos+%28%5Cbeta%29-%5Ccos%28x%2F2%29%5Csin%28%5Cbeta%29%5Cright%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sin (\\beta)=2\\left(\\sin (x/2)\\cos (\\beta)-\\cos(x/2)\\sin(\\beta)\\right)")

![\\tan(\\beta)=2\\sin(x/2)-2\\tan(\\beta)\\cos(x/2)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctan%28%5Cbeta%29%3D2%5Csin%28x%2F2%29-2%5Ctan%28%5Cbeta%29%5Ccos%28x%2F2%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\tan(\\beta)=2\\sin(x/2)-2\\tan(\\beta)\\cos(x/2)")

![\\tan(\\beta)=\\dfrac{2\\sin(x/2)}{1+2\\cos(x/2)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctan%28%5Cbeta%29%3D%5Cdfrac%7B2%5Csin%28x%2F2%29%7D%7B1%2B2%5Ccos%28x%2F2%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\tan(\\beta)=\\dfrac{2\\sin(x/2)}{1+2\\cos(x/2)}")

Thus we get: ![\\beta= \\arctan \\left(\\dfrac{2\\sin
\\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}{1+2\\cos
\\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}\\right)](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbeta%3D+%5Carctan+%5Cleft%28%5Cdfrac%7B2%5Csin+%5Cleft%28%5Cdfrac%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D%5Cright%29%7D%7B1%2B2%5Ccos+%5Cleft%28%5Cdfrac%7Bx%7D%7B2%7D%5Cright%29%7D%5Cright%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\beta= \\arctan \\left(\\dfrac{2\\sin \\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}{1+2\\cos \\left(\\dfrac{x}{2}\\right)}\\right)")
