---
title: AN INDIAN ASCETIC

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [European Newspaper
Reports](european_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](maidenhead_adviser_oct_23_1895.htm)

## AN INDIAN ASCETIC

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 3, pp. 246-47.)

\[*Standard*, October 23, 1895\]

Since the days of Ramahoun \[Ram Mohan\] Roy, says the Standard, with
the single exception of Keshub Chunder \[Keshab Chandra\] Sen, there has
not appeared on an English platform a more interesting Indian figure
than the Brahman who lectured in Princes' \[Prince's\] Hall last night.
. . .

The lecture[1](#fn1) was a most fearless and eloquent exposition of the
pantheistic philosophy of the Vedanta school, and the Swami seems to
have incorporated into his system a good deal also of the moral element
of the Yoga school, as the closing passage of his lecture presented in a
modified form not the advocacy of mortification, which is the leading
feature of the latter school, but the renunciation of all so-called
material comforts and blessings, as the only means of entering into
perfect union with the supreme and absolute Self. The opening passages
of the lecture were a review of the rise of the grosser form of
Materialism in the beginning of the present century, and the later
development of the various forms of metaphysical thought, which for a
time swept materialism away. From this he passed on to discuss the
origin and nature of knowledge. In some respects his views on this point
were almost a statement of pure Fichteism, but they were expressed in
language, and they embodied illustrations, and made admissions which no
German transcendentalist would have used. He admitted there was a gross
material world outside, but he confessed he did not know what matter
was. He asserted that mind was a finer matter, and that behind was the
soul of man, which was immovable, fixed, before which outward objects
passed, as it were, in a procession, which was without beginning or end
— in other words, which was eternal, and finally which was God. He
worked out this pantheistic conception of the personal identity of man
and God with great comprehensiveness and an ample wealth of
illustration, and in passage after passage of great beauty, solemnity,
and earnestness. "There is only one Soul in the Universe", he said:

There is no "you" or "me"; all variety is merged into the absolute
unity, the one infinite existence — God.

From this, of course, followed the immortality of the soul, and
something like the transmigration of souls towards higher manifestations
of perfection. As already stated, his peroration of twenty minutes was a
statement of the doctrine of renunciation. In the course of it he made
some remorselessly disparaging criticism on the work that factories,
engines and other inventions, and books were doing for man, compared
with half a dozen words spoken by Buddha or Jesus. The lecture was
evidently quite extemporaneous, and was delivered in a pleasing voice,
free from any kind of hesitation.

[→](london_morning_post_oct_23_1895.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)The lecture was "Self-Knowledge", of which there is no
    verbatim transcript available.
