---
title: AN OCTOBER CLASS REVIEW

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [European Newspaper
Reports](european_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](light_jul_4_1896.htm)

## AN OCTOBER CLASS REVIEW

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 4, pp. 370-71.)

\[*Light*, October 28, 1896\]

On the sixth floor of one of the dismal but convenient Victoria-street
houses, we lately listened to a discourse by Swami Vivekananda — one of
a long series on the Hindoo Religionand Philosophy.[1](#fn1) . . . For
an hour and a half he spoke, without a note. It is true that the
discourse was rather a flow of remarks than a connected study, but it
was all keenly interesting.

The subject, in the main, was the Vedas, but we got excursions upon
Evolution, Modern Science, Idealism and Realism, the Supremacy of
Spirit, &c. On the whole, we gathered that the speaker was a preacher of
the universal religion of spiritual ascendency and spiritual harmony.
Certain passages from the Vedas — beautifully translated and read, by
the way — were charming in their bearing upon the humanness and sharp
reality of a life beyond the veil. One longed for more of this.

We were much impressed with the admission that in the Vedas there were
many contradictions, and that devout Hindoos never thought of denying
them nor reconciling them. Everyone was free to take what he liked. At
different stages and on different planes, all were true. Hence the
Hindoos never excommunicated and never persecuted. The contradictions in
the Vedas are like the contradictions in life — they are very real, but
they are all true. This seems impossible, but there is sound sense in
it. At all events, as regards excommunication and persecution, we only
wish the Christians could make the Hindoo's claim.

[→](../part_iii_indian_newspaper_reports/indian_newspaper_contents.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)"" Probably "Vedic Religious Ideals", delivered in
    London, England, on Wednesday, October 28, 1896, of which there is
    no verbatim transcript available.
