---
title: RESPONSE TO WELCOME

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](note.htm)

## RESPONSE TO WELCOME

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, pp. 83-84.)

*\[Editorial synthesis of four Chicago newspaper reports from:*

Herald, Inter Ocean, Tribune, *and* Record,

*ca. September 11, 1893\]*

(Cf. ["Response to Welcome", *Complete Works* I:
3-4](../../../volume_1/addresses_at_the_parliament/v1_c1_response_to_welcome.htm)
, for a somewhat different version.)

\[Sisters and Brothers of America,\]

It fills my heart with joy unspeakable to rise in response to the grand
words of welcome given to us by you. I thank you in the name of the most
ancient order of monks the world has ever seen, of which Gautama was
only a member. I thank you in the name of the Mother of religions, of
which Buddhism and Jainism are but branches; and I thank you, finally,
in the name of the millions and millions of Hindoo people of all castes
and sects. My thanks also to some of the speakers on the platform who
have told you that these different men from far-off nations will bear to
the different lands the idea of toleration which they may see here. My
thanks to them for this idea.

I am proud to belong to a religion which has taught the world both
tolerance and universal acceptance. We believe not only in universal
tolerance but we accept all religions to be true. I am proud to tell you
that I belong to a religion in whose sacred language, the Sanskrit, the
word exclusion is untranslatable. (Applause) I am proud to belong to a
nation which has sheltered the persecuted and the refugees of all
religions and all nations of the earth. I am proud to tell you that we
have gathered in our bosom the purest remnant of the Israelites, a
remnant of which came to southern India and took refuge with us in the
very years in which their holy temple was shattered to pieces by Roman
tyranny. I am proud to belong to the religion which has sheltered and is
still fostering the remnant of the grand Zoroastrian nation.

I will quote to you, brothers, a few lines from a hymn which every
Hindoo child repeats every day. I feel that the very spirit of this
hymn, which I remember to have repeated from my earliest boyhood, which
is every day repeated by millions and millions of men in India, has at
last come to be realized. "As the different streams, having their
sources in different places, all mingle their water in the sea; O Lord,
so the different paths which men take through different tendencies,
various though they appear, crooked or straight, all lead to Thee."

The present convention, which is one of the most august assemblies ever
held, is in itself an indication, a declaration to the world of the
wonderful doctrine preached in the *Gita*: "Whosoever comes to Me,
through whatsoever form I reach him, all are struggling through paths
that in the end always lead to me." Sectarianism, bigotry and its
horrible descendant fanaticism, have possessed long this beautiful
earth. It has filled the earth with violence, drenched it often and
often with human gore, destroyed civilization and sent whole nations
into despair. But its time has come, and I fervently believe that the
bell that tolled this morning in honor of the representatives of the
different religions of the earth, in this parliament assembled, is the
death-knell to all fanaticism (applause), that it is the death-knell to
all persecution with the sword or the pen, and to all uncharitable
feelings between brethren wending their way to the same goal, but
through different ways.

[→](02_chicago_record_sep_11_1893.htm)

</div>
