---
title: THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](13_minneapolis_journal_dec_15_1893.htm)

## THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, pp. 217-19.)

\[*Minneapolis Tribune*, December 15, 1893\]

Swami Vive Kananda, the Brahmin priest, was greeted by a packed house
last evening at the First Unitarian Church, when he appeared before his
second Minneapolis audience. Vive Kananda is a bright, quick witted
talker, ready at all points to attack or defend, and inserts a humor
into his speeches that is not lost upon his auditors. He spoke last
evening under the auspices of the Kappa Kappa Gammas of the University,
and the audience embraced a large number of earnest thinking men and
women, pleased to be enlightened upon the "Manners and Customs of
India," which was his chosen subject. (Of which there is no verbatim
transcript available. Cf. the preceding American newspaper report, ["A
witty Hindu"](13_minneapolis_journal_dec_15_1893.htm) , for other
highlights of the lecture.)

Robed in his native garb, with his hands for the most part clasped
behind his back, Kananda paces back and forth the narrow platform,
talking as he paces, with long pauses between his sentences, as if
willing that his words should sink into the deepest soil. His talk is
not so weighty that the frivolous mind may not appreciate some of his
sayings, but he also speaks a philosophy that carries gravest truth. He
tells of the manners and customs of India, of the divided life between
the male and female, of the reverence for and holiness of women, and
again of their degeneracy; of the calm and peaceful life, that yet is
not true life because it is not liberty; he speaks of the Mohammedans,
who form one-fifth of the Indian population, and that 65,000,000, equal
to the entire population of the United States. He describes the
magnificence of the temples, the art of the jugglers, who are the
gypsies of the Indian race, and he touches upon the superstitions of the
people, of how they fill the water jars and stand them in the doorway
before starting on a journey; he speaks of the metaphysical knowledge of
the plowman, who yet only knows that he "pays taxes to the government";
he admits the reverence of the Hindu for the river Ganges, and his ever
lingering wish that he shall die on its banks; he tells all these things
in a quiet, half supercilious voice that presently leads to some remark
on the American way of doing things, and then his audience is in a
ripple of laughter, and a tremor of clapping expresses amused
acknowledgement of his sarcasm. . . .

When some one at the close of his lecture asked him "What class of
people are reached and converted by the missionaries?" he quickly
replied, "You know as much about that, the American sees the reports, we
never do", he has turned the query into a cause for smiling, and while
the house regains its composure he paces quietly to and fro. The address
was followed with the closest attention and was supplemented by several
questions and answers among the audience, from whom he invited
interrogation.

[→](15_detroit_tribune_feb_18_1894.htm)

</div>
