---
title: CULTURE AT HOME

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](17_detroit_journal_feb_23_1894.htm)

## CULTURE AT HOME

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, p. 365.)

\[*Detroit Evening News*, February 25, 1894\]

——

ANECDOTES OF SWAMI VIVE KANANDA'S VISIT TO DETROIT.

Anecdotes of Swami Vive Kananda's visit are numerous and amusing — at
least they must have been amusing to him, al though a little humiliating
to the American self-love. One lady said:

"I really was ashamed at the contrast between the knowledge possessed by
him and by some of our Detroit men who consider themselves gentlemen of
culture. At one dinner party a gentleman asked Kananda what books he
would advise him to read on chemistry, whereupon the Hindu monk
responded with a long list of English works on this science, which one
would naturally expect an American to know more about than a Hindu.
Another gentleman followed by a request as to books on astronomy, to
which Kananda obligingly answered with another equally good list of
English astronomical works. But his growing astonishment reached its
climax when a lady spoke of 'The Christ,' and said, 'What do those words
mean?' He again furnished the desired information, but in a tone growing
slightly sarcastic."

Probably the choicest example of nineteenth century civilization and
culture was given by a lady, who asked Kananda if he liked the English.
He very naturally responded that he did not. Then she continued, with
fine tact, to pursue the subject still further by touching references to
that pleasant event, the Sepoy rebellion. As the Hindu grew excited she
smiled at him ironically and said:

"I thought I could disturb your philosophical Eastern calm."

[→](19_detroit_tribune_mar_11_1894.htm)

</div>
