---
title: KANANDA, THE PAGAN

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](18_detroit_evening_news_feb_25_1894.htm)

## KANANDA, THE PAGAN

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, pp. 410-16.)

\[*Detroit Tribune*, March 11, 1894\]

ATTACKED CHRISTIAN MISSIONS IN LAST NIGHT'S LECTURE.

——

AND HIS WORDS WERE WARMLY APPLAUDED

BY THE AUDIENCE.

——

CHRISTIAN NATIONS KILL AND MURDER, HE SAID, AND IMPORT

DISEASE INTO FOREIGN COUNTRIES, THEN ADD INSULT TO

INJURY BY PREACHING OF A CRUCIFIED CHRIST.

Swami Vive Kananda lectured to a very large audience at the Detroit
Opera House last night on "Christian Missions in India.", (Cf.
“Christianity in India”, [*Complete Works*, VIII:
214-9](../../../volume_8/notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures/christianity_in_india.htm)
, for a somewhat less comprehensive report of the same lecture.) One
could believe that the lecture was intended as an answer to the many
statements of missionaries which have been aimed at Kananda during the
past two weeks in this city.

Kananda was introduced by Honorable Thomas W. Palmer last night, who
recited a fable by way of preface. "Two knights of honor once met on the
field," he said, "and seeing a shield hanging on a tree they halted. One
said: 'What a very fine silver shield.' The other replied that it was
not silver but copper. Each disputed the other's statement until at last
they got off their horses, tied them to the tree, and drawing their
swords fought for several hours. After they were both well spent by the
loss of blood they staggered against each other and fell on the opposite
sides from where they had been fighting. Then one glanced up at the
pendant shield and said: 'You were right, my friend. The shield is
copper.' The other looked up and said: 'It is I who was mistaken. The
shield is silver.' If they had looked at both sides of the shield in the
first place it would have saved the loss of much blood. I think that if
we looked at both sides of every question there would be less argument
and fighting.

"We have with us tonight a gentleman who, from the christian standpoint
is, I suppose, a pagan. But he belongs to a religion which was old long
before ours was thought of by men. I am sure that it will be pleasant to
hear from the copper side of the shield. We have looked at it only from
the silver side. Ladies and Gentlemen, Swami Vive Kananda."

Kananda, who had remained seated on the stage during Mr. Palmer's
remarks, stepped to the front, clad in the orange robe and unique turban
of the Brahman \[*sic*\] priest, bowed in acknowledgement of the
welcoming applause, and launched at once into his subject.

What India Is

\[The Swami said:\]

I do not know about the efforts of christian missionaries in China and
Japan except through reading the books and literature on the subject,
but I can speak about the efforts of christianizing India. But before I
go into this I want to place before you an idea of what India is.

Then he explained in detail how the 300,000,000 inhabitants of India are
divided into castes, between which there can be no affiliation, how the
natives of the south cannot understand the language of the ones of the
north, and vice versa. He told how the lower caste lived on the flesh of
dead animals, and never bathed their bodies, and how impossible it would
be for the higher class to mingle with them, although they were granted
the protection of the same laws.

He referred to the first appearance of the christians in an attempt to
evangelize the followers of Buddah \[Buddha\]. They were Spaniards, he
said, and they discovered a temple near Ceylon, in which was presented a
tooth of Buddah as a sacred relic. "The Spaniard christians thought that
their God commanded them to go and fight and kill and murder," he said,

and so they seized the tooth of Buddah and destroyed it. By the way, it
was not a tooth of Buddah at all, but a relic manufactured by the
priests — it was a foot long. (Laughter)

  

Every religion has its miracles; you needn't laugh because the tooth was
a foot long. Well, after the Spaniards took away the tooth they
converted a few hundred and killed a few thousands; and there Spain
stops in the history of missionary efforts among the Buddhists.

The Portugese \[*sic*\] christians, he said, discovered the great temple
at Bombay, built in the form of a body with three heads, in
representation of the trinity as the Hindoo believes in a trinity.

"The Portugese saw it and couldn't explain it," said Kananda, with a
sarcastic ring in his voice,

and so they concluded that it was of the devil, and gathered their
forces and knocked off the three heads of the temple. The devil is such
a handy man. I am sorry to see him so fast disappearing.

Then Kananda outlined the various stages of christian evangelization in
India, and paid very high tribute to two or three missionaries, who, he
said, had been great exceptions to the rule, and lived among the people
to uplift and minister to their needs.

Antagonize Native Interests

The Hindoo priest told how as soon as the land came into possession of
the English people every village had its white colony, which huddled
itself together and withdrew from all association with the natives. Then
when the missionaries reached the country, he said, they would naturally
go at once among the English people, who sympathized with them and with
whom they could converse. The missionaries know nothing of the native
language, he says, and so they cannot dwell with the people. Most of
them are married and for the sake of getting their wives into the
English society they identify themselves with all their interests, and
in doing so directly antagonize the interests of the natives, and make
it impossible to get in touch with them.

"We sometimes have famines in India," he said.

  

And so the young missionaries will hang about the fag end of a famine
and give a starving native 5 shillings, and there you have him, a
ready-made christian; take him. That was probably a baptist missionary,
and so when a methodist missionary comes along he gives the same native
5 shillings, and his name is again registered as a convert. The only
band of converts around each missionary is composed of those dependent
upon him for a living. They have to be christians or starve. And they
are dwindling as the money supply decreases. I am glad if you want to
make christians in India by giving work and bread to the poor. God speed
you to do that. There is one benefit that must be credited to the
missionary movement. It makes education cheap. The missionaries bring
some money with them from the people who send them, and the Indian
government appropriates some, so that there are some very good colleges
and schools available to the natives through missionaries. But I will be
frank with you. There are no conversions from the schools to the
christian religion. The Hindoo boy is very clever. He takes the bait,
but never gets the hook.

The speaker said that the lady missionary goes into certain houses, gets
four shillings a month, reads the Bible, while the native girls give
indifferent attention, and teaches them to knit while they pay very keen
attention. The girls, like the boys, he said are always alert to learn
practical things, but they will give little heed to the christian
religion, although they will espouse it if necessary to get the other
advantages.

Most Missionaries Incompetent

"The most of the men whom you send us as missionaries are incompetent,"
he said.

I have never known of a single man who has studied Sanscrit \[*sic*\]
before going to India as a missionary and yet all our books and
literature are printed in it.

He suggested as an explanation of the visits of the missionaries that
"perhaps the atheism and scepticism at home is push ing the missionaries
out all over the world." When in India he said he had thought the sole
business of christianity \[was\] to send all people to the fires of
hell, but since coming to America he has found that there are a great
many liberal men. He referred to the parliament of religions, and told
how a certain editor of a presbyterian paper had written an article at
the close of the parliament entitled "The Lying Hindoo," in which he had
scored him very severely.

In the article the editor said that "while in the parliament he was here
as our guest, but now that it is over we ought to make an enthusiastic
attack against him and his false doctrines."

In referring to the medical missionaries in India Kananda said:

India requires health, but it must be health for people. And how can you
help our people if you do not get in touch with them? When you come to
us as missionaries you ought to throw over all idea of nationality.
Jesus didn't go about among the English officials attending champagne
suppers. He didn't care to have his wife get into high European society.
If your missionary does not follow Christ what right has he to call
himself a christian? We want missionaries of Christ. Let such come to
India by the hundreds and thousands. Bring Christ's life to us and let
it permeate the very core of society. Let Him be preached in every
village and corner of India. But don't have your missionaries choose
their profession as a means of livelihood. Let them have the call of
Christ. Let them feel within that they were born for that work.  
As far as converting India to christianity is concerned, there is no
hope. If it were possible it ought not to be done. It would be
dangerous; it would mark the destruction of all religions. If the whole
universe should come to have the same temperament, physical or mental,
destruction would immediately result. Why couldn't you convert the Jew?
Why couldn't you make the Persians christians? Why is it that to every
African who becomes a christian 100 become followers of Mohammed? Why
can't you make an impression on India and China, and Japan? Because
oneness of mental temperament all over the world would be death. Nature
is too wise to allow such things.

Filled the World with Bloodshed

\[The Swami said:\]  
The christian nations have filled the world with bloodshed and tyranny.
It is their day now. You kill and murder and bring drunkenness and
disease in our country, and then add insult to injury by preaching
Christ and Him crucified. What christian voice goes through the land
protesting against such horrors? I have never heard any. You drink the
idea in your mothers' milk that you are angels and we are devils. It is
not enough that there be sunlight; you must have the eyes to see it. It
is not only necessary that there be goodness in people; you must have
the appreciation of goodness within yourselves in order to distinguish
it. This is in every heart until it has been murdered by superstition
and hideous blasphemy.

Then Kananda drew a very beautiful simile to illustrate that the
essential truths of all religions are \[the\] same, and all else is but
incidental and unimportant environment. He told how the savage man might
find a few jewels, and prizing them, tie them with a rude thong and
string them about his neck. As he became slightly civilized he would
perhaps exchange the thong for a string. Becoming still more enlightened
he would fasten his jewels with a silken cord; and when possessed of a
high civilization he would make an elaborate gold setting for his
treasures. But throughout all the changes in settings the jewels — the
essentials —would remain the same.

If the Hindoo wishes to criticize the christian religion he talks of the
fables and miracles, and all the nonsense of the Bible, but he does not
say one word in disparagement of the sermon on the mount, or of the
beautiful life of Jesus. And so when the christian criticizes the Hindoo
religion he talks about the dogmas and the temples, but he says nothing
\[should say nothing\] against the morality and philosophy of the
Hindoo. Help the Jew and let him help you. Help the Hindoo and let him
help you. I deny that any human being has the faculty of seeing good at
all who cannot see it in all places. There is the same beauty in the
character of Christ and the character of Buddah. It is not an
assimilation that we want, but adjustment and harmony. I ask the
preachers to give up, first, the idea of nationality; and second, the
idea of sects. God's children have no sects.  
Much has been said about the ladies of India, and of their faults and
condition. There are faults; God help us to make them right. We are
thankful for your criticism of our women. But while you are speaking of
them I will say that I should be glad to see a dozen spiritual women in
America. Nice dress, wealth, brilliant society, operas, novels — . Even
intellectuality is not all that there is for a man or woman. There
should be also spirituality, but that side is entirely absent from
christian countries. They live in India.

Vive Kananda's large audience listened very respectfully to his remarks
last night, and once or twice applauded heartily.

[→](20_detroit_tribune_mar_20_1894.htm)

</div>
