---
title: AS THE WAVE FOLLOWS WAVE

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](19_detroit_tribune_mar_11_1894.htm)

## AS THE WAVE FOLLOWS WAVE

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, pp. 441-43.)

\[*Detroit Tribune*, March 20, 1894\]

SO SOUL FOLLOWS SOUL, ACCORDING TO KANANDA.

Vive Kananda lectured to an audience of about 150 \[according to the
*Journal*, 500\] at the Auditorium last night upon "Buddhism, the
Religion of the Light of Asia." (Of which there is no verbatim report
available.) Honorable Don M. Dickinson introduced him to the audience.

"Who shall say that this system of religion is divine and that doomed?"
asked Mr. Dickinson in his introductory remarks. "Who shall draw the
mystic line?"

He also said that at one time the followers of Buddha were the unwilling
allies of the christian religion. Kananda appeared in a robe of orange
yellow with a sash-like cord about the waist, and a turban draped out of
some eastern cloth of silken texture, the flowing end of which was
brought in front over one shoulder.

Vive Kananda reviewed at length the early religions of India. He told of
the great slaughter of animals on the altar of sacrifice; of Buddha's
birth and life; of his puzzling questions to himself over the causes of
creation and the reasons for existence; of the earnest struggle of
Buddha to find the solution of creation and life; of the final result.

Buddha, he said, stood head and shoulders above all other men. He was
one, he said, \[of\] whom his friends or enemies could never say that he
drew a breath or ate a crumb of bread but for the good of all.

"He never preached transmigration of the soul," said Kananda,

except he believed one soul was to its successor like the wave of the
ocean that grew and died away, leaving naught to the succeeding wave but
its force. He never preached that there was a God, nor did he deny there
was a God.  
"Why should we be good?" his disciples asked of him.  
"Because," he said, "you inherited good. Let you in your turn leave some
heritage of good to your successors. Let us all help the onward march of
accumulated goodness, for goodness' sake."  
He was the first prophet. He never abused any one or arrogated anything
to himself. He believed in our working out our own salvation in
religion.  
"I can't tell you," he said, on his death bed, "nor any one. Depend not
on any one. Work out your own religion \[salvation\]."  
He protested against the inequality of man and man, or of man and beast.
All life was equal, he preached. He was the first man to uphold the
doctrine of prohibition in liquors. "Be good and do good," he said. "If
there is a God you have him by being good. If there is no God, being
good is good. He is to be blamed for all he suffers. He is to be praised
for all his good."  
He was the first who brought the missionaries into existence. He came as
a savior to the downtrodden millions of India. They could not understand
his philosophy, but they saw the man and his teachings and they followed
him.

In conclusion Kananda said that Buddhism was the foundation of the
christian religion; that the catholic church came from Buddhism.

[→](21_detroit_evening_news_mar_21_1894.htm)

</div>
