---
title: LECTURE BY HINDOO MONK

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](27_ny_daily_tribune_may_3_1894.htm)

## LECTURE BY HINDOO MONK

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 65-68.)

Swami Vivekananda Tells About the Religion of High Caste  
Indians

(Of which no verbatim transcript is available.)

\[Lawrence, Massachusetts, *Evening Tribune*, May 16, 1894\]

Liberty hall was comfortably filled last evening, on the occasion of the
lecture by Swami Vivekananda, the noted Brahmin monk, who was a
prominent personality at the world's parliament of religions at Chicago
last summer, and who is spending some time in this country, studying its
manners and customs. The lecture was under the auspices of the woman's
club, and was a novel and interesting occasion. The noted Hindu was
pleasantly introduced by the president of the club, Miss Wetherbee, who
alluded to the great antiquity of India, its wonderful history and the
high intellectual qualities of the Hindu race.

The speaker of the evening was attired in native costume, namely, a
bright scarlet robe, confined at the waist by a long scarf of the same
color, and wore a picturesque white silk turban wound round his head. At
the first glance one saw the swarthy complexion, the dark and dreamy
eyes and introspective manner of a high caste Brahmin, whose life is
devoted to religion and who is also a celibate. That he is a finely
educated person, appeared in his wonderful command of English and his
power of argument, while an occasional quotation from Milton and
Dickens, showed that he was appreciative of the great English classics.

He first spoke of that striking peculiarity of the social condition of
the Hindu's caste, affirming that it is not now as strict an institution
as in the past, although even now everything goes by heredity. Mixture
of castes, though not absolutely forbidden, entails disadvantage on the
children. The Brahmin or high caste person devotes the first part of his
life to the study of the Vedas or sacred books and the latter part to
meditating on the divinity, being supposed to have overcome the human in
himself, and to be only a soul.

The speaker did not hesitate to criticise adversely some western
customs, especially some connected with the position of woman. He
affirmed that we worship women in the wife, while all women to the Hindu
represent the mother element. In America when a woman ceases to be young
and beautiful, she has a hard time of it, but in India kings must step
aside for an aged woman to pass, so great is the respect in which they
are held. He affirmed that some of the most beautiful portions of the
Vedas, the Hindu bible, were written by women, but that there was no
other bible in this world in which they had any part.

Considerable time was given to refuting the statement, which he
characterized as untrue, in regard to the cruelty practised to widows in
India, the speaker referring in the course of his remarks to the zenana
widows, who have been for some time the objective point of Christian
missionaries from other countries. Marriage is an institution very
safely guarded and, in addition to the law that a Brahmin must not marry
a relative, none are allowed to marry who are known to have such a
disease as consumption or any incurable physical ill. The strict rules
of caste which prevent a person from drinking from the same glass as
another, and other kindred regulations, although \[not\] part of the
religion, were excellent in their result on the physical condition of a
country, numbering 285 millions, in the prevention of the spread of
contagious diseases. The speaker was horrified, as he might well be, at
the promiscuous water drinking seen in railroad trains and stations in
this country. The children are, first of all, taught kindness to all
living beings and so thoroughly is this training that the smallest child
instinctively turns aside from stepping on a worm. A strange thought
that among these so called heathen there is no need of the society with
the long name which often fails in its mission in Christian
lands.[1](#fn1) The guest of a house, that is, a man who comes to the
door and says, "I am hungry," is God's own image to the Hindu and is
treated with the utmost kindness and consideration, being fed before the
master and mistress of the establishment.

The speaker alluded sadly to the poverty of his country, for, while the
upper caste live in comfort, there are millions whose only food is dried
flowers, and who are so low in the scale of existence that they have
hardly an identity, and are pitiful objects in the plane of existence.
He hinted quite forcibly that food and education would be better than
the sermons which Christians and Mohammedans had been throwing at them
for the last hundred years. Many of the simple and primitive customs of
this peculiar people were told with naivete and innocence that was
refreshing in this age when words are used to conceal thoughts. He said
there was no flirting or coquetting between their young men and maids,
and that the latter did not strut forth into public places with all
their bravery \[finery?\] on for the purpose of securing a husband, all
of which made the inhabitants of this great and glorious republic wonder
if something were not slightly rotten in the state of Denmark. It is
well to see both sides of the shield in order to be able to decide with
an unprejudiced eye, and many of the listeners went away quite puzzled
in mind at hearing some of their pet American customs arraigned by a
Hindu and a heathen.

The address was a most interesting one and was listened to with deep
attention by all present. At the close many \[questions\] were presented
to the thoughtful monk, who wasted very few words in social flourishes
or unmeaning talk. He seemed much interested in Dr. Bowker, the only one
in the audience who had ever visited the strange land which was
centuries old before this republic was born.

[→](29_lawrence_american_may_18_1894.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Swami Vivekananda may have been referring to the American
    Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
