---
title: THE BRAHMAN MONK

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](28_evening_tribune_may_16_1894.htm)

## THE BRAHMAN MONK

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 68-71.)

Swami Vivekananda the Guest of the Woman's Club

(Of which no verbatim transcript is available Cf. the preceding American
newspaper report, "[Lecture by Hindoo
monk](28_evening_tribune_may_16_1894.htm) " of the Lawrence Evening
Tribune (pp. 463-66), for other highlights of the same lecture.)

\[*Lawrence American and Andover Advertiser*, May 18, 1894\]

HE POINTS OUT THE BETTER PHASES OF BRAHMANISM.

———

AND DELIVERS A POINTED MESSAGE TO CHRISTIANS.

Swami Vivekananda, the Brahman monk addressed a most interested audience
Tuesday night in Library Hall under the auspices of the Lawrence Woman's
Club.

Miss Wetherbee introduced the speaker and prepared the way for a cordial
reception which American courtesy rarely fails to give a distinguished
visitor from another nation.

Miss Wetherbee wisely referred to him as a prominent personality at the
World's Parliament of Religions, also to the strong impression made by
him at the World's fair. . . .

  

His Iterations

. . . In his own country, in his own class, he addresses all women as
mother. The Brahmin is educated thus to think of women as mother and a
man may not marry his mother. In that country the mother instinct is
developed in woman; in this he thought the wife instinct was cultivated,
and the most beautiful thing in his lecture was his tribute to the
mother, and not unnoticed was the reference to the kindness of heart of
the little Hindoo child which would instinctively cause him to turn
aside from his path rather than crush a worm.

The Subject of Marriage

formed a large part of his lecture. Among the high classes, called
Aryans, women think of marriage as indecent \[?\]. A widow is not
expected to ever marry again. A man who never marries, is highly
praised, and indeed worshipped, but should he marry then in the minutes
all would be changed. He who does not marry is looked upon as
high-minded, as holy and spiritual.

Among the Aryans no money is paid in marriage \[?\], and as female
children are largely in the majority it is one of most difficult things
for a father to marry his daughter, and from the time of her birth he
racks his brains to find her a husband.

With the two lower classes the rules in regard to marriage are all
different. Widows marry again and wives and husbands if desirous become
divorced. When a child is born an astrologer comes and casts a horoscope
of the child, he delineates the future character of the boy or girl — it
is decided whether he is manly or a devilish child; if devilish — he is
married to one next in caste, and thus is obtained a minute chance of
bettering the condition of the devilish child.

The matter of marriage is not left to the decision of the child as in
that case he might marry because \[he was\] in love with a good nose or
good eyes and so in having his own way would spoil the whole thing. The
fact was emphasised that only the higher classes think of a

True Spiritual Life

and of worshiping God instead of thinking of marriage. He spoke of the
pitiful condition of the lower classes, their poverty and their
ignorance. Millions and millions are \[un\]able to write their name and
yet he said:

We are all preaching sermons into them, when their hands are reaching
out for bread. Poverty is so extreme in the lower classes that fifty
cents a month is the average income of a Hindoo. Millions live on one
poor meal a day and millions subsist on wild flowers for food.

He spoke of the idea being prevalent that there were no scholars among
the women of India and stated that this was an error as many women of
the Brahmins were married but became scholars, and with evident pride he
referred to the fact that in no nation could one line be found

In Any Bible

that had been written by a woman excepting his own country alone where
many beautiful things in their Bible had been written by women.

Swami Vivekananda did not fail to inform the audience in English words
which could not be misunderstood, that the effort to raise his people by
teaching them the Christian religion was a thankless task. He said:

We have seen the Greek and the Persian come to us — we have seen the
Spaniard with guns come to make us Christians, still we are Hindoos and
thus we shall remain.

Had Vivekananda used all the power of his flashing eyes and his
expressive voice it would have been a most dramatic speech when he said:

I dare here in America to say that we of India shall stand by our
religion.

He said our customs were good for us and we were welcome to them. He
stood before us as he has before many a cultured American audience — he,
the learned exponent of the Brahman religion, the only Hindoo who has
ever come to this country to tell us — as forcibly as he dared and as
politely as he could and yet be forcible, — to say no more to the poor
Hindoo but to be so very kind as to mind our own business.

After the lecture many of the audience gladly availed themselves of the
opportunity offered by Mr. and Mrs. Young to meet Vivekananda at their
residence where he has been entertained and has proven himself to be a
most delightful guest.

[→](30_boston_evening_transcript_aug_11_1894.htm)

</div>
