---
title: A WISE MAN AMONG US

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](34_baltimore_news_oct_13_1894.htm)

## A WISE MAN AMONG US

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 200-202.)

\[*Baltimore Sunday Herald*, October 14, 1894\]

———

Visit of a Distinguished Hindoo Priest to This City

———

HE IS A GUEST OF THE VROOMAN BROTHERS AND IS INTERESTED IN THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF RELIGIONS — HIS GORGEOUS
GARB.

. . . . . .

. . . Mr. Vivecananda conversed with a *Sunday Herald* reporter,
speaking English with ease and with an accent similar to that of an
educated Italian. He displayed the greatest familiarity with the
institutions of this country, religious, political and social.

Mr. Vivecananda came to Baltimore at the invitation of the Vrooman
brothers, Hiram, Carl and Walter, and while in this city will be their
guest. Rev. Hiram Vrooman was seen at his residence, 1122 North Calvert
Street, yesterday, and talked freely in reference to the visit of the
distinguished guest.

"Mr. Vivecananda," he said, "is one of the most intelligent men I have
ever met. He came to this city at our invitation, and while here will
confer with us in reference to the founding of the international
university, which it is proposed to establish as an outcome of the
World's Congress of Religions, which was such an interesting feature of
the World's Fair. This university is one of Mr. Vivecananda's pet ideas,
and has the full sympathy of myself and my brothers, and also a number
of gentlemen of wealth and position, including several religions. Among
its promoters are members of the Roman Catholic and Hebrew religions.
The idea of the university is education in general religion. . . .

"One of Mr. Vivecananda's ideas in the establishing of the university is
that it may serve to educate a superior kind of missionary for work in
India. While he is steadfast to his own religious belief, he wishes that
the present system of sending ignorant men as missionaries to India may
be discontinued and men sent there who can teach the Christian religion
from an elevated standpoint. In this wish he is animated only by a
desire for the good of general religion. . . .

"Mr. Vivecananda told me that his father was a great believer in the
Lord Jesus, as he called Him, and that when a boy he had read in the
Gospel of St. John the thrilling description of the crucifixion of the
Savior and wept over it. He will remain in this city for several weeks.
To-morrow evening he will deliver a brief address at our meeting at the
Lyceum, and on Sunday week will speak at length at our second meeting on
the university plan."

[→](36_washington_times_oct_29_1894.htm)

</div>
