---
title: HEARD SWAMI TALK

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](43_tribune_mar_5_1896.htm)

## HEARD SWAMI TALK

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 4, p. 41.)

\[*News Tribune*, March 16, 1896\]

VIVEKANANDA LECTURED IN TEMPLE BETH EL

———

Spoke on the Ideal of a Universal Religion

He Will Probably Leave Tuesday

Temple Beth El was crowded to the doors last night when Swami
Vivekananda delivered his address upon "The Ideal of a universal
religion." (Of which no verbatim transcript is available.) The time
announced for the service was 8 o'clock, but the congregation began to
assemble at the temple early in the evening so that the doors had to be
opened at 6:25 p.m. They were closed at 7 o'clock and the hundreds that
arrived after that time had to be turned away.

We all hear about universal brotherhood, and how societies stand up and
want to preach this. But to what does it amount? As soon as you make a
sect you protest against equality, and thus it is no more,

said Swami.

Unity in variety is the plan of the universe. Just as we are all men,
yet we are all separate. We find then, that if by the idea of a
universal religion is meant one set of doctrines should be believed by
all mankind, it is impossible, it can never be, any more than there will
be a time when all faces will be the same. We must not seek that all of
us should think alike, like Egyptian mummies in a museum, looking at
each other without thought to think. It is this difference of thought,
this differentiation, losing of the balance of thought, which is the
very soul of our progress, the soul of thought.

Swami will probably leave Tuesday \[March 17\]. At the close of his
address last night he thanked the people of Detroit for the kind
reception tendered him and his philosophy.

[→](45_boston_evening_transcript_mar_21_1896.htm)

</div>
