+++
title = "Citrabhānu’s cubes"

+++
The Hindus unlike their yavana cousins preferred algebra to geometry.
Yet on occasions they could indulge in geometric games for demostrating
proofs of algebraic relations. We see a bit of this in the Āryabhaṭa
school and the great Bhāskara-II, but one of the masters of the
self-evident geometric demonstration was Citrabhānu the nambūtiri
brāhmaṇa poet, mathematician and astronomer from the cera country
(1500s). His student (also that of one of India’s greatest pre-modern
scientists Nīlakaṇṭha somayājin) was the ritual assistant Śaṃkara
Vāriyār. In his Kriyakramakārī he records some of these self-evident
proofs of his teacher. Now one such question Citrabhānu poses is to show
without any algebra that:

![\\dfrac{a^3-b^3-(a-b)^3}{3(a-b)}=ab](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdfrac%7Ba%5E3-b%5E3-%28a-b%29%5E3%7D%7B3%28a-b%29%7D%3Dab&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\dfrac{a^3-b^3-(a-b)^3}{3(a-b)}=ab")

Of course, this is simple 7th class algebra in our old school system. My
father probably taught it to me while I was in 4th class. Yet it is some
fun to show without using any algebra at all.

[![chitrabhanu](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/chitrabhanu.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/chitrabhanu.png)

Citrabhānu has several such ‘wordless’ proofs that delve into figurate
numbers. Of course this was not a late medieval innovation suddenly
dawning on Citrabhānu. It has a long Hindu tradition going back to the
Āryabhaṭa school and from there to figurate numbers of the Vedic ritual
altar. Thus, it is another example of the continuity of Hindu science
with the Vedic tradition of which Citrabhānu, like his coethnics, was a
major practitioner. Finally, we may note that Citrabhānu seems to have
had a particularly fertile abstract conception of higher dimensional
space in the context of figurate numbers and what we show above is only
the simplest of algebra.
