---
title: 'THE PLAGUE MANIFESTO1

  '

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm) /

[←](footnotes.htm)

## THE PLAGUE MANIFESTO[1](#fn1)

*Om Salutations to Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna*

Brothers of Calcutta!

1\. We feel happy when you are happy, and we suffer when you suffer.
Therefore, during these days of extreme adversity, we are striving and
ceaselessly praying for your welfare and an easy way to save you from
disease and the fear of an epidemic.

2\. If that grave disease — fearing which both the high and the low, the
rich and the poor are all fleeing the city — ever really comes in our
midst, then even if we perish while serving and nursing you, we will
consider ourselves fortunate because you are all embodiments of God. He
who thinks otherwise — out of vanity, superstition or ignorance —
offends God and incurs great sin. There is not the slightest doubt about
it.

3\. We humbly pray to you — please do not panic due to unfounded fear.
Depend upon God and calmly try to find the best means to solve the
problem. Otherwise, join hands with those who are doing that very thing.

4\. What is there to fear? The terror that has entered people's hearts
due to the occurrence of the plague has no real ground. Through God's
will, nothing of the terrible form that plague takes, as seen in other
places, has occurred in Calcutta. The government authorities have also
been particularly helpful to us. So what is there to fear?

5\. Come, let us give up this false fear and, having faith in the
infinite compassion of God, gird our loins and enter the field of
action. Let us live pure and clean lives. Disease, fear of an epidemic,
etc., will vanish into thin air by His grace.

6\.    (a) Always keep the house and its premises, the rooms, clothes,
bed, drain, etc., clean.

       (b) Do not eat stale, spoiled food; take fresh and nutritious
food instead. A weak body is more susceptible to disease.

       (c) Always keep the mind cheerful. Everyone will die once.
Cowards suffer the pangs of death again and again, solely due to the
fear in their own minds.

       (d) Fear never leaves those who earn their livelihoods by
unethical means or who cause harm to others. Therefore, at this time
when we face the great fear of death, desist from all such behaviour.

       (e) During the period of epidemic, abstain from anger and from
lust — even if you are householders.

       (f) Do not pay any heed to rumours.

       (g) The British government will not vaccinate anyone by force.
Only those who are willing will be vaccinated.

       (h) There will be no lack of effort in treating the afflicted
patients in our hospital under our special care and supervision, paying
full respect to religion, caste and the modesty (Purdah) of women. Let
the wealthy run away! But we are poor; we understand the heartache of
the poor. The Mother of the Universe is Herself the support of the
helpless. The Mother is assuring us: "Fear not! Fear not!"

7\. Brother, if there is no one to help you, then send information
immediately to the servants of Shri Bhagavan Ramakrishna at Belur Math.
There will be no dearth of help that is physically possible. By the
grace of the Mother, monetary help will also be possible.

— N. B. In order to remove the fear of the epidemic, you should sing
Nâma Sankirtanam \[the name of the Lord\] every evening and in every
locality.

[→](one_circle_more.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#tx1)Udbodhan, Chaitra 1329, Vol. 25, Number 3, p. 169 (March
    1926). In May 1898, when a plague epidemic broke out in Calcutta and
    numbers of terror-stricken residents fled the city in panic, Swami
    Vivekananda wrote this manifesto in Bengali, which was printed and
    freely distributed amongst the people.
