+++
title = "The Birth Of Athena – On The Indo-European Genesis Ofxa0Tritogeneia"
date = "July 3, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/birth_of_athena_large_image_77.jpg?w=514)

Earlier this week I encountered something which has, by now, become
regrettably familiar to me – although this did not dull my rage at its
ridiculous (re-)appearance. Somebody proclaiming that Athena – in amidst
a veritable ‘Who’s Who’ of the Greek pantheon – was part of a clade of
“certain mythological stories or deities that seem to have no parallels
in the mythologies of other Indo-European peoples”, as part of yet
another attempt to push the notion that much of Greek language and
evidently religion is not actually Indo-European.

Perish the thought.

I have earlier covered various particular points pertaining to Athena
which show quite the contrary – in specia, Her role assisting Herakles
and Iolaos in the Hydra-Slaying (which is a direct resonancy for Vak
Saraswati, Indra, and Trita Aptya respectively in *Their* efforts in the
Vedic mythic and ritual-religious sphere), and the investiture of the
Furor quality (known as ‘Menos’ in the Greek, Ugra in one Vedic
encounter, and Odr in Old Norse … and presided over as an investiture by
Athena and Vak Devi, respectively, with a strong potential parallel viz.
Freyja in the Ynglina Saga for the Nordic; see my earlier work ‘Furor
Teutonicus And Furor Poeticus – The Furious Goddess-Given Power Of Both
Barbarian And Brahmin Alike’, for instance; as well as a provision of
‘nectar and ambrosia’ to Achilles, resonating with Vak’s role in the
production of the Soma), elements pertaining to the Gorgoneion (as
covered in ‘Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr – The Terrifying Face of Thunder’),
Her ‘unlocking’ of the Thunderbolt (‘On Athena Storm-Bringer And The
Thunderbolt Also Of Zeus’), and various other attributes and elements
besides.

However, there is one element which deserves heightened attention –
namely, the Birth of Athena. And to that, we shall now turn in earnest.

The oldest Greek textual account which we can reliably draw from for
this is contained in Hesiod’s Theogony. There, he states:

“But Zeus himself gave birth from his own head to bright-eyed
Tritogeneia, the awful, the strife-stirring, the host-leader, the
unwearying, the queen, who delights in tumults and wars and battles. But
Hera without union with Zeus — for she was very angry and quarrelled
with her mate — bare famous Hephaestus, who is skilled in crafts more
than all the sons of Heaven.

But Hera was very angry and quarrelled with her mate. And because of
this strife she bare without union with Zeus who holds the aegis a
glorious son, Hephaestus, who excelled all the sons of Heaven in crafts.
But Zeus lay with the fair-cheeked daughter of Ocean and Tethys apart
from Hera…deceiving Metis (Thought) although she was full wise. But he
seized her with his hands and put her in his belly, for fear that she
might bring forth something stronger than his thunderbolt: therefore did
Zeus, who sits on high and dwells in the aether, swallow her down
suddenly. But she straightway conceived Pallas Athene: and the father of
men and gods gave her birth by way of his head on the banks of the river
Trito. And she remained hidden beneath the inward parts of Zeus, even
Metis, Athena’s mother, worker of righteousness, who was wiser than gods
and mortal men. There the goddess (Athena) received that whereby she
excelled in strength all the deathless ones who dwell in Olympus, she
who made the host-scaring weapon of Athena. And with it (Zeus) gave her
birth, arrayed in arms of war.”

This fundamentally agrees with the account given in the Homeric Hymns,
which are of slightly more recent provenancy:

“I begin to sing of Pallas Athena, the glorious goddess, bright-eyed,
inventive, unbending of heart, pure virgin, saviour of cities,
courageous, Tritogeneia.  
Wise Zeus himself bare her from his awful head, arrayed in warlike arms
of flashing gold, and awe seized all the gods as they gazed.  
But Athena sprang quickly from the immortal head and stood before Zeus
who holds the aegis, shaking a sharp spear: great Olympus began to reel
horribly at the might of the bright-eyed goddess, and earth round about
cried fearfully, and the sea was moved and tossed with dark waves, while
foam burst forth suddenly: the bright Son of Hyperion stopped his
swift-footed horses a long while, until the maiden Pallas Athena had
stripped the heavenly armour from her immortal shoulders.  
And wise Zeus was glad.  
And so hail to you, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis! Now I will
remember you and another song as well.”

And, several centuries more recent again, we have Pindar in his Odes:

“Disturbances of the mind lead astray even a wise man. Tlepolemus went
and sought the god’s oracle. To him the golden-haired god spoke, from
his fragrant sanctuary, of a voyage by ship from the shore of Lerna
straight to the pasture land with sea all around it, where once the
great king of the gods showered the city with golden snow, when, by the
skills of Hephaestus with the bronze-forged hatchet, Athena leapt from
the top of her father’s head and cried aloud with a mighty shout. The
Sky and mother Earth shuddered before her. Then even the god that brings
light to mortals, son of Hyperion, enjoined his dear children to observe
the obligation that was soon to be due: that they should be the first to
build for the goddess an altar visible to all men, and by founding a
sacred burnt-offering warm the spirit of the father and of the daughter
who thunders with her spear. She who casts excellence and joys into men
is the daughter of Forethought, Reverence.”

Now, I have set all of these out in front of you, because I want to
demonstrate that these are fairly consistent understandings within the
Greek mythology – they are not some isolated thing which crept in later,
nor were considered especially strange, foreign, nor outlandish. They
are also in, as I have said, quite foundational agreement upon certain
key elements which are either directly or inferentially present in these
accounts.

These include both traits pertaining to Athena Herself (e.g. the
Spear-Wielding, martial disposition, and great (indeed, great*est*)
strength (i.e. surpassing that of other Deities), with a certain Roar
being attested also), as well as details pertaining to the Birth itself
(such as the quaking terror of the Worlds and Deities and need to
placate Her through offerings so that She might remove Her ‘war-facing’
and thus become less terrific \[in the sense of begetting terror\] … and
also, of course, Her emergence out of the Head of Her Father, Zeus –
reported to be in rather a state of discomfort at the time!).

So, the question becomes … is there some other Indo-European culture
which preserves something similar to this within the annals of their own
scripture? And is it an independent – insofar as these things ever are
within the Indo-European sphere – preservation, rather than being
attributable to cross-cultural transmission, a la Minerva / Menrva of
the Romans / Etruscans respectively.

It shall surprise precisely no-one to find that the answer is a most
resounding Yes.

For within the Vedas – specifically the Shatapatha Brahmana ritual
manual – we find unmistakably presented this exact same archaic
Indo-European mytheme.

I shall quote:

“6 And as to why he performs the Satarudriya offering. When Pragâpati
had become disjointed, the deities departed from him. Only one god did
not leave him, to wit, Manyu (wrath): extended he remained within. He
(Pragâpati) cried, and the tears of him that fell down settled on Manyu.
He became the hundred-headed, thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra. And
the other drops that fell down, spread over these worlds in countless
numbers, by thousands; and inasmuch as they originated from crying
(rud), they were called Rudras (roarers). That hundred-headed,
thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra, with his bow strung, and his
arrow fitted to the string, was inspiring fear, being in quest of food.
The gods were afraid of him.

7 They spake unto Pragâpati ‘We are afraid of this one, lest he should
hurt us!’ He spake, ‘Gather food for him, and appease him therewith!’
They gathered for him that food, the Satarudriya (offering), and thereby
appeased him; and inasmuch as they thereby appeased (sam) the
hundred-headed (satasîrsha) Rudra, it is called
Satasîrsharudrasamanîya,–and satasîrsharudrasamanîya, doubtless, is what
they mystically call Satarudriya, for the gods love the mystic. And in
like manner does this (Sacrificer) now gather for him that food, the
Satarudriya, and appease him thereby.”

The phrasing is somewhat occluding, and in requiring of commentary to
make proper sense of (fortunate that you have me here, then, isn’t it) –
yet I believe it is reasonably clear just how closely this concords with
the typology for the mythic Genesis of Athena which we have earlier
aforesketched.

We have a great god that might be rendered as ‘Allfather’ (a .. somewhat
useful translation for ‘Prajapati’), we have the ’emanation’ or
‘releasing’ of the specific deity of interest to us from the head of
this Father associated with a Roaring sound (and note Pindar’s ‘Roaring’
description for Athena, along with Hesiod’s ‘Tumultuous’ descriptor,
whilst the Homeric Hymn has generalized ‘roaring’ round about from the
Earth as a storm whips the waters of the Sea), we have the terror which
this inspires in the rest of the Pantheon, and we have the placation of
this Deity via sacrifice so as to bid the Deific to become what in
Sanskrit we should term ‘Aghora’ – literally ‘Non-Terrifying’ \[and it
is no coincidence that the Gorgoneion ‘War-Facing’ of Athena is derived
from this exact same PIE root which gives us ‘Ghora’ – Terrifying – in
Sanskrit\]. Who is this deific? Well, in the SataRudriya conceptry
aforementioned it is, of course, Rudra – the Roarer – better known today
as Shiva, or in this particular context, as The Manyu.

This Manyu is perhaps describable as amidst the foremost of the Vedic
War Gods – so mighty that, as we have seen, even the entire rest of the
Pantheon is affeared of He.

One of His RigVedic Hymnals makes for stirring reading:

RV X 84:

1 Borne on with Thee, O Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brave men,
impetuous, bursting forward,  
March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointed arrows,
sharpening their weapons.  
2 Flashing like fire, be Thou, O conquering Manyu, invoked, O Victor, as
our army’s leader.  
Slay Thou our foes, distribute their possessions: show forth Thy vigour,
scatter those who hate us.  
3 O Manyu, overcome Thou our assailant on! breaking, slaying, crushing
down the foemen.  
They have not hindered Thine impetuous vigour: Mighty, Sole born! Thou
makest them Thy subjects.  
4 Alone or many Thou art worshipped, Manyu: sharpen the spirit of each
clan for battle.  
With Thee to aid, O Thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift the
glorious shout for conquest.  
5 Unyielding bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu, be Thou here our
Sovran Ruler.  
To Thy dear name, O Victor, we sing praises: we know the spring from
which Thou art come hither.  
6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest
conquering might is Thine, Subduer!  
Be friendly to its in thy spirit, Manyu, O Much-invoked, in shock of
mighty battle.  
7 For spoil let Varuṇa and Manyu give us the wealth of both sides
gathered and collected;  
And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed with terror,
slink away defeated.”

It is not hard to see how this resonates with, to quote Hesiod – “the
awful, the strife-stirring, the host-leader, the unwearying, the queen,
who delights in tumults and wars and battles”, a wielder of the
“host-scarring weapon”; and elsewhere stated to beΑρεια (Areia –
Warlike),Λειτις (Leitis – Distributor of War-Booty),Πολεμηδοκος
(Polemodocus – ‘War’ (in the sense of an Assault, based around the
potential PIE etymology and post-PIE cognates) plus ‘Main Beam’ (as in,
of a House – so ‘Supporter’, ‘Anchoring Point’; interestingly the same
term also can refer to a Meteor), effectively ‘Supporter \[in/of\] War’,
or the major shaft to the spear-thrust of a charge),Σαλπινξ (Salpinx –
‘War-Trumpet’),Νικη (Nike – Victory),Σθενιας (Sthenias – Strength /
Strong),ἀλκή (Alke – ‘Force’ , ‘Prowess’ , ‘Combat’ , Protect(ress) –
interestingly, a near phonetic doublet for another Ancient Greek term
for an Elk, which may be worth exploring at some other time due to the
role of an antlered deer in Goddess worship … but I digress),Ζωστηρια
(Zosteria – Armourer, Girder),Ερυμα (Eruma – ‘Protect(ress)’ /
‘Defender’, and interestingly also ‘Fortress’ – c.f my earlier work
pertaining to ‘Durga’, especially in ‘Bharat Mata And The Indo-European
Deific Of National Identity’), and quite an array of other such terms
besides. As applies Athena it is also necessary to emphasize that the
‘generalship’ dimension is ever present – with the precise *means* via
which the foe is to be broken not only including direct martial
application of force by Her or Her Chosen … but through cunning and
genius as well –Μαχανιτις (Makhanitis, from similar root to
‘Mechanism’) andΑπατουρια (Apaturia – ostensibly ‘Deceiver’) are both
terms deployed to refer to ‘strategy’ and ‘generalship’ in the Ancient
Greek world-view.

We do most certainly find active battlefield prayer to Athena within the
Classical corpus – consider the words of Diomedes in Book V of the
Iliad:

“Hear me, child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, unwearied one! If ever
with kindly thought thou stoodest by my father’s side amid the fury of
battle, even so do thou now be likewise kind to me, Athene. Grant that I
may slay this man, and that he come within the cast of my spear, that
hath smitten me or ever I was ware of him, and boasteth over me, and
declareth that not for long shall I behold the bright light of the sun.”

In terms of one of the other points of interest identified in said
RigVedic hymnal – Wielder of the “Destructive Bolt of Thunder” – the
term deployed for this in the original Vedic Sanskrit is, of course,
Vajra. And whilst often associated in the popular imagination with Indra
(and quite rightly so!), we *also* find other figures making use of this
weapon: Rudra, for instance, in RV II 33 3; or, as we have just seen,
that form of Rudra known as The Manyu. Particularly in later Hindu
iconographic representation and accompanying theology, we may also find
the Vajra referred to as being ‘equivalent’ to or embodied in the form
of other weaponry carried by He (or, for that matter, His Wife),
including His Spear – the Trishula.

Pindar saw no issue describing Athena as “Thundering” with Her Spear,
and the iconographic representations of Zeus’ Thunderbolt from the
Classical age are often less a smashy club (as seen with the weapon of
Herakles – Himself the major Classical ‘Striker/Thunderer’, even if a
wooden club or a metallic Harpe is less overtly the mystical
Thunder-Hammer akin to Thor’s Mjolnir or the Vajra of Indra Himself that
we have come to expect ; see, for instance, my recent ‘On Herakles As
Thunderer – The Recollection Of The Weapon In The Classical Conceptual
Sphere’), but rather a thrown weapon more akin to a javelin – part of a
general typology of the Spear-Wielding Sky Father (as we considered at
some length across multiple Indo-European mythocultures and multiple
occurrences within the Classical / Greek sphere specifically, in last
year’s ‘On The World-Spear of the Sky Father – Trishula, Gungnir,
Pinaka’). Intriguingly, there are even coins hailing from across the
Hellenic(-influenced) world depicting the Weapon of Athena as a
Thunderbolt – various of these supposedly in reference to a particular
Athena statue (we should say ‘Murti’ in the Hindu understanding) of Her
at the Macedonian capital of Pella.

Now, I could go on at quite some length here – however I suspect it has
come time to address the necessary ‘elephant in the room’ (and by this I
do not refer to some very, very cool Central Asian coinage which alerted
me to some of the above, wherein Athena is depicted riding a quadriga
\[four-horse chariot\] pulled by elephants).

It cannot have escaped the notice of even the most unperspicacious and
unfamiliar-with-the-field of readers that for all of these clear and
evident coterminities of Athena with this Manyu Rudra … that there is
one very, very big difference, as well. In fact, two of them,
foundationally interlinked.

The first and most obvious concerns the sex of each deific. Athena is
female – a Goddess ; Manyu Rudra is quite definitely male – a God. The
second concerns the fact that Rudra is hailed elsewhere in the Vedas as
Dyaus Pitar – that is to say, Zeus Pater … which introduces an obvious
point of further difficulty for reconciling the scenario herein.

Now, to address the latter matter first, it is my belief that the birth
myth of Zeus is *also* running off the same foundational PIE mytheme
occurrent in the SataRudriya explication for the Birth/Emanation of
Rudra – which interestingly posits Prajapati as Kronos in that scenario.
I have detailed my thoughts upon this but briefly elsewhere, and may
look at this in greater depth of detail in a future work. Suffice to
say, if this is true – then it suggests that the *original* PIE form of
the myth *should* have a *male* deific resultant from the situation in
question – and there is some further, tangential support for this via
the occurrence of Hephaestus wielding an axe in some of the Athena-birth
recountings … perhaps resonating with the occurrence of Axe-Wielding
Rudra ‘gainst Prajapati in a situation featuring the latter’s daughter,
Saraswati. Another *potential* proof would be to be found in the curious
epithet of ‘Tritogeneia’ – which either means ‘Born of the Head’ in a
perhaps somewhat questionable ancient ‘folk-etymology’, ‘Born of the
Trito\[nis\]’ (a particular body of water on the fringes of the world),
… or ‘Of Three Progenitors’. I consider the last of these of fascinating
potential probative value, as it is also utilized for Orion (Whom we
have previously linked to Rudra), and would form an elegant cognate of
meaning for the prominent Roudran epithet/theonym ‘Tryambakam’ (‘of the
Three Mothers’ – although see my sustained discussion of this in
‘Tryambaka Triophthalmos Triformis – The Three Eyes Of The Indo-European
Sky Father As Seen Through Vedic & Hellenic Perspective’ for some of the
other potential saliencies for ‘Tryambaka’ etc. ). But, as I say – more
upon all of that, perhaps, some other time.

The repeated and quite pointed emphases in various Classical texts for
Athena as having some level of equivalency with Zeus may additionally
support such a claim. This occurs both inferentially, in terms of shared
attributes (such as the Gorgoneion capaciously aforementioned – which
is, itself, an identifying Sky Father element when considered in light
of other IE evidence – see my earlier‘Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr – The
Terrifying Face of Thunder’), yet also directly. And beyond those
occurrences in the three Greek sources quoted at length above, I should
also like to introduce the following excerpt fromQuintus Smyrnaeus’
‘Fall of Troy’:

“She donned the stormy Aigis flashing far, adamantine, massy, a marvel
to the Gods, whereon was wrought Medusa’s ghastly head, fearful: strong
serpents breathing forth the blast of ravening fire were on the face
thereof. Crashed on the Queen’s breast all the Aigis-links, as after
lightning crashes the firmament. Then grasped She Her father’s weapons,
which no God save Zeus can lift, and wide Olympos shook. Then swept She
clouds and mist together on high; night over earth was poured, haze o’er
the sea. Zeus watched, and was right glad as broad heaven’s floor rocked
‘neath the Goddess’s feet, and crashed the sky, as though invincible
Zeus rushed forth to war.”

As we can see, a reasonably direct equivalency in quite important
elements to our understanding and the Classical perception(s) of Her.

Now, before I go any further – it is necessary to clarify that I am NOT
endeavouring to suggest that the dominant Classical view of the birth of
Athena is somehow “wrong” or “false” merely because the gender of the
figure produced via the comparable process in the Vedic understanding,
and plausibly also the Proto-Indo-European one … is the opposite to that
of Athena’s. Nor am I seeking to suggest any of this is ‘false’ because
there may be a ‘double-up’ with the mythic origin / birth of Zeus.

In Hindu understanding, we find the same general concept – the same
general typology – also made use of to explicate an array of mythic
occurrences. I looked at these in far grander depth of detail in
‘MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] – The Mind,
The Mania, The Manyu’. In essence, we see both Lord Shiva and Lady
Parvati / Durga emanating out truly formidable Avenger/Destroyer/Warrior
Forms of Themselves via Their Third Eyes, etc. (indeed, Veerabhadra, in
the Vishnu and Vayu Puranas, is said to be an emanation of *Devi’s*
Wrath, through Rudra’s ‘active expression’). Now, we have already
demonstrated that the idea of Zeus Himself possessing a faculty
analogous to the Third Eye … was both literally known in the Classical
realm (see my work on Zeus Triophthalmos), as well as inferentially
there in a manner which gels foundationally with what we are explicating
here, when we consider the coterminity about His Forehead in light of
certain other Greek materials (again, c.f the Third Mytholinguistics of
War (A)Arti-cle just aforecited).

Especially in light of the strong conceptual coterminity clearly
exhibited elsewhere between Hellenic Athena (and Roman Minerva, etc.)
with Vedic Vak Saraswati (again, please see my previous works upon this
subject, which also observe Vak Saraswati to be quite the formidable,
indeed all-conquering and war-commanding Goddess) – I do not think that
observing the close comparison between the Birth of Athena and the
Emanation of the Manyu invalidates either Deific.

Nor should the ongoing observation that there are various important
qualities ‘shared’ between Athena and Zeus, or more broadly Athena and
the Sky Father deific complex. Instead of the implication that Athena
might be some sort of ‘misremembering’ of said (male) Sky Father, it is
better to consider that the notion of ‘Female Counterpart / Equivalent’
is quite a well-known Hindu understanding – Rudra and RudraKali, for
instance … or, at the arguable apex of the phenomenon, Ardhanarishvara –
a ‘Joint Aspect’ of Lord Shiva and Devi Who is simultaneously Both at
Once.

Yet let us return to our main stream.

As applies ‘Manyu’ itself, this term hails ultimately from PIE ‘Men’ –
meaning ‘Mind’ (also from the same root, as potentially is ‘Man’/’Men’),
‘Active Spirit’, and ‘Mental Activity’. In Sanskrit, this particular
term has acquired a fantastic spread of meaning – with the ‘Man’ stem
occurrent in quite a number of terms pertaining to ‘mental activity’ or
the enactors of same (including, as it happens, a term which most of us
are instantly familiar with through cultural transmission and
consequent, seeming-inevitable dilution – ‘Mantra’; and if we are
looking for ‘wisdom’ or ‘wise advice’ or ‘understanding’, then ‘Mantu’
(मन्तु ) should be our port of call); although ‘Manyu’ ( मन्यु )
remains a particular favourite. It means not only ‘Mind’ or ‘Spirit’ in
the sense of our locus of mentally active being, but ‘Spirit’ in the
sense of ‘Espritde Corps’ as well (as in, the morale and ‘spirit’ of an
army – something prayed to be imparted into the war-host, as we have
seen) – and, in terms of further ‘active expressions’ of the mind and
mental enactment, we find it used to mean “Anger”, “Passion”, “Zeal”,
“Wrath”, “Ardour”, “Enthusiasm”, “Exuberancy”, and interestingly also
“Distress”, “Grief” or “Sorrow” (which resonates with an underlying yet
under-spoken of characterization to Rudra – see my earlier recent ‘On
The Rudraksha – Tears of Rudra’, which observes that the mythology and
PIE etymology for ‘Rudra’ (PIE: ‘Hrewdh’, a term linked to strong
outpourings of emotion – ‘Weeping’, indeed) support such a resonant
reading). It occurs in the Shatapatha Brahmana presentation
aforementioned as a descriptor also for the state of Prajapati – that is
to say, Prajapati is in a state of quite ‘active’ strong emotion and
discomfort (hence the shedding of tears) prior to the externalization of
the Manyu from His Head … in a manner quite potentially concordant with
the great headache suffered by Zeus (to the point of Hephaestus being
deployed with an axe to relieve the symptomatology in a rather … drastic
approach) prior to the Birth of Athena. Or, should we say – Jupiter
prior to the Birth of Minerva : for Minerva, to what should not be
anybody’s especial surprise by now, is quite cognate with “Manyu” both
mythically but also directly linguistically speaking.

Of additional interest for our purposes is the manner in which that
veer-y same PIE ‘Men’ has informed the Ancient Greek ‘Menos’ (μένος )
and ‘Menis’ (μῆνῐς ); the former of which, particularly in its
prominent Iliad occurrence for Athena’s empowerment of Her Chosen,
Diomedes (Who interestingly, gains the ability to ‘see things as they
actually are’, with a fiery gaze, shrug off mortal impediments like
being shot, and fight even Gods in this state) – is a very strong
cognate in terms of meaning for Sanskrit ‘Manyu’ – although with
additional emphatic upon a *purpose*, a *force*, and *violence*; the
latter, meanwhile, more narrowly focused upon “Wrath”, especially “of
the Gods”(hence, the sheer potency of Achilles’ Menis – so much so that
it is in the evocatively descriptive first few lines of the Iliad as a
standout element for the entire poem – is effectively being implicitly
compared to, well, the Wrath of the Gods in its intensity and
destructive capability … as well it should be, for Athena had granted
Achilles ‘Nectar and Ambrosia’ in order to empower the legendary warrior
in its course). Now, I have observed elsewhere in my work that all of
these terms – Menos , Menis , and Manyu – are decent enough methods via
which the Indo-European understanding of ‘Furor’ is communicated in
their respective archaic languages and scriptural canons. In Old Norse,
we would find this as ‘Odr’ and other such terminology – unsurprisingly
linked to “Odin”, which is likewise from PIE ‘Weht’ \[‘to become
excited’\]. Not only, therefore, is it logical that just as Ugra is both
the Furor imparted by Vak Devi to Her Chosen (in RV X 125 5) yet also
one of the names for Her Husband, the God Rudra, that Manyu is likewise
a Roudran epithet and Odr associated with Frejya and implicitly with
Odin in terms of name … but so, too, do we find the Goddess in the
Classical realm Who imparts such, and Who is also simultaneously rather
directly resonant with this male deific, whilst – in Roman or Etruscan
understanding at least – bearing a theonym which is from that same PIE
‘Men’ root.

As a side note, that Ancient Greek term, ‘Menis’ has been argued by
Beekes – a well-known purveyor of the farcical notion that seemingly
everything which isn’t nailed down securely (and a rather depressing
swathe of what *is* in fact most *firmly* affixed within the broader IE
comparanda) is the result of some imaginary “Pre-Greek”
non-Indo-European substrate to that Hellenic language and culture – to
be a ‘religious term’ of non-Indo-European origins likewise. A moment’s
consideration should reveal the fairly obvious problem with this – as
there is a quite clear Proto-Indo-European root, which informs *very*
closely comparable usage for a direct cognate in a different
Indo-European linguistic and religious corpus (and I only say “very
closely” rather than “downright identical”, because ‘Manyu’ is, strictly
speaking, rather broader than ‘Menis’ in imputation – even though
‘Manyu’ as “Wrath”, specifically “most formidable Wrath of the Gods” is
most definitely in keeping with the Vedic term’s definitional and
functional-applicational ambit), and which *also* has informed *another*
close cognate in Ancient Greek Herself (i.e. Menos) … it becomes
apparent that in order for ‘Menis’ to be non-IE ‘Pre-Greek’, as Beekes
would have us believe, that this would require this ‘non-IE substrate’
of his to just so happen to have virtually the exact same term in terms
of both sound and meaning to an already-extant Ancient Greek word of
slightly broader definitional ambit, but also clearly resonant in both
dimensions to Sanskrit’s Manyu and Meni (मेनि – another fascinating
term which at once refers to Wrath, but also Speech, and a Thunderbolt
or other such projectile weapon). It should truly be a most remarkable
coincidence were all that to prove to be the case – although as there’s
literally no actual evidence to support such a contention, I suggest
that it is *far* more likely that ‘Menis’ is, as it appears to be, a PIE
‘Men’ derivative matching closely these other PIE ‘Men’ derivatives in a
number of Indo-European languages, with no extraneous non-IE influence
required.

The same can most assuredly be stated for Athena.

The fact that we can identifiably determine that the Greek accountings
for the Birth of Athena hail from the exact same source as the Vedic
understanding of the Emanation of the Manyu Rudra – simply shows that
these are Both irreducibly Indo-European, indeed Proto-Indo-European
figures.

There are most definitely an array of eminently intriguing questions to
be considered as to Athena and Her situation – where She fits in –
within the post-PIE mytho-religious sphere. However, “how a non-IE
figure wound up in the Ancient Greek pantheon” is, most assuredly, NOT
one of them!

Jai Mata DI !
