+++
title = "On The Archaic Notion Of The Indo-Europeanxa0Demigod"
date = "July 12, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/perseus-holding.png?w=609)

Recently, in the course of a discussion elsewhere, an occasional
correspondant – [‘Indian History’ on
twitter](https://twitter.com/IndianHistory0) – made mention of a most
intriguing Sanskrit term he’d observed in a Hymnal of the RigVeda.

We were discussing ‘Demigods’, and whether these were a more exclusively
Greek / Classical phenomenon or something of a broader Indo-European
provenance.

My personal perspective is that what’s connoted by the demigods within
the Classical corpus is not really all that different from what we find
elsewhere – simply differently labelled, as the result of rather
different presumptions about the relative situations of Gods and mortals
between the Hellenic and Hindu spheres. For them – i.e. the Greeks and
their associated mythoi – there is a much harder dividing line between
the two groups; for us – i.e. the Hindus – it is really more of a
‘spectrum’ in some ways, and in any case we find it uncontroversial to
have figures correlate to the most famous demigod of all, Herakles,
being born to ostensibly human parents yet still being (or re-becoming)
fully-fledged divinities. The exemplars of this which I am thinking of
being Hanuman (Who is said in some materials to have been condemned to
‘forget’ His Divinity and thence have to ‘work His way back up’ through
properly penitent conduct serving others) and Krishna (although in this
particular case, the names of Krishna’s human parents seem to preserve
in euhemerized format the identities of the Sky Father and Mother
Goddess – see my previous works upon the subject, and the comparison to
the names of Herakles’ own Mother in this regard).

However, this *does* nevertheless demonstrate to us that what’s – again,
broadly – communicated in the Greek mythos pertaining to Herakles and
other such figures, also occurs in the Hindu understanding. Which either
means that it’s a case of remarkably close ‘convergent evolution’, or
it’s a case of something quite archaic – indeed, potentially
Proto-Indo-European being preserved and passed forward in each
dimensional sphere.

I personally suspect, as per often, that it is a case of ‘both’ rather
than either.

Now, we CAN observe that within the Greek legendarium, there appears to
have been a certain ‘euhemericism’ which has accompanied the figure of
the Striker/Thunderer – not only in terms of half of His ostensible
parentage, and consequent life circumstances pre-Apotheosis (i.e.
actually requiring an apotheosis in order to become a God – or, in the
Etruscan version of the telling, the breastmilk of Uni (a situation
relevant as the acknowledgement of Hercle as *Her* ‘adopted’ Son), which
may be sensibly connected, one presumes, to the Soma milk of the Mother
Goddess as Cow in the Vedas), but also in terms of the Weapon of the
Striker/Thunderer going from something truly supernal like the Vajra and
most definitely mythic as with Mjolnir … through to a Harpe (Sword) or a
knotted tree bough as a wooden club.

However, while I have most definitely argued that there is a not
entirely dissimilar trend on-show for certain other Indo-European mythic
occurrences including in the Hindusphere … it is not that trend which I
wish to draw upon for this piece.

Instead, it is another ritual understanding – one I had covered much
more extensively in my earlier ‘The Apple of Odin to Rerir, The
Fire-Seed of Agni, The Egg of Nemesis, The Paternity of Alexander, And
The Asvamedha of Dasharatha – On The Equine Investiture Of The Divine
Essence In A King’s Heir-To-Be In The Indo-European Mytho-Religious
Sacro-Political Tradition’.

There, we find a particular rite from the Shatapatha Brahmana in which
an ‘investiture’ of divine essence is congealed and presented to a
king’s wife (i.e. the queen of his kingdom) so as to beget a suitably
impressive heir. I have plausibly connected this to various occurrences
found elsewhere within the annals of Indo-European mythology – including
in both the Nordic and Classical spheres; where we find Volsung, and …
an array of Greek mythic (and even in at least one case, historical)
exemplars fitting this typology.

All of which brings us to this aforementioned RigVedic Hymnal – RV IV
42. And the precise Sanskrit term which is of interest to us therein –
Ardhadeva – quite literally ‘Half-God’ … rendered directly by Griffith
in his translation of the RigVeda, appropriately enough, as “Demigod”.

Let’s look at the word in context:

“8 Our fathers then were these, the Seven his, what time the son of
Durgaha was captive.  
For her they gained by sacrifice Trasadasyu, a demi-god, like Indra,
conquering foemen.  
9 The spouse of Purukutsa gave oblations to you, O Indra-Varuṇa, with
homage.  
Then unto her ye gave King Trasadasyu, the demi-god, the slayer of the
foeman.”

Now, to explicate what is going on here … RV IV 42 is a hymnal that is
traditionally ascribed in its authorship to Trasadasyu Paurukutsya –
Trasadasyu, the Son of Purukutsa. Trasadasyu, as a point of interest,
presumably either means ‘\[Re-\]Mover of Dasyu’ or ‘Terrorizer
\[reducing to quivering/flight\] of the Dasyu’ – apt for the Indra
connotation.

The Indra-Varuna dual mentions are curious from the point of view of our
mythological understanding, yet when considered via a ritual lense they
are not so. The King has been invested with several essences – if we
were running a pseudo-Dumezilian typology (a dangerous thing to do,
indeed, but here a not entirely un-useful shorthand), we might suggest
that the two ‘spheres’ or two ‘energies’ are that of ‘Brahmin’ and
‘Kshatriya’. As the King is supposed to be, in effect, something of
‘both’. However, I must emphasize that this is not *literally* the case,
insofar as the actual Varna status of Varuna and Indra would be … rather
more complex than that (for instance, there is a potentially intriguing
mention for Varuna in ‘Kshatriya’ linkage in the Maitrayani Samhita
which I have not – so far – personally followed up upon to directly
attest), and that it is *far better* to think of proceedings as
encompassing ‘competencies’ or ’empowerments’ in two areas rather than
*actually* drawing from two Varnas (and not least because we quite
frequently in both mythology and history find Brahmin weaponsmasters,
generals, and kings; and deifics ostensibly grouped into that ‘First
Function’ clade acting as incredibly potent martial and regal figures).

Trasadasyu phrases it quite directly, in the earlier verses of the
Hymnal:

“1 I am the royal Ruler, mine is empire, as mine who sway all life are
all Immortals.  
Varuṇa’s will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of men’s most
lofty cover.  
2 I am King Varuṇa. To me were given these first existing high celestial
powers.  
Varuṇa’s will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of men’s most
lofty cover.  
3 I Varuṇa am Indra: in their greatness, these the two wide deep
fairly-fashioned regions,  
These the two world-halves have I, even as Tvaṣṭar knowing all beings,
joined and held together.  
4 I made to flow the moisture-shedding waters, and set the heaven firm
in the scat of Order.  
By Law the Son of Aditi, Law Observer, hath spread abroad the world in
threefold measure.  
5 Heroes with noble horses, fain for battle, selected warriors, call on
me in combat.  
I Indra Maghavan, excite the conflict; I stir the dust, Lord of
surpassing vigour.  
6 All this I did. The Gods’ own conquering power never impedeth me whom
none opposeth.  
When lauds and Soma juice have made me joyful, both the unbounded
regions are affrighted.”

A functionary then adds the additional hailing *to* the King / Deific(s)
–

“7 All beings know these deeds of thine thou tellest this unto Varuṇa,
thou great Disposer!  
Thou art renowned as having slain the Vṛtras. Thou madest flow the
floods that were obstructed.”

And then we are back to the aforementioned verses wherein the
description of the divine investiture of essence for the begetting of
the Son of Purukutsa \[i.e. RV IV 42 8-9\] is the subject, again voiced
by this other (non-Kingly) voice.

Now, the point I am seeking to elucidate with all of this is a
remarkably simple one. We see a situation wherein the rite we *know*
exists elsewhere in the Vedic canon, and which we can eminently
reasonably infer to exist throughout the Indo-European sphere based on
evidence marshalled in my earlier work aforementioned … is cited in this
particular RigVedic hymnal.

We see it producing a scenario wherein the resultant regal offspring is
regarded not merely as having a sort of ‘heritage’ nor ‘heredity’ from a
God – or, in this case, *two* Gods, They being both Indra and Varuna
(and it is intriguing that the one follows the other in a symbolic
‘descent’ from Heaven to Earth in the hymnal as pertains to Their
authority and mighty deeds respectively). But rather, the King is being
hailed *as* the God(s). That is to say, He is being regarded as an
incarnate Eternal Return (in Eliadian terms), a sort of ‘Avatar’ (and
‘Descent’ is quite an apt summation here, in the non-formalized sense of
that term ‘Avatar’ taken as a slightly broader concept than that more
usually intended in Hindu theology).

Given that the formulation we have uncovered in both the Classical and
Hindu realms appears to feature multiple parents (two human, at least
one divine), and result in a Striker/Thunderer figure (Herakles, or
Hanuman being useful exemplars here) – it would be tempting to speculate
as to just how and why we appear to have myths in which a Demigod /
ArdhaDeva form of the Striker/Thunderer is produced to these regal human
parents, existing in the case of the Hindusphere *alongside* the
mythology wherein the Striker/Thunderer is instead the child of the Sky
Father and Mother Goddess (and there are some very intriguing points
around the invocation of Aditi in RV IV 4 which we shall not address
here, although build from our previous observations in various previous
works oriented for Her) and is fully Divine from the start.

Two possibilities suggest themselves.

Either this is how things are ‘supposed’ to be, with multiple figures
that are running off the same overarching essence occurrent within the
mythology as a fairly consistent – and intentional – thing. Encoded
within the mythology so that we know that it’s a thing, and that the
rituals can produce such a concept – a ‘living God’ amongst mortal men;
albeit one Who eventually dies (in literally mortal terms) and undergoes
a post-mortem ‘Apotheosis Proper’, perhaps – as seen upon the funerary
pyre of Herakles, and with Krishna’s death in the human sphere not
impeding His Divine station in which He is so justifiably prominent
today.

Or there has been some shift in understanding, possibly a bit of a
confusion which has somehow emerged in parallel in both Hellenic and
Hindu spheres, wherein something like the circumstances of King
Trasadasyu has been, if you like, ‘mythunderstood’ – and resulted in the
Striker/Thunderer having just such an ‘on-Earth’ (‘Loka-lized’, as I am
fond of saying, and not merely for the terrestrial-ization, but due to
the ‘humanity’ interpretation for ‘Loka’ likewise) ‘refraction’. With,
over time, something being forgotten – some understanding having
shifted, and so instead of ‘the King invested his son with divine
essence so that he would be as the Striker/Thunderer is to the Sky
Father; and as the Striker/Thunderer is to Mankind, as well as, when he
should come to rule over us, as the Sky Father is to the universe
entire’ … we have just wound up with ‘the wife of the King received
‘divine essence’ from the Sky Father, and has given birth to this
princeling Who has the traits of the Striker/Thunderer’.

That is to say – instead of “this princeling was born which has the
imprintings / resonancies of the Striker/Thunderer”, it may have become
twisted with the travails of time and the passaging of story to become
“the Striker/Thunderer was born amongst us”. And, in the Greek sphere,
the blending of the two figures – the ‘fully divine’ Striker/Thunderer,
and the ‘half-divine’ one – meaning that a fulsome recollection of the
true (i.e. fully divine) nature of the Striker/Thunderer was forgotten
about. This may also, all up, help to explicate the otherwise curious
situation wherein we can quite clearly identify at least *two*
Striker/Thunderer figures within the Greek mythos – They being Herakles,
and His (Great) Grandfather (but also (half-)brother), Perseus; although
with only Herakles being regarded as (eventual) God ‘proper’, and
worship of Perseus largely restricted to hero-cult veneration.

However, it is also necessary to consider that as applies Hanuman – we
have the occurrence in RV X 86 of quite direct statements ascribed to
Indra by the verse-smith that the Bull-Ape (Vrsakapi) and He are
‘ritually equivalent’, in the sense that offerings to the one go also to
the other, to the same effective place. This is voiced in the context of
objection being raised to said Vrsakapi figure seeming to ‘steal’ the
offerings of Lord Indra (and engage in certain other conduct which could
be euphemistically phrased as ‘taking liberties’ and inviting Himself
into the Striker/Thunderer’s position and identity).

I have long argued that RV X 86 evinces that the figure of Hanuman, the
iconographically depicted ‘Monkey (visaged) God’ was not some non-Arya
latter assimilation nor incorporation as some Indologists like to claim
– but rather an alternate ‘facing’ of the Striker/Thunderer deific; a
point perhaps supported by the curious occurrence of ‘Curious/Unwise
Ape’ in apparent reference to Thor in the Nordic textual corpus.

The fact of this occurrence – the idea of ‘two-but-really-one’ (for
ritual purposes especially) Striker/Thunderer(s) – is therefore attested
in the RigVeda, means that as applies Hanuman at least, this ‘double-up’
is not entirely a novel development in the later textual (indeed,
post-Vedic) textual corpus. It does not fully account for various
matters, and we are left wondering whether the circumstances of
Bajrangi’s birth to Anjani and Kesari (featuring an ingestion by the
former of a portion of the ritual production via which the king
Dasharatha had hoped to conceive just such a divinely empowered heir)
were actually in the original mythology which RV X 86 is implicitly
referencing, or whether these are a ‘back-filling’ set of details as the
story grew in later times.

What we *can* observe, however, is that the rather curious later
theological statements of Hanuman being simultaneously an Avatar of
Shiva (yet also, as we have seen, evidently a ‘resonancy’ of Lord Indra)
and Son of Vayu (and/or Shiva – various texts attest either) … are not
so contradictory as they may otherwise appear. For leaving aside the
longstanding equivalency in various senses of Shiva and Vayu, and Shiva
in particular with the Sky Father deific (as directly attested via the
RigVeda’s statements of Rudra being Dyaus), with the Striker/Thunderer
being the logical Son of Same … what we have observed within RV IV 42 is
a direct statement of a figure born as the result of this style of
ritual being at once the “Son of Aditi” \[Aditi is the Mother of Indra
by Dyaus, She is the Queen of the Heavens), i.e. (a resonancy of) the
Striker/Thunderer *and* simultaneously, (a resonancy of) a Sky Father
figure (i.e. Varuna).

As it should happen, this *also* helps us to explicate the various
Ramayana occurrences wherein Lord Rama is hailed or otherwise regarded
as Indra-like – a cause taken up by the eminent modern-day Vedic sage,
Manasataramgini in the course of his work. Rama being that heir
conceived by Dasharatha via the ritual employment which had also
produced Hanuman. Although where Manasataramgini has taken the view that
Hanuman is intended to be a ‘refraction’ or ‘carrying forward’ of Vayu –
I would instead suggest that it is a case of ‘both rather than either’,
with Hanuman for whatever reason being in receipt of *both* Indra and
Vayu resonancies; and the situation of Rama effectively representing a
not unfamiliar archaic Indo-European understanding for certain
mythic(ally mighty) figures being ‘bearers’ of these emanated essences
without (necessarily) supplanting the major deific Who has contributed
thusly. It is not, in other words, a case of ‘Stealing His Thunder’ (a
line which most definitely *had* to go in this piece somewhere!).

All of this brings us back to the situations of Herakles and Perseus in
the Greek Indo-European comparanda.

To put it bluntly, we cannot verifiably nor reliably assert *what* has
gone on there with anything like the (relative) clarity of the above in
relation to the Hindu recollection of such matters. There simply isn’t
enough material – and what we *do* have can be read in so many different
ways, including from itself. A frequently encountered struggle for us
here. And one that is not easily resolved via recourse to the broader
Indo-European sphere for comparatives for that exact reason.

It *could* be that as applies Herakles and/or Perseus, a human prince or
princes operating in the manner of Trasadasyu had become so
comprehensively identified with the Striker/Thunderer deific that almost
nothing of his actual mortal life and deeds remained, other than the
mortal circumstances of his birth and maternal situation (albeit with
the name of the mother tending to be quite close to what we should
expect for the Wife of the Sky Father – either because this, too, has
become ‘subsumed’ by the assumption of the mantle of myth by the Son, or
because the ‘Son of Aditi’ situation from RV IV 42 4 is an essence-tial
portion of the ritual processes and understanding; or, perhaps even,
because the human child(ren) may indeed have been born to a queen or
queens with a divinely resonant / resemblant name). Certainly, in RV IV
42, if we did not have additional surrounding contextual information
(both provided in some small number of lines of the Hymnal itself, as
well as elsewhere in the scriptural canon), we could be forgiven for
reading much of that Hymn (mythic-)literally, and thinking that this
was, indeed, *the* Indra speaking about His Mighty Deeds, or being
hailed for same.

Or it could go the other way – insofar as the mythic figure with the
mythic circumstances of life has been semi-misremembered as having
mortal (part-)parentage , and this detail has come to somewhat define
the later mythological-corpus existence of the Striker/Thunderer amongst
the Greeks. An ‘addition’ of (semi-)mortality and requiring subsequent
apotheosis to resolve the contradiction and restore Herakles (but
apparently not Perseus) to the status of the Olympian ‘true God’
Striker/Thunderer commensurate with His co-expressions, Indra and Thor
elsewhere amidst the Indo-European sphere. If this were the case, it may
have been a semi-intentional ‘tweak’ – designed to present the
‘position’ of the Striker/Thunderer as ‘available’ for assumption here
in this mortal world of ours by the suitably ritually empowered and
prepared (indeed, quite literally *prayed for*) princeling.

It would be tempting to assume that as we have *two* of these figures
amongst the Greeks – Perseus and Herakles – that one is the ‘original
God’, and the other is a recollection of the ‘elevated princeling’. I
cannot suggest one way or the other whether there is any truth to that –
and instead can only point to the fact that *both* Perseus *and*
Herakles possess quite key features in the course of Their Live(s) that
would make it very difficult to determine which should properly be
regarded as which. I shall not enumerate these here, but suffice to say
that if Herakles has the Olympian end to His mortal existence, Perseus’
circumstances following His Birth, being set adrift upon the sea with
His Mother, Dannae (note – another Mother Goddess theonymic resonancy,
although also rather interesting given the likely etymology meaning
‘(Flowing) Water’) clearly resonating with the situation of Lord Indra
in RV IV 18 , where Indra too is consigned to the waters as a newborn.
However, these details pertaining to Perseus are not only resonant with
the mythology of Indra – but the later attestations for the early
circumstances of both Krishna and Karna also (as I considered at greater
length in a number of previous works, including ‘On The Birth Of Indra
And Its Direct Parallel In The Circumstance Of Danae And Perseus, Devaki
And Krishna, Pritha And Karna, Etc.’). As the latter of these in
particular appears quite a logical candidate for the ‘Demigod’ rubric
(being the son of the Sun God to a mortal woman, conceived via the
utilization of a particular mantra, and not usually thought of as a
deity in the main sense), perhaps such an element (notwithstanding its
seeming lack of attestation for the young Herakles) may apply to
*both/either* Striker/Thunderer *proper* *as well as* to the mortal
child conceived as a resonancy of He.

It may also simply be the result of different local versions of the
Striker/Thunderer acknowledged by different Greek groups of the
far-distant pre-antiquity, under different theonymics and unevenly
preserving certain other details – then, when coming together in the
higher and more Classical age where much mythology of this kind was
‘reconciled’ into an attempt at a cohesive mythos … instead of realizing
that it was a case of two expressions of the same deific, we wound up
with two figures that *could* both be identified as related in *some*
sense (namely, the paternity), yet which remained obscure in various
other coterminities. There is some potential precedency for this when we
consider the general confusion even into the Classical era of just what
to make of Dionysus … to the point of some ancient authorities holding
that there were, in fact, *multiple* Dionysuses even named as such (and
including Zagreus; Sabazios, also, where Thracian ‘Interpretatio’ was
called for), whilst others recalled the co-identification with Hades
etc. and so forth.

About the only thing we can state for certain – is that we cannot state
very much for certain. Other than, of course, the clear saliency for the
Striker/Thunderer underlying Indo-European mythology in the Classical
accountings that have come down for us of each of Herakles and Perseus
(and, of course, the Roman, Etruscan, etc. etc. equivalent figures).

Although thanks to this most intriguing RigVedic Hymnal – we can now
*also* assert with confidence that the notion of the ‘Demigod’ … and, as
I had predicted in various works written over the course of the past
year, the saliency for the Striker/Thunderer in relation to resonancy
for the royal heir conceived via the relevant ritual in question,
informing a fair few mythic figures of prominency likewise … that these
things are much more ancient and archaically Indo-European than are
often suspected by many.

For that, we can but thank the rather forthrightly stated verses of this
ancient Vedic King, Trasadasyu.
