+++
title = "On The ‘Prime Deity’ Of Thexa0RigVeda"
date = "July 16, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/twitter-poll-rv.png?w=615)

This poll somebody ran on twitter is interesting. Now, I have my own
biases, of course, but I’m not sure that the results are especially
accurate. For instance, it would take quite a .. selective reading to
conclude Vishnu to be the “prime deity” of the RigVeda – that would seem
to be a modern sectarian influence back-projecting itself through time.

However, there’s a rather more foundational problem. Two, in fact –

First and foremost – what does “prime deity” mean? Most frequency of
mentions – the ‘quantitative’ approach? I don’t think that’s especially
useful. Most important? That would be better, yet how do we assess
importance. Integrality to rites, scale and scope of contribution?

Personally, I would suggest that in various ways the most important
deific of the RigVeda … is Vak Aditi

After all, this is the foundation – the Queen of Law , Cosmic Order ;
Speech without which there is no Vedas, the investiture of
Furor/Inspiration without which Rsis cannot write.

Similarly, it is only through the Devi’s availment that Indra is able to
accomplish His most mighty deeds; it is only through the Devi that the
Soma is able to be produced or the Vajra conjured from the Waters.

In the sense that Aditi is Mother of Indra – then quite directly, there
would be no Indra without Her ; which is also applicable to Rudra as
Dyaus Pitar as Father of Indra, I suppose. \[And we can also note with
interest the statement that it is Vak Devi Who empowers the Bow of
Rudra, likewise\]

In the sense that we are able to operationalize the Rites – well, once
more, Vak ; and, per Word of Goddess Herself in RV X 125 – it is much
more than just ritual which is all, implicitly, contingent upon Her.

Hence what is found in RV X 125 3 –

अहं राष्ट्री संगमनी वसूनां चिकितुषी परथमायज्ञियानाम \|

Which, in Griffith translation –

“I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most thoughtful, first of
those who merit worship.”

Or, in the Jamison/Brereton:

“I am ruler, assembler of goods, observer foremost among those deserving
the sacrifice.”

Now, of interest is that the actual words utilized … well, what She
‘gathers’ are the Vasus – ‘radiances’; whilst ‘most thoughtful’ we
should probably more aptly render something akin to
‘Understander/Comprehender of the Absolute’ (‘self-knowledge’, in Her
most illustrious case, of course).

Prathama Yajniyanam, meanwhile, almost requires no translation – the
foremost and leading of the most deserving recipients of the Yajna, our
Fire Sacrifice.

I have gone through and put considerable attention on translating some
of the other lines of this most magnificent hymnal – as well as various
other hymnals of the RigVeda (and other texts) where the Goddess is
mentioned. I shall not seek to repeat that work here.

For now, it is enough to know that we have an intriguing
millennia-antecedent exemplar of that modern proverb concerning what
lies behind every good man.

Or, as She Herself puts it –

अहं मित्रावरुणोभा बिभर्म्यहमिन्द्राग्नीहमश्विनोभा  
अहं सोममाहनसं बिभर्म्यहं तवष्टारमुतपूषणं भगम

A list of Gods that are Supported and Empowered by Her. And, indeed, Who
correspondingly Empower Others Themselves in fairly direct consequence.

It might be suggested to be a bit lamentably typical that Devi Vak
should be left off a poll such as this – in favour of several male
deifics Whose mightiest deeds for which They are deservedly renowned are
only accomplished through Her agency …

… but I somehow suspect that She is still ‘getting on with the job’
regardless, whatever others may say (or not).

After all, as we know from the later and more expansive Hindu
theological canon – it is only She, only Devi Who is *not* weakened via
the loss of sacral conduct when this is wiped out and suppressed by a
rather imaginative demonic war effort. And therefore, to Her that the
entire rest of the Pantheon must turn – and receive Their entreaties to
come and deliver both them and us from a fate most malefic indeed.

So, whether hailed as ‘prime deity’ in a twitter poll or not – not only
is it abundantly clear that Her Primacy in the *actual* Veda is
paramount, but that Her Primacy in the actual reality is so likewise.

Jai Mata Di !
