+++
title = "Brief Overview Of Some Empowering Elixir Comparanda – Soma, Kvasir, Mead of Poetry, Ambrosia,xa0etc."
date = "July 15, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/2140a1a9-c420-4813-9ffd-bc2985f536ef_rw_1920-1.jpg?w=1024)

As promised, short-form not-articles of broader interest. This is from
an interaction about Soma / Kvasir / Mead of Poetry / Ambrosia, etc.
etc.  
  
Begins:  
—  
We can tell that Soma & Kvasir \*should\* be the same substance based
around the unmistakably coterminous elements contained in the
Skaldskaparmal & Havamal mythology for the obtaining of the latter …
with the Vedic ritual elements for the obtaining of the former.
Sturluson’s account, in other words, has preserved a mythologized (yet
still recognizable) recounting that is the same general ritual, from the
same source, as the Vedic understanding.  
Now, I don’t deny that something peculiar happened viz. the Greeks so
that they wound up with a prominent role for alcohol in their later
civilization – yet in the \*earlier\* materials, and still residually
there even in some later ones, you can see the much more close
coterminity in key aspects with what we know from Vedic evidence.  
  
\[the particular example which springs to mind is Achilles’ empowerment
from “Nectar and Ambrosia” as delivered by Athena – directly coterminous
with the key role for Aditi Vak Saraswati in the bestowal of both Ugra
\[the ‘furor’ state\] and the empowerment of Soma in Vedic understanding
… with interesting key mytholinguistic descriptors for Achilles’ state
which \*show\* it’s the same understanding being deployed there; the
interesting situation of Herakles / Hercle / Hercules and Hera / Uni /
Juno with regard to milk and apotheosis/empowerment is similarlyl
resonant ; as is what occurs with Triptolemos & Demeter \]  
  
\[as applies the Greeks, it isn’t just wine etc. – or, for that matter,
something-laced wine – which winds up crowding out somewhat what would
have been the more authentic element. Olives and olive oil appear to
have somehow wound up with a not entirely dissimilar mytho-cultural
role, as can be demonstrated via … some of the stuff which goes on with
Greek mythologization of what elsewhere in the IE sphere we recognize as
rituals (admittedly, rituals also preserved for easy memorization in
narrative form in various ritual commentary texts).\]  
  
The Scythian lack of familiarity – and, depending upon which bit of
Herodotus one is reading from (because it’s an internally contradictory
text on the relevant points for .. reasons that I don’t think i got
around to discussing in any of my works upon the subject but which
basically come down to some of the occasions where Scythians show up
them being used as more of a literary device than a genuine recounting
of their culture – the ‘opposite to civilization’, so to speak) – with
alcohol further speaks to that not having a (major) role in the
\*actual\* archaic Indo-European empowering elixir.  
  
The situation of the Scythians as – particularly in the East, what had
been the \*conservative\* post-Andronovo IE religion (as demonstrated by
their \*severe disdain\* for the Zoroastrian Heresy .. despite later
post-facto Achaemenid era syncreticisms which started to emerge in some
places on a mostly aesthetic rather than substantive basis) should be
taken as indicative if not necessarily authoritative (because we don’t
have enough Scythian material in any depth nor detail to \*be\*
authoritative with).  
  
Which is important to note because what we \*can\* tell from relatively
recent archaeological unearthing on the subject is that … yeah,
(Indo-)Scythian utilization of psilocybin mushrooms for Soma was,
indeed. a thing. And rather directly attested, too.  
  
And it matches up rather strikingly well with the ethnobotany (more
properly, ethnomycology i suppose?) of psilocybin bearing mushrooms –
like, the effect profile described in Vedic comparanda and preparation
processes are still recognizable today. \[which has interesting bearing
upon the – potential – alcoholic incorporation for the Nordic iteration,
because you can def perform an alcohol extraction for psilocybin, but
more especially you can utilize an alcoholic solution for
\*preservation\* purposes as well.\]  
  
Although my position is that Zoroastrian Haoma is .. an “in name only”
equivalent – insofar as the same “culture-jamming” process which the
Zoroastrians deployed about \*just about everything else\* , they did
with said empowering elixir as well. Which makes logical sense when you
consdier the serious lengths they went to to try and suppress /
eradicate the orthodox religion they were supplanting, its priesthood
and genuine divine connection.  
Hence, ephedra being utilized rather than an actual ‘proper’
mind-altering substance /entheogen.  
  
—  
  
ENDS  
  
Now, of course, there’s quite a lot of expansion upon various of those
points I’ve just briefly touched on there – and you can read all about
it in various of my other works.  
  
But figured that a really brief primer overview would be of interest in
the mean-time.
