+++
title = "On Bowing To The Gods – The Greek Perception (Anxa0Excerpt)"
date = "July 25, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/he_stoods_silent_before_king.jpg?w=724)

Now, when these debates come up in earnest around something as simple as
bowing before a God – we inevitably find people objecting upon the basis
of a rather skewed (mis-)understanding of history and scripture (yes,
Indo-European religions have scripture – almost as if this is rather
important as a feature of an enduring tradition spanning thousands of
years or something). It seems almost customary to cite the opposition of
the Macedonians to Alexander’s attempt to institute the Persianate
custom ofProskynesis – and thence extrapolate from there that the
objection of these Greeks to engaging with their ruler as if he were a
God, ought mean that the Greeks were simultaneously opposed to engaging
with their actual Gods in anything even vaguely reminiscent of such a
manner.

A moment’s consideration ought reveal the essential fallacy to that
attempted equation.

Especially when we consider some of the actual textual evidence of the
Classical world itself upon such matters –

Here’s Xenophon, in his Anabasis: “Again, when Xerxes at a later time
gathered together that countlesshost and came against Greece, then too
our forefathers were victorious, both by land and by sea, over the
forefathers of our enemies. As tokens of these victories we may, indeed,
still behold the trophies, but the strongest witness to them is the
freedom of the states in which you were born and bred; for to no human
creature do you pay homage as master, but to the gods alone.”

Now, the words which have been rendered there as “pay homage” – in the
original Greek, it is προσκυνεῖτε. Proskyneíte. That is to say,
‘Proskynesis’ – invoked here as something inappropriate when engaging
with a mortal human as a master … but most *definitely* appropriate as
applies our relationship to The Gods. Indeed, quite pointedly held here
as the essence-tial element which enabled the Greeks to triumph and
*remain* free – although this becomes clearer when parsing Xenophon’s
speech in its full length, something we do not have the space to do here
for now.

There’s another occurrence for Proskynesis to be found in that same
chapter of the Anabasis, of course – and it is rather more famous. I
shall again quote the words of Xenophon:

“‘\[…\] but if our intention is to rely upon our arms, and not only to
inflict punishment upon them for their past deeds, but henceforth to
wage implacable war with them, we have—the gods willing—many fair hopes
of deliverance.’  
As he was saying this a man sneezed, and when the soldiers heard it,
they all with one impulse made obeisance to the god; and Xenophon said,
“I move, gentlemen, since at the moment when we were talking about
deliverance an omen from Zeus the Saviour was revealed to us, that we
make a vow to sacrifice to that god thank-offerings for deliverance as
soon as we reach a friendly land; and that we add a further vow to make
sacrifices, to the extent of our ability, to the other gods also. All
who are in favour of this motion,” he said, “will raise their hands.”
And every man in the assembly raised his hand. Thereupon they made their
vows and struck up the paean.”

Now, to explicate what has occurred there – at the moment that Xenophon
uttered that word, ‘Deliverance’, ‘σωτηρία’ (‘Soteria’), ‘Ten Thousand’
hardened Greek warriors fell to their knees. The reasoning being that it
was felt that Zeus the Savior – Zeus Soteria – had sent an omen of their
impending deliverance from the most perilous circumstances they now
found themselves immersed amidst. Why a sneeze? Why should a sneeze form
such a potent portent? I do not know – although one thing I can say for
certain is that when thousands of Greek soldiers immediately all bow as
a result of it, that is most certainly no ordinary sneeze!

Xenophon’s speech then takes as its theme the aforementioned situation
of the Greeks having historically triumphed against the hostile Persians
who sought to render them serfs – thanks to the Availment of the Gods,
and the powerful metaphysical forces at play in those conflicts for
which they were justly thankful. The serious and ornate ritual
understandings enjoined there are quite at odds with this notion of just
casually going drinking with divinity.

Another term which is perhaps relevant is the Ancient Greekἱκεσῐ́ᾱ
/ἱκετείᾱ (‘hiketeia’ / ‘hikesia’) andἱκᾱ́νω (‘hikano’) – effectively,
‘supplication’, and ‘to approach \[as a supplicant\]’, respectively
(ἱκετεύω (‘hiketeuo’) – ‘to beg’ – is also closely related). These are
gestures that are found as far back as the Iliad (i.e. as far back as
the Ancient Greek mythological canon really goes, textually speaking),
and tend to involve … well, ‘going low’ before the God being approached.
‘Crouching’, touching the knees of the power being supplicated, and
other such associated elements are quite pointedly referenced. Although
whereas Proskynesis is intended to be more toward the ‘general act of
recognition and piety’ end of things, the hiketeia is instead connoted
as a more specific call for aid or forgiveness.

There are, of course, quite numerous further examples which could be
drawn from in both the Greek and Roman textual spheres – but I think
that I have made my point here. I shall also not expand upon the
comparative elements found in Hinduism – although suffice to say that,
once again, we find clear resonancies between the Classical and the
Hindu understandings (for example, the concept of Pranam – literally
‘bending forward’ in honouring).
