+++
title = "Hellenic Solidarity For Hindu NASA Intern A Bright Spark Amidst Thexa0Black"
date = "July 15, 2021"

+++
![Earlier this week, NASA posted a tweet featuring four of its young
interns at their workstations. One of these was a Hindu woman in a bindi
– whose workspace featured several deific depictions (small statuettes,
a miniature shivling, and a few pictures up on the walls).  
  
Now, sadly this was … a bit much for some people – and so the NASA post
in question wound up with some pretty caustic pushback from people
outraged that somebody working for NASA might be, variously, religious
(and specifically Hindu religious), or Indian (and unapologetically
Hindu whilst being so).  
  
Personally, I’d have felt that what she had on her desk was of
considerably secondary importance than the fact that .. you know ..
she’d scored an internship at NASA – and was therefore evidently pretty
smart straight from the get-go. But I suppose I’m biased in that way.
(Also noted that her desk was the most ‘cluttered’ of those on show – a
positive, it frequently correlates with a spark of genius .. but, again,
biased in that sphere)  
  
I also found myself recalling various of those great minds in physics
and other scientific fields in history who’ve been quite overt as to
their having derived some influence, inspiration, and in Oppenheimer’s
case, pithy quotation from our faith. Perhaps these people with a
problem with the young woman shall be similarly rolling up at CERN to
protest that they have a rather large Nataraja Murti upon the grounds
there.  
  
Certainly, were I in her position, the active integration of religious
elements into my work – by which I mean my headspace, mindspace, and the
drawing from those faculties in the work’s completion – would be a big
part of what I was doing there. (Although perhaps not *quite* as overtly
and actively as I wound up doing for my rehab coursework last semester,
as I think some of us may recall 😛 )  
  
Anyway, while it can be quite fairly argued, I think, that were it a
young Muslim woman with a hijab, or a Sikh lad with a turban, that
there’d have been a rather different response from some of the
commenters in question – praising the ‘diversity’ on show, the ‘look at
how they’ve proudly presented their culture and heritage even into the
highest echelons’ sort of thing …  
  
… a young Indian Hindu woman in a bindi is, apparently, supposed to be
the opposite and the antithesis of everything NASA stands for; and never
mind the absolutely incredible heritage of Vedic mathematics and
astronomy, etc. … how *very dare* somebody actually be *this specific
kind* of religious in the 21st century in science with Saraswati
devotional iconography upon display.  
  
The fact that the major murtis were the TriDevi probably also induced
some consternation in there somewhere about being unable to so easily
roll out a “patriarchal religion, oppresses women!” attack to add to the
calumny 😛  
But all of that isn’t why I shared this tweet here.  
  
Instead, it’s for something quite different, and far more positive –  
  
A [Greek (Hellenic) traditional religious adherent sending his
solidarity](https://twitter.com/angelonasios/status/1414652852509753345),
and his support by showing that, once again, “we’re not so different,
after all”, across the Indo-European
sphere!](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/greek-nasa-solidarity.png?w=610)
