+++
title = "The Six-Faced Son Of The Skyxa0Father"
date = "July 20, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/e6thllhucaengzc.jpg?w=1024)

Apt for a Tuesday (that is to say – Mars’ Day: Dies Martis, Hemera
Areos, etc.)

‘Kumara’, by Kedaram Vishwanathan.

Better known as Skanda or Kartikeya – Kumara \[‘Son’\], the prominent
Hindu War God (well, one of … look, we have quite a few) Whose Vahana
(‘Vehicle’/’Steed’) is the Peacock or Rooster (although I have also seen
a few other avian iconographic options … and maintain that there
*should* be some conceptual resonancy for a bipedal predatory dinosaur …
but that is my peculiar idiosyncracy).

Now, Kumara is interesting because He helps us to demonstrate the
underlying coterminity of an array of seemingly somewhat disparate Hindu
myth and deific (co-)identity.

The most prominent mythology tends to refer to Skanda as Son of Shiva,
via a complicated situation involving the Krtikka (Pleiades
constellation – whence His name of Kartikeya, i.e. ‘of the Krtikka’, in
reference to His Six Mothers; and thus also His Six Heads in many
iconographic depictions – we similarly find a brief citation for a
‘Six-Faced One’ in the Taittiriya Aranyaka attached to the Yajurveda).

In Vedic texts, we find Agni linked to the Krtikka (Pleiades
constellation); and there is also a prominent mythological presentation
for Kumara as Son of Agni, again via a complicated situation involving
the Pleiades.

At first, there may appear to be some curious contradiction here – is
the deific that has fathered this Son via the Pleiades, Shiva or Agni?

And to that, the answer can only be – “Yes”.

For while there are some rather … pointed differences to the major
manifestations of the Agni => Kumara and Shiva-Rudra => Skanda mythology
(in particular, the role played in the latter by Agni specifically) – it
is nevertheless abundantly clear that in various important particulars,
the myths do, indeed, foundationally align.

And, as luck (‘Shiva’) should have it … we are in possession of quite an
array of Vedic direct statements that Agni is Rudra.

Further supports for all of this are to be furnished via the drawing
from both Nordic and Classical Indo-European mythologies – wherein we
can find both the situation of Odin and Heimdall appearing to resonate
with interesting directness to the ‘pattern’ of this myth; and the
situation of .. various deifics in relation to the Pleiades within the
Greek reckoning. I have written upon those mat(t)ers elsewhere.

For today, it is enough to hail Skanda – a figure I intend to write
further upon in due time !

योगीश्वरो महासेनः कार्तिकेयोऽग्निनंदनः ।  
स्कंदः कुमारः सेनानीः स्वामी शंकरसंभवः ॥
