+++
title = "On The Spurious De-Indo-European-ization Of The Gods On Wikipedia Andxa0Elsewhere"
date = "July 8, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/pelasgian-pre-ie-crop.png?w=827)

This is what we’re up against. And yes, yes I know – the hazards of
reading Wikipedia … but that’s just it, isn’t it. So many people do. The
stuff they see on that website is their first (and quite frequently,
last and only) meaningful introduction to a topic, its nuances and its
intricacies. As applies matters Indo-European … this leads to some *very
questionable* interpretations and even outright fictional “facts” being
perpetuated – because they’re part of the ‘preferred headcanon’ of some
wiki editor out there somewhere.

Although in truth, it’s not quite their fault. They – usually – just put
up and approve changes to pages that can provide a citation to an
academic or other expert in the field. And *in principle*, that’s no bad
thing … except some of the academics in some fields have some *very
strange* ideas that are frequently, demonstrably, pants-on-head
incorrect.

In some cases, it’s stuff which came up when our field was first getting
its serious start in the 1800s … and has just become so much ‘part of
the furniture’ that it hasn’t really seriously been challenged nor
changed *since* then by people acting to present the ‘orthodoxy’ of the
field to outsiders and lay-people.

An example for that is the situation around Dyaus Pitar being “dead” or
“absent” – blatantly not true, directly contradicted by various IE
mythic canons .. yet it persists on, and then somehow feeds into that
“Odin displacing Tyr” meme (also false and another example of flawed
etymology / comparative analysis from early days in the field still
being re-perpetuated to this day).

In some further cases, it’s a case of probably-honest error, resultant
from people – even experts in a field – not quite grasping what they’re
grapping with, and then in something approaching good-faith presenting a
flawed position which then gets seized upon by others.

David Anthony’s ‘The Horse, The Wheel, And Language’ (at least, I
*think* that’s the book people quote with this in) has a prominent
instance of this – advancing the notion of Indra being a sort of ‘canon
immigrant’ without other Indo-European cognates and being sourced into
the Vedic religion from the BMAC (Bactria Margiana Archaeological
Complex), and others suggesting that the ‘original’ Dragon-Slayer in
Indo-Iranic mythology ‘should’ be Trita Aptya with Indra having ‘stolen
His Thunder’ so to speak by becoming prominent for a deed that’s .. in
the I-I mythology at least .. kinda shared.

Except that’s … really not the case – as I’ve repeatedly demonstrated
through my work, Indra is quite clearly a strongly IE expression of the
Indo-European Striker/Thunderer deific, and the key features of the
mythology are directly concordant with what we should expect there as
the fairly direct result. There’s no room for ‘incorporation’ – as He
was already there! The reason why it’s come up in academia is because
Zoroastrian-oriented scholars have seen the lack of an Indra god in the
Zoroastrian canon, noted that their version of Trita fulfils the
relevant role, and rather than observe that there’s an Indra *demon*
\[i.e. the demonized God Indra\] Who has been displaced … assumed that
the *lack of an Indra deific* is the ‘proper’ baseline Indo-Iranian
state. It’s annoying – although as applies guys like Anthony, I don’t
*think* it’s been done maliciously.

In other cases still, it’s stuff where somebody has almost
*deliberately* sought to put out a ‘controversial’ (we could probably
just as well say ‘edgy’) take on things, because that stands out and
gets you a reputation, interest, and funding.

The thing which annoyed me in this screencap is partially derived from
that – although, again, it’s a much bigger problem as applies the Greek
sphere.

Guys like Beekes and Furnee have almost *vandalized* the field by
running around publishing works proclaiming that there are “no”
Indo-European etymologies for various integral Greek mythic and
religious terms, in a bid to ascribe seemingly anything and everything
that isn’t nailed down (and quite a lot which, quite frankly, *actually
is*), to non-IE “Pre-Greeks”.

In order to do this, they *blatantly and seemingly deliberately* ignore
*clearly viable* Proto-Indo-European etymologies and *obvious* and
obviously close cognates in Sanskrit etc. Because it would be decidedly
inconvenient for what they’re selling to acknowledge thus … because it’d
make their schtick entirely unnecessary were they to do so.

This does not just extend to the linguistic sphere – but also right out
into the mythological one, as well.

There is some utter aversion to the notion that large swathes of an
Indo-European mythic canon … might in fact be Indo-European, archaically
and endogenously so. This doesn’t mean that there isn’t scope for
occasional syncretizations or foreign incorporations – especially later
on.

But looking at this list of deifics that somebody’s identified as
possessing “no parallels in the mythologies of other Indo-European
peoples” … as with Indra, we are finding that *key* and *core* figures
are being ascribed an *entirely* foreign and blatantly unnecessary
non-Indo-European point of origin.

Or, I suppose, an “Anatolian” one … because whomever wrote this
apparently hasn’t realized that “Anatolian Indo-European” is literally a
thing – and the *dominant* set of spheres in that place at the point in
time when any interchange could have occurred.

I won’t go through and point-by-point refute *every* deific listed there
being lacking in clear IE parallels – I’ve done that for many of Them in
the course of my previous work, for all but Aphrodite and Apollo (and I
haven’t done much in those Two directions not because They are somehow
non-IE … but simply because it has not been an especial area of interest
– although I have written several times *tangentially* about Apollo in
IE comparanda terms; our associate Athanaricus is quite keen to write
something looking at Aphrodite specifically in these Indo-European terms
as well). Happy to link the relevant (A)Arti-cles in the comments if
they are of interest to people.

Now as for ‘why this matters’ – well, some might suggest that the whole
thing is a bit academic. They are both correct, and to a certain extent
missing the point. If you don’t grasp why the active engagement with
heritage and faith are important even (no doubt *especially*) amidst the
detritus of the modern era .. I’m not going to sell you on it right now.

But if you *do*, then you already understand why it’s so important for
such things to be *accurate*. And if you’re most interested in engaging
with *our* ancestral elements … then being told “oh, hey, x y and z
aren’t actually anything to do with these, they turned up later and were
borrowed/nicked off some other neighbouring people”, can significantly
chance your perception thereof.

We look in righteous disdain at people attempting to co-opt such things
for their own very modern indeed agendas. The sorts who insist outright
that Yoga was ‘Kemetic’ and African rather than Indian (interestingly, a
line of popularity amongst those who think they are ‘fighting’ ‘Right
Wing Hindutva Extremism’ in certain white American settings), or that
Leonardo Da Vinci somehow sourced much of the Renaissance from a Chinese
visitation to Italy (I am not kidding, this is basically what Gavin
Menzies is pushing these days – to PRC enthusiastic support), or various
groups endeavouring to place themselves as the direct descendants of
Ancient Egypt’s Pharaohs.

We react with indignation (or bemusement) at these bristling
ridicularities precisely because we can see that they are incorrect –
and that they are being wilfully repeated all about the place by people
who want to get you to *believe* something which is fundamentally
nonsense. Because it serves some agenda or agendas in order for you to
do so.

And yet, when it comes to The Gods – Our Gods – … Who shall step up to
defend Them from similar misconstruement, spurious eschewment, and in
various cases active and out-right defamation.

After all – ‘perception’ seems to manufacture ‘reality’, these days …
and one of the most powerful conditioners for reshaping views is “Oh, I
saw it upon Wikipedia”.
