---
title: THE FIRST STEPS

---
<div>

[←](the_preparation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Addresses on
Bhakti-Yoga](addresses_on_bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_teacher_of_spirituality.htm)

  

## THE FIRST STEPS

The philosophers who wrote on Bhakti defined it as extreme love for God.
Why a man should love God is the question to be solved; and until we
understand that, we shall not be able to grasp the subject at all. There
are two entirely different ideals of life. A man of any country who has
any religion knows that he is a body and a spirit also. But there is a
great deal of difference as to the goal of human life.

In Western countries, as a rule, people lay more stress on the body
aspect of man; those philosophers who wrote on Bhakti in India laid
stress on the spiritual side of man; and this difference seems to be
typical of the Oriental and Occidental nations. It is so even in common
language. In England, when speaking of death it is said, a man gave up
his ghost; in India, a man gave up his body. The one idea is that man
*is* a body and *has* a soul; the other that man *is* a soul and *has* a
body. More intricate problems arise out of this. It naturally follows
that the ideal which holds that man is a body and has a soul lays all
the stress on the body. If you ask why man lives, you will be told it is
to enjoy the senses, to enjoy possessions and wealth. He cannot dream of
anything beyond even if he is told of it; his idea of a future life
would be a continuation of this enjoyment. He is very sorry that it
cannot continue all the time here, but he has to depart; and he thinks
that somehow or other he will go to some place where the same thing will
be renewed. He will have the same enjoyments, the same senses, only
heightened and strengthened. He wants to worship God, because God is the
means to attain this end. The goal of his life is enjoyment of
sense-objects, and he comes to know there is a Being who can give him a
very long lease of these enjoyments, and that is why he worships God.

On the other hand the Indian idea is that God is the goal of life; there
is nothing beyond God, and the sense-enjoyments are simply something
through which we are passing now in the hope of getting better things.
Not only so; it would be disastrous and terrible if man had nothing but
sense-enjoyments. In our everyday life we find that the less the
sense-enjoyments, the higher the life of the man. Look at the dog when
he eats. No man ever ate with the same satisfaction. Observe the pig
giving grunts of satisfaction as he eats; it is his heaven, and if the
greatest archangel came and looked on, the pig would not even notice
him. His whole existence is in his eating. No man was ever born who
could eat that way. Think of the power of hearing in the lower animals,
the power of seeing; all their senses are highly developed. Their
enjoyment of the senses is extreme; they become simply mad with delight
and pleasure. And the lower the man also, the more delight he finds in
the senses. As he gets higher, the goal becomes reason and love. In
proportion as these faculties develop, he loses the power of enjoying
the senses.

For illustration's sake, if we take for granted that a certain amount of
power is given to man, and that that can be spent either on the body, or
the mind, or the spirit, then all the powers spent on any one of these
leaves just so much less to be expended on the others. The ignorant or
savage races have much stronger sensual faculties than the civilised
races, and this is, in fact, one of the lessons we learn from history
that as a nation becomes civilised the nerve organisation becomes finer,
and they become physically weaker. Civilise a savage race, and you will
find the same thing; another barbarian race comes up and conquers it. It
is nearly always the barbarian race that conquers. We see then that if
we desire only to have sense-enjoyments all the time, we degrade
ourselves to the brute state. A man does not know what he is asking for
when he says, he wants to go to a place where his sense-enjoyments will
be intensified; that he can only have by going down to the brutes.

So with men desiring a heaven full of sense-pleasures. They are like
swine wallowing in the mire of the senses, unable to see anything
beyond. This sense-enjoyment is what they want, and the loss of it is
the loss of heaven to them. These can never be Bhaktas in the highest
sense of the word; they can never be true lovers of God. At the same
time, though this lower ideal be followed for a time, it will also in
course of time change, each man will find that there is something
higher, of which he did not know, and so this clinging to life and to
things of the senses will gradually die away. When I was a little boy at
school, I had a fight with another schoolfellow about some sweetmeats,
and he being the stronger boy snatched them from my hand. I remember the
feeling I had; I thought that boy was the most wicked boy ever born, and
that as soon as I grew strong enough I would punish him; there was no
punishment sufficient for his wickedness. We have both grown up now, and
we are fast friends. This world is full of babies to whom eating and
drinking, and all these little cakes are everything. They will dream of
these cakes, and their idea of future life is where these cakes will be
plentiful. Think of the American Indian who believes that his future
life will be in a place which is a very good hunting ground. Each one of
us has an idea of a heaven just as we want it to be; but in course of
time, as we grow older and see higher things, we catch higher glimpses
beyond. But let us not dispense with our ideas of future life in the
ordinary way of modern times, by not believing in anything — that is
destruction. The agnostic who thus destroys everything is mistaken, the
Bhakta sees higher. The agnostic does not want to go to heaven, because
he has none; while the Bhakta does not want to go to heaven, because he
thinks it is child's play. What he wants is God.

What can be a higher end than God? God Himself is the highest goal of
man; see Him, enjoy Him. We can never conceive anything higher, because
God is perfection. We cannot conceive of any higher enjoyment than that
of love, but this word love has different meanings. It does not mean the
ordinary selfish love of the world; it is blasphemy to call that love.
The love for our children and our wives is mere animal love; that love
which is perfectly unselfish is the only love, and that is of God. It is
a very difficult thing to attain to. We are passing through all these
different loves — love of children, father, mother, and so forth. We
slowly exercise the faculty of love; but in the majority of cases we
never learn anything from it, we become bound to one step, to one
person. In some cases men come out of this bondage. Men are ever running
after wives and wealth and fame in this world; sometimes they are hit
very hard on the head, and they find out what this world really is. No
one in this world can really love anything but God. Man finds out that
human love is all hollow. Men cannot love though they talk of it. The
wife says she loves her husband and kisses him; but as soon as he dies,
the first thing she thinks about is the bank account, and what she shall
do the next day. The husband loves the wife; but when she becomes sick
and loses her beauty, or becomes haggard, or makes a mistake, he ceases
to care for her. All the love of the world is hypocrisy and hollowness.

A finite subject cannot love, nor a finite object be loved. When the
object of the love of a man is dying every moment, and his mind also is
constantly changing as he grows, what eternal love can you expect to
find in the world? There cannot be any real love but in God: why then
all these loves? These are mere stages. There is a power behind
impelling us forward, we do not know where to seek for the real object,
but this love is sending us forward in search of it. Again and again we
find out our mistake. We grasp something, and find it slips through our
fingers, and then we grasp something else. Thus on and on we go, till at
last comes light; we come to God, the only One who loves. His love knows
no change and is ever ready to take us in. How long would any of you
bear with me if I injured you? He in whose mind is no anger, hatred, or
envy, who never loses his balance, dies, or is born, who is he but God?
But the path to God is long and difficult, and very few people attain
Him. We are all babies struggling. Millions of people make a trade of
religion. A few men in a century attain to that love of God, and the
whole country becomes blessed and hallowed. When a son of God appears, a
whole country becomes blessed. It is true that few such are born in any
one century in the whole world, but all should strive to attain that
love of God. Who knows but you or I may be the next to attain? Let us
struggle therefore.

We say that a wife loves her husband. She thinks that her whole soul is
absorbed in him: a baby comes and half of it goes out to the baby, or
more. She herself will feel that the same love of husband does not exist
now. So with the father. We always find that when more intense objects
of love come to us, the previous love slowly vanishes. Children at
school think that some of their schoolfellows are the dearest beings
that they have in life, or their fathers or mothers are so; then comes
the husband or wife, and immediately the old feeling disappears, and the
new love becomes uppermost. One star arises, another bigger one comes,
and then a still bigger one, and at last the sun comes, and all the
lesser lights vanish. That sun is God. The stars are the smaller loves.
When that Sun bursts upon him, a man becomes mad what Emerson calls "a
God-intoxicated man". Man becomes transfigured into God, everything is
merged in that one ocean of love. Ordinary love is mere animal
attraction. Otherwise why is the distinction between the sexes? If one
kneels before an image, it is dreadful idolatry; but if one kneels
before husband or wife, it is quite permissible!

The world presents to us manifold stages of love. We have first to clear
the ground. Upon our view of life the whole theory of love will rest. To
think that this world is the aim and end of life is brutal and
degenerating. Any man who starts in life with that idea degenerates
himself He will never rise higher, he will never catch this glimpse from
behind, he will always be a slave to the senses. He will struggle for
the dollar that will get him a few cakes to eat. Better die than live
that life. Slaves of this world, slaves of the senses, let us rouse
ourselves; there is something higher than this sense-life. Do you think
that man, the Infinite Spirit was born to be a slave to his eyes, his
nose, and his ears? There is an Infinite, Omniscient Spirit behind that
can do everything, break every bond; and that Spirit we are, and we get
that power through love. This is the ideal we must remember. We cannot,
of course, get it in a day. We may fancy that we have it, but it is a
fancy after all; it is a long, long way off. We must take man where he
stands, and help him upwards. Man stands in materialism; you and I are
materialists. Our talking about God and Spirit is good; but it is simply
the vogue in our society to talk thus: we have learnt it parrot-like and
repeat it. So we have to take ourselves where we are as materialists,
and must take the help of matter and go on slowly until we become real
spiritualists, and feel ourselves spirits, understand the spirit, and
find that this world which we call the infinite is but a gross external
form of that world which is behind.

But something besides that is necessary. You read in the Sermon on the
Mount, "Ask, and it shall be given (to) you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you." The difficulty is, who seeks,
who wants? We all say we know God. One man writes a book to disprove
God, another to prove Him. One man thinks it his duty to prove Him all
his life; another, to disprove Him, and he goes about to teach man there
is no God. What is the use of writing a book either to prove or disprove
God? What does it matter to most people whether there is a God or not ?
The majority of men work just like a machine with no thought of God and
feeling no need of Him. Then one day comes Death and says, "Come." The
man says, "Wait a little, I want a little more time. I want to see my
son grow a little bigger." But Death says, "Come at once." So it goes
on. So goes poor John. What shall we say to poor John? He never found
anything in which God was the highest; perhaps he was a pig in the past,
and he is much better as a man. But there are some who get a little
awakening. Some misery comes, someone whom we love most dies, that upon
which we had bent our whole soul, that for which we had cheated the
whole world and perhaps our own brother, that vanishes, and a blow comes
to us. Perhaps a voice comes in our soul and asks, "What after this?"
Sometimes death comes without a blow, but such cases are few. Most of
us, when anything slips through our fingers, say, "What next?" How we
cling to the senses! You have heard of a drowning man clutching at a
straw; a man will clutch at a straw first, and when it fails, he will
say someone must help him. Still people must, as the English phrase
goes, "sow their wild oats", before they can rise to higher things.

Bhakti is a religion. Religion is not for the many, that is impossible.
A sort of knee-drill, standing up and sitting down, may be suited for
the many; but religion is for the few. There are in every country only a
few hundreds who can be, and will be religious. The others cannot be
religious, because they will not be awakened, and they do not want to
be. The chief thing is to *want* God. We want everything except God,
because our ordinary wants are supplied by the external world; it is
only when our necessities have gone beyond the external world that we
want a supply from the internal, from God. So long as our needs are
confined within the narrow limits of this physical universe, we cannot
have any need for God; it is only when we have become satiated with
everything here that we look beyond for a supply. It is only when the
need is there that the demand will come. Have done with this child's
play of the world as soon as you can, and then you will feel the
necessity of something beyond the world, and the first step in religion
will come.

There is a form of religion which is fashionable. My friend has much
furniture in her parlour; it is the fashion to have a Japanese vase, so
she must have one even if it costs a thousand dollars. In the same way
she will have a little religion and join a church. Bhakti is not for
such. That is not *want*. Want is that without which we cannot live. We
want breath, we want food, we want clothes; without them we cannot live.
When a man loves a woman in this world, there are times when he feels
that without her he cannot live, although that is a mistake. When a
husband dies, the wife thinks she cannot live without him; but she lives
all the same. This is the secret of necessity: it is that without which
we cannot live; either it must come to us or we die. When the time comes
that we feel the same about God, or in other words, we want something
beyond this world, something above all material forces, then we may
become Bhaktas. What are our little lives when for a moment the cloud
passes away, and we get one glimpse from beyond, and for that moment all
these lower desires seem like a drop in the ocean? Then the soul grows,
and feels the want of God, and must have Him.

The first step is: *What* do we want? Let us ask ourselves this question
every day, do we want God? You may read all the books in the universe,
but this love is not to be had by the power of speech, not by the
highest intellect, not by the study of various sciences. He who desires
God will get Love, unto him God gives Himself. Love is always mutual,
reflective. You may hate me, and if I want to love you, you repulse me.
But if I persist, in a month or a year you are bound to love me. It is a
wellknown psychological phenomenon. As the loving wife thinks of her
departed husband, with the same love we must desire the Lord, and then
we will find God, and all books and the various sciences would not be
able to teach us anything. By reading books we become parrots; no one
becomes learned by reading books. If a man reads but one word of love,
he indeed becomes learned. So we want first to get that desire.

Let us ask ourselves each day, "Do we want God?" When we begin to talk
religion, and especially when we take a high position and begin to teach
others, we must ask ourselves the same question. I find many times that
I don't want God, I want bread more. I may go mad if I don't get a piece
of bread; many ladies will go mad if they don't get a diamond pin, but
they do not have the same desire for God; they do not know the only
Reality that is in the universe. There is a proverb in our language — If
I want to be a hunter, I'll hunt the rhinoceros; if I want to be a
robber, I'll rob the king's treasury. What is the use of robbing beggars
or hunting ants? So if you want to love, love God. Who cares for these
things of the world? This world is utterly false; all the great teachers
of the world found that out; there is no way out of it but through God.
He is the goal of our life; all ideas that the world is the goal of life
are pernicious. This world and this body have their own value, a
secondary value, as a means to an end; but the world should not be the
end. Unfortunately, too often we make the world the end and God the
means. We find people going to church and saying, "God, give me such and
such; God, heal my disease." They want nice healthy bodies; and because
they hear that someone will do this work for them, they go and pray to
Him. It is better to be an atheist than to have such an idea of
religion. As I have told you, this Bhakti is the highest ideal; I don't
know whether we shall reach it or not in millions of years to come, but
we must make it our highest ideal, make our senses aim at the highest.
If we cannot get to the end, we shall at least come nearer to it. We
have slowly to work through the world and the senses to reach God.

</div>
