---
title: THE CHIEF SYMBOLS

---
<div>

[←](the_need_of_symbols.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](..%5Cvolume_4_contents.htm) / [Addresses on
Bhakti-Yoga](addresses_on_bhakti-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](the_ishta.htm)

  

## THE CHIEF SYMBOLS

There are two Sanskrit words, Pratika and Pratimâ. Pratika means coming
towards, nearing. In all countries you find various grades of worship.
In this country, for instance, there are people who worship images of
saints, there are people who worship certain forms and symbols. Then
there are people who worship different beings who are higher than men,
and their number is increasing very rapidly — worshippers of departed
spirits. I read that there are something like eight millions of them
here. Then there are other people who worship certain beings of higher
grade — the angels, the gods, and so forth. Bhakti-Yoga does not condemn
any one of these various grades, but they are all classed under one
name, Pratika. These people are not worshipping God, but Pratika,
something which is near, a step towards God. This Pratika worship cannot
lead us to salvation and freedom; it can only give us certain particular
things for which we worship them. For instance, if a man worships his
departed ancestors or departed friends, he may get certain powers or
certain information from them. Any particular gift that is got from
these objects of worship is called Vidyâ, particular knowledge; but
freedom, the highest aim, comes only by worship of God Himself. Some
Orientalists think, in expounding the Vedas, that even the Personal God
Himself is a Pratika. The Personal God may be a Pratika, but the
Pratikas are neither the Personal nor Impersonal God. They cannot be
worshipped as God. So it would be a great mistake if people thought that
by worshipping these different Pratikas, either as angels, or ancestors,
or Mahâtmâs (holy men, saints), etc., or departed spirits, they could
ever reach to freedom. At best they can only reach to certain powers,
but God alone can make us free. But because of that they are not to be
condemned, their worship produces some result. The man who does not
understand anything higher may get some power, some enjoyment, by the
worship of these Pratikas; and after a long course of experience, when
he will be ready to come to freedom, he will of his own accord give up
the Pratikas.

Of these various Pratikas the most prevalent form is the worship of
departed friends. Human nature — personal love, love for our friends —
is so strong in us that when they die, we wish to see them once more —
clinging on to their forms. We forget that these forms while living were
constantly changing, and when they die, we think they become constant,
and that we shall see them so. Not only so, but if I have a friend or a
son who has been a scoundrel, as soon as he dies, I begin to think he is
the saintliest person in existence; he becomes a god. There are people
in India who, if a baby dies, do not burn it, but bury it and build a
temple over it; and that little baby becomes the god of that temple.
This is a very prevalent form of religion in many countries, and there
are not wanting philosophers who think this has been the origin of all
religions. Of course they cannot prove it. We must remember, however,
that this worship of Pratikas can never bring us to salvation or to
freedom.

Secondly, it is very dangerous. The danger is that these Pratikas,
"nearing-stages", so far as they lead us on to a further stage, are all
right; but the chances are ninety-nine to one that we shall stick to the
Pratikas all our lives. It is very good to be born in a church, but it
is very bad to die there. To make it clearer, it is very good to be born
in a certain sect and have its training — it brings out our higher
qualities; but in the vast majority of cases we die in that little sect,
we never come out or grow. That is the great danger of all these
worships of Pratikas. One says that these are all stages which one has
to pass, but one never gets out of them; and when one becomes old, one
still sticks to them. If a young man does not go to church, he ought to
be condemned. But if an old man goes to church, he also ought to be
condemned; he has no business with this child's play any more; the
church should have been merely a preparation for something higher. What
business has he any more with forms and Pratikas and all these
preliminaries?

Book worship is another strong form of this Pratika, the strongest form.
You find in every country that the book becomes the God. There are sects
in my country who believe that God incarnates and becomes man, but even
God incarnate as man must conform to the Vedas, and if His teachings do
not so conform, they will not take Him. Buddha is worshipped by the
Hindus, but if you say to them, "If you worship Buddha, why don't you
take His teachings?" they will say, because they, the Buddhists, deny
the Vedas. Such is the meaning of book worship. Any number of lies in
the name of a religious book are all right. In India if I want to teach
anything new, and simply state it on my own authority, as what I think,
nobody will come to listen to me; but if I take some passage from the
Vedas, and juggle with it, and give it the most impossible meaning,
murder everything that is reasonable in it, and bring out my own ideas
as the ideas that were meant by the Vedas, all the fools will follow me
in a crowd. Then there are men preaching a sort of Christianity that
would frighten the ordinary Christian out of his wits; but they say,
"This is what Jesus Christ meant", and many come round them. People do
not want anything new, if it is not in the Vedas or the Bible It is a
case of nerves: when you hear a new and striking thing, you are
startled; or when you see a new thing, you are startled; it is
constitutional. It is much more so with thoughts. The mind has been
running in ruts, and to take up a new idea is too much of a strain; so
the idea has to be put near the ruts, and then we slowly take it. It is
a good policy, but bad morality. Think of the mass of incongruities that
reformers, and what you call the liberal preachers, pour into society
today. According to Christian Scientists, Jesus was a great healer;
according to the Spiritualists, He was a great psychic; according to the
Theosophists, He was a Mahâtmâ. All these have to be deduced from the
same text. There is a text in the Vedas which says, "Existence (Sat)
alone existed, O beloved, nothing else existed in the beginning". Many
different meanings are given to the word Sat in this text. The Atomists
say the word meant "atoms", and out of these atoms the world has been
produced. The Naturalists say it meant "nature", and out of nature
everything has come. The Shunyavâdins (maintainers of the Void) say it
meant "nothing", "zero", and out of nothing everything has been
produced. The Theists say it meant "God", and the Advaitists say it was
"Absolute Existence", and all refer to the same text as their authority.

These are the defects of book worship. But there is, on the other hand,
a great advantage in it: it gives strength. All religious sects have
disappeared excepting those that have a book. Nothing seems to kill
them. Some of you have heard of the Parsees. They were the ancient
Persians, and at one time there were about a hundred millions of them.
The majority of them were conquered by the Arabs, and converted to
Mohammedanism. A handful fled from their persecutors with their book,
which is still preserving them. A book is the most tangible form of God.
Think of the Jews; if they had not had a book, they would have simply
melted into the world. But that keeps them up; the Talmud keeps them
together, in spite of the most horrible persecution. One of the great
advantages of a book is that it crystallises everything in tangible and
convenient form, and is the handiest of all idols. Just put a book on an
altar and everyone sees it; a good book everyone reads. I am afraid I
may be considered partial. But, in my opinion books have produced more
evil than good. They are accountable for many mischievous doctrines.
Creeds all come from books, and books are alone responsible for the
persecution and fanaticism in the world. Books in modern times are
making liars everywhere. I am astonished at the number of liars abroad
in every country.

The next thing to be considered is the Pratima, or image, the use of
images. All over the world you will find images in some form or other.
With some, it is in the form of a man, which is the best form. If I
wanted to worship an image I would rather have it in the form of a man
than of an animal, or building, or any other form. One sect thinks a
certain form is the right sort of image, and another thinks it is bad.
The Christian thinks that when God came in the form of a dove it was all
right, but if He comes in the form of a fish, as the Hindus say, it is
very wrong and superstitious. The Jews think if an idol be made in the
form of a chest with two angels sitting on it, and a book on it, it is
all right, but if it is in the form of a man or a woman, it is awful.
The Mohammedans think that when they pray, if they try to form a mental
image of the temple with the Caaba, the black stone in it, and turn
towards the west, it is all right, but if you form the image in the
shape of a church it is idolatry. This is the defect of image-worship.
Yet all these seem to be necessary stages.

In this matter it is of supreme importance to think what we ourselves
believe. What we have realised, is the question. What Jesus, or Buddha,
or Moses did is nothing to us, unless we too do it for ourselves. It
would not satisfy our hunger to shut ourselves up in a room and think of
what Moses ate, nor would what Moses thought save *us*. My ideas are
very radical on these points. Sometimes I think that I am right when I
agree with all the ancient teachers, at other times I think they are
right when they agree with me. I believe in thinking independently. I
believe in becoming entirely free from the holy teachers; pay all
reverence to them, but look at religion as an independent research. I
have to find my light, just as they found theirs. Their finding the
light will not satisfy us at all. You have to *become* the Bible, and
not to follow it, excepting as paying reverence to it as a light on the
way, as a guide-post, a mark: that is all the value it has. But these
images and other things are quite necessary. You may try to concentrate
your mind, or even to project any thought. You will find that you
naturally form images in your mind. You cannot help it. Two sorts of
persons never require any image — the human animal who never thinks of
any religion, and the perfected being who has passed through these
stages. Between these two points all of us require some sort of ideal,
outside and inside. It may be in the form of a departed human being, or
of a living man or woman. This is clinging to personality and bodies,
and is quite natural. We are prone to concretise. How could we be here
if we did not concretise? We are concreted spirits, and so we find
ourselves here on this earth. Concretisation has brought us here, and it
will take us out. Going after things of the senses has made us human
beings, and we are bound to worship personal beings, whatever we may say
to the contrary. It is very easy to say "Don't be personal"; but the
same man who says so is generally most personal. His attachment for
particular men and women is very strong; it does not leave him when they
die, he wants to follow them beyond death. That is idolatry; it is the
seed, the very cause of idolatry; and the cause being there it will come
out in some form. Is it not better to have a personal attachment to an
image of Christ or Buddha than to an ordinary man or woman? In the West,
people say that it is bad to kneel before images, but they can kneel
before a woman and say, "You are my life, the light of my eyes, my
soul." That is worse idolatry. What ifs this talk about my soul my life?
It will soon go away. It is only sense-attachment. It is selfish love
covered by a mass of flowers. Poets give it a good name and throw
lavender-water and all sorts of attractive things over it. Is it not
better to kneel before a statue of Buddha or the Jina conqueror and say,
"*Thou* art my life"? I would rather do that.

There is another sort of Pratika which is not recognised in Western
countries, bout is taught in our books. This teaches the worship of mind
as God. Anything that is worshipped as God is a stage, a nearing, as it
were. An example of this is the method of showing the fine star known as
Arundhati, near the group Pleiades. One is shown a big star near to it,
and when he has fixed his attention on this and has come to know it, he
is shown a finer and still nearer star; and when he has fixed his
attention on that, he is led up to Arundhati. So all these various
Pratikas and Pratimas lead to God. The worship of Buddha and of Christ
constitute a Pratika. a drawing near to the worship of God. But this
worship of Buddha and of Christ will not save a man, he must go beyond
them to Him who manifested Himself as Jesus Christ, for God alone can
give us freedom. There are even some philosophers who say these should
he regarded as God; they are not Pratikas, but God Himself. However, we
can take all these different Pratikas, these different stages of
approach, and not be hurt by them: but if we think while we are
worshipping them that we are worshipping God, we are mistaken. If a man
worships Jesus Christ, and thinks he will be saved by that, he is
mistaken entirely. If a man thinks that by worshipping an idol or the
ghosts or spirits of the departed he will be saved, he is entirely
mistaken. We may worship anything by seeing God *in* it, if we can
forget the idol and see God there. We must not project any image upon
God. But we may fill any image with that Life which is God. Only forget
the image, and you are right enough — for "Out of Him comes everything".
He is everything. We may worship a picture as God, but not God as the
picture. God in the picture is right, but the picture as God is wrong.
God *in* the image is perfectly right. There is no danger there. This is
the real worship of God. But the image-God is a mere Pratika.

The next great thing to consider in Bhakti is the "word", the
Nâmashakti, the power of the name. The whole universe is composed of
name and form. Whatever we see is either a compound of name and form, or
simply name with form which is a mental image. So, after all, there is
nothing that is not name and form. We all believe God to be without form
or shape, but as soon as we begin to *think* of Him, He acquires both
name and form The Chitta is like the calm lake, thoughts being like
waves upon this Chitta — and name and form are the normal ways in which
these waves arise; no wave can rise without name and form. The uniform
cannot be thought of; it is beyond thought; as soon as it becomes
thought and matter, it must have name and form. We cannot separate
these. It is said in many books that God created the universe out of the
Word. Shabdabrahman, in Sanskrit, is the Christian theory of the Word.
An old Indian theory, it was taken to Alexandria by Indian preachers and
was planted there. Thus the idea of the Word and the Incarnation became
fixed there.

There is deep meaning in the thought that God created everything out of
the Word. God Himself being formless, this is the best way to describe
the projection of forms, or the creation. The Sanskrit word for creation
is Srishti, projection. What is meant by "God created things out of
nothing"? The universe is projected out of God. He becomes the universe,
and it all returns to Him, and again it proceeds forth, and again
returns. Through all eternity it will go on in that way. We have seen
that the projection of anything in the mind cannot be without name and
form. Suppose the mind to be perfectly calm, entirely without thought;
nevertheless, as soon as thought begins to rise it will immediately take
name and form. Every thought has a certain name and a certain form. In
the same way the very fact of creation, the very fact of projection is
eternally connected with name and form. Thus we find that every idea
that man has, or can have, must be connected with a certain name or word
as its counterpart. This being so, it is quite natural to suppose that
this universe is the outcome of mind, just as your body is the outcome
of your idea — your idea, as it were, made concrete and externalised. If
it be true, moreover, that the whole universe is built on the same plan,
then, if you know the manner in which one atom is built, you can
understand how the whole universe is built. If it is true that in you,
the body forms the gross part outside and the mind forms the fine part
inside, and both are eternally inseparable, then, when you cease to have
the body, you will cease to have the mind also. When a man's brain is
disturbed, his ideas also get disturbed, because they are but one, the
finer and the grosser parts. There are not two such things as matter and
mind. As in a high column of air there are dense and rarefied strata of
one and the same element air, so it is with the body; it is one thing
throughout, layer on layer, from grosser to finer. Again, the body is
like the finger nails. As these continue growing even when they are cut,
so from our subtle ideas grows body after body. The finer a thing the
more persistent it is; we find that always. The grosser it is the less
persistent. Thus, form is the grosser and name the finer state of a
single manifesting power called thought. But these three are one; it is
the Unity and the Trinity, the three degrees of existence of the same
thing. Finer, more condensed, and most condensed. Wherever the one is,
the others are there also. Wherever name is, there is form and thought.

It naturally follows that if the universe is built upon the same plan as
the body, the universe also must have the same divisions of form, name,
and thought. The "thought" is the finest part of the universe, the real
motive power. The thought behind our body is called soul, and the
thought behind the universe is called God. Then after that is the name,
and last of all is the form which we see and feel. For instance, you are
a particular person, a little universe in this universe, a body with a
particular form; then behind that a name, John or Jane, and behind that
again a thought; similarly there is this whole universe, and behind that
is the name, what is called the "Word" in all religions, and behind that
is God. The universal thought is Mahat, as the Sânkhyas call it,
universal consciousness. What is that name? There must be some name. The
world is homogeneous, and modern science shows beyond doubt that each
atom is composed of the same material as the whole universe. If you know
one lump of clay you know the whole universe. Man is the most
representative being in the universe, the microcosm, a small universe in
himself. So in man we find there is the form, behind that the name, and
behind that the thought, the thinking being. So this universe must be on
exactly the same plan. The question is: What is that name? According to
the Hindus that word is Om. The old Egyptians also believed that. The
Katha Upanishad says, "That, seeking which a man practices Brahmacharya,
I will tell you in short what that is, that is Om. ... This is Brahman,
the Immutable One, and is the highest; knowing this Immutable One,
whatever one desires one gets."

This Om stands for the name of the whole universe, or God. Standing
midway between the external world and God, it represents both. But then
we can take the universe piecemeal, according to the different senses,
as touch, as colour, as taste, and in various other ways. In each case
we can make of this universe millions of universes from different
standpoints, each of which will be a complete universe by itself, and
each one will have a name, and a form, and a thought behind. These
thoughts behind are Pratikas. Each of them has a name. These names of
sacred symbols are used in Bhakti-Yoga. They have almost infinite power.
Simply by repetition of these words we can get anything we desire, we
can come to perfection. But two things are necessary. "The teacher must
be wonderful, so also must be the taught", says the Katha Upanishad.
Such a name must come from a person to whom it has descended through
right succession. From master to disciple, the spiritual current has
been coming; from ancient times, bearing its power. The person from whom
such a word comes is called a Guru, and the person to whom it goes is
called Shishya, the disciple. When the word has been received in the
regular way, and when it has been repeated, much advance has been made
in Bhakti-Yoga. Simply by the repetition of that word will come even the
highest state of Bhakti. "Thou hast so many names. Thou understandest
what is meant by them all these names are Thine, and in each is Thine
infinite power; there is neither time nor place for repeating these
names, for all times and places are holy. Thou art so easy, Thou art so
merciful, how unfortunate am I, that I have no love for Thee!"

</div>
