---
title: THE ISHTA

---
<div>

[←](the_chief_symbols.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Addresses on
Bhakti-Yoga](addresses_on_bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](../lectures_and_discourses/the_ramayana.htm)

  

## THE ISHTA

The theory of Ishta, which I briefly referred to before, is a subject
requiring careful attention because with a proper understanding of this,
all the various religions of the world can be understood. The word Ishta
is derived from the root Ish, to desire, choose. The ideal of all
religions, all sects, is the same — the attaining of liberty and
cessation of misery. Wherever you find religion, you find this ideal
working in one form or other. Of course in lower stages of religion it
is not so well expressed; but still, well or ill-expressed, it is the
one goal to which every religion approaches. All of us want to get rid
of misery; we are struggling to attain to liberty — physical, mental,
spiritual. This is the whole idea upon which the world is working.
Through the goal is one and the same, there may be many ways to reach
it, and these ways are determined by the peculiarities of our nature.
One man's nature is emotional, another's intellectual, another's active,
and so forth. Again, in the same nature there may be many subdivisions.
Take for instance love, with which we are specially concerned in this
subject of Bhakti. One man's nature has a stronger love for children;
another has it for wife, another for mother, another for father, another
for friends. Another by nature has love for country, and a few love
humanity in the broadest sense; they are of course very few, although
everyone of us talks of it as if it were the guiding motive power of our
lives. Some few sages have experienced it. A few great souls among
mankind feel this universal love, and let us hope that this world will
never be without such men.

We find that even in one subject there are so many different ways of
attaining to its goal. All Christians believe in Christ; but think, how
many different explanations they have of him. Each church sees him in a
different light, from different standpoints. The Presbyterian's eyes are
fixed upon that scene in Christ's life when he went to the
money-changers; he looks on him as a fighter. If you ask a Quaker,
perhaps he will say, "He forgave his enemies." The Quaker takes that
view, and so on. If you ask a Roman Catholic, what point of Christ's
life is the most pleasing to him, he, perhaps, will say, "When he gave
the keys to Peter". Each sect is bound to see him in its own way.

It follows that there will be many divisions and subdivisions even of
the same subject. Ignorant persons take one of these subdivisions and
take their stand upon it, and they not only deny the right of every
other man to interpret the universe according to his own light, but dare
to say that others are entirely wrong, and they alone are right. If they
are opposed, they begin to fight. They say that they will kill any man
who does not believe as they believe, just as the Mohammedans do. These
are people who think they are sincere, and who ignore all others. But
what is the position we want to take in this Bhakti-Yoga? Not only that
we would not tell others that they are wrong, but that we would tell
them that they are right — all of these who follow their own ways. That
way, which your nature makes it absolutely necessary for you to take, is
the right way. Each one of us is born with a peculiarity of nature as
the result of our past existence. Either we call it our own reincarnated
past experience or a hereditary past; whatever way we may put it, we are
the result of the past - that is absolutely certain, through whatever
channels that past may have come. It naturally follows that each one of
us is an effect, of which our past has been the cause; and as such,
there is a peculiar movement, a peculiar train, in each one of us; and
therefore each one will have to find way for himself.

This way, this method, to which each of us is naturally adapted, is
called the "chosen way". This is the theory of Ishta, and that way which
is ours we call our own Ishta. For instance, one man's idea of God is
that He is the omnipotent Ruler of the universe. His nature is perhaps
such. He is an overbearing man who wants to rule everyone; he naturally
finds God an omnipotent Ruler. Another man, who was perhaps a
schoolmaster, and severe, cannot see any but a just God, a God of
punishment, and so on Each one sees God according to his own nature; and
this vision, conditioned by our own nature, is our Ishta. We have
brought ourselves to a position where we can see that vision of God, and
that alone; we cannot see any other vision. You will perhaps sometimes
think of the teaching of a man that it is the best and fits you exactly,
and the next day you ask one of your friends to go and hear him; but he
comes away with the idea that it was the worst teaching he had ever
heard. He is not wrong, and it is useless to quarrel with him. The
teaching was all right, but it was not fitted to that man. To extend it
a little further, we must understand that truth seen from different
standpoints can be truth, and yet not the same truth.

This would seem at first to be a contradiction in terms, but we must
remember that an absolute truth is only one, while relative truths are
necessarily various. Take your vision of this universe, for instance.
This universe, as an absolute entity, is unchangeable, and unchanged,
and the same throughout. But you and I and everybody else hear and see,
each one his own universe. Take the sun. The sun is one; but when you
and I and a hundred other people stand at different places and look at
it, each one of us sees a different sun. We cannot help it. A very
little change of place will change a man's whole vision of the sun. A
slight change in the atmosphere will make again a different vision. So,
in relative perception, truth always appears various. But the Absolute
Truth is only one. Therefore we need not fight with others when we find
they; are telling something about religion which is not exactly
according to our view of it. We ought to remember that both of us may be
true, though apparently contradictors. There may be millions of radii
converging towards the same centre in the sun. The further they are from
the centre, the greater is the distance between any two. But as they all
meet at the centre, all difference vanishes. There is such a centre,
which is the absolute goal of mankind. It is God. We are the radii. The
distances between the radii are the constitutional limitations through
which alone we can catch the vision of God. While standing on this
plane, we are bound each one of us to have a different view of the
Absolute Reality; and as such, all views are true, and no one of us need
quarrel with another. The only solution lies in approaching the centre.
If we try to settle our differences by argument or quarrelling, we shall
find that we can go on for hundreds of years without coming to a
conclusion. History proves that. The only solution is to march ahead and
go towards the centre; and the sooner we do that the sooner our
differences will vanish.

This theory of Ishta, therefore, means allowing a man to choose his own
religion. One man should not force another to worship what he worships.
All attempts to herd together human beings by means of armies, force, or
arguments, to drive them pell-mell into the same enclosure and make them
worship the same God have failed and will fail always, because it is
constitutionally impossible to do so. Not only so, there is the danger
of arresting their growth. You scarcely meet any man or woman who is not
struggling for some sort of religion; and how many are satisfied, or
rather how few are satisfied! How few find anything! And why? Simply
because most of them go after impossible tasks. They are forced into
these by the dictation of others. For instance, when I am a child, my
father puts a book into my hand which says God is such and such. What
business has he to put that into my mind? How does he know what way I
would develop? And being ignorant of my constitutional development, he
wants to force his ideas on my brain, with the result that my growth is
stunted. You cannot make a plant grow in soil unsuited to it. A child
teaches itself. But you can *help* it to go forward in its own way. What
you can do is not of the positive nature, but of the negative. You can
take away the obstacles, but knowledge comes out of its own nature.
Loosen the soil a little, so that it may come out easily. Put a hedge
round it; see that it is not killed by anything, and there your work
stops. You cannot do anything else. The rest is a manifestation from
*within* its own nature. So with the education of a child; a child
educates itself. You come to hear me, and when you go home, compare what
you have learnt, and you will find you have thought out the same thing;
I have only given it expression. I can never teach you anything: you
will have to teach yourself, but I can help you perhaps in giving
expression to that thought.

So in religion — more so — I must teach myself religion. What right has
my father to put all sorts of nonsense into my head? What right has my
master or society to put things into my head? Perhaps they are good, but
they may not be *my* way. Think of the appalling evil that is in the
world today, of the millions and millions of innocent children perverted
by wrong ways of teaching. How many beautiful things which would have
become wonderful spiritual truths have been nipped in the bud by this
horrible idea of a family religion, a social religion, a national
religion, and so forth. Think of what a mass of superstition is in your
head just now about your childhood's religion, or your country's
religion, and what an amount of evil it does, or can do. Man does not
know what a potent power lies behind each thought and action. The old
saying is true that, "Fools rush in where angels fear to tread." This
should be kept in view from the very first. How? By this belief in
Ishta. There are so many ideals; I have no right to say what shall be
your ideal, to force any ideal on you. My duty should be to lay before
you all the ideals I know of and enable you to see by your own
constitution what you like best, and which is most fitted to you. Take
up that one which suits you best and persevere in it. This is your
Ishta, your special ideal.

We see then that a congregational religion can never be. The *real* work
of religion must be one's own concern. I have an idea of my own, I must
keep it sacred and secret, because I know that it need not be your idea.
Secondly, why should I create a disturbance by wanting to tell everyone
what my idea is? Other people would come and fight me. They cannot do so
if I do not tell them; but if I go about telling them what my ideas are,
they will all oppose me. So what is the use of talking about them? This
Ishta should be kept secret, it is between you and God. All theoretical
portions of religion can be preached in public and made congregational,
but higher religion cannot be made public. I cannot get ready my
religious feelings at a moment's notice. What is the result of this
mummery and mockery? It is making a joke of religion, the worst of
blasphemy. The result is what you find in the churches of the present
day. How can human beings stand this religious drilling? It is like
soldiers in a barrack. Shoulder arms, kneel down, take a book, all
regulated exactly. Five minutes of feeling, five minutes of reason, five
minutes of prayer, all arranged beforehand. These mummeries have driven
out religion. Let the churches preach doctrines, theories, philosophies
to their hearts' content, but when it comes to worship, the real
practical part of religion, it should be as Jesus says, "When thou
prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray
to thy Father which is in secret"

This is the theory of Ishta. It is the only way to make religion meet
practically the necessities of different constitutions, to avoid
quarrelling with others, and to make real practical progress in
spiritual life. But I must warn you that you do not misconstrue my words
into the formation of secret societies. If there were a devil, I would
look for him within a secret society — as the invention of secret
societies. They are diabolical schemes. The Ishta is *sacred*, not
secret. But in what sense? Why should I not speak of my Ishta to others?
Because it is my own most holy thing. It may help others, but how do I
know that it will not rather hurt them? There may be a man whose nature
is such that he cannot worship a Personal God, but can only worship as
an Impersonal God his own highest Self. Suppose I leave him among you,
and he tells you that there is no Personal God, but only God as the Self
in you or me. You will be shocked. His idea is sacred, but not secret.
There never was a great religion or a great teacher that formed secret
societies to preach God's truths. There are no such secret societies in
India. Such things are purely Western in idea, and merely foisted upon
India. We never knew anything about them. Why indeed should there be
secret societies in India? In Europe, people were not allowed to talk a
word about religion that did not agree with the views of the Church. So
they were forced to go about amongst the mountains in hiding and form
secret societies, that they might follow their own kind of worship.
There was never a time in India when a man was persecuted for holding
his own views on religion. There were never secret religious societies
in India, so any idea of that sort you must give up at once. These
secret societies always degenerate into the most horrible things. I have
seen enough of this world to know what evil they cause, and how easily
they slide into free love societies and ghost societies, how men play
into the hands of other men or women, and how their future possibilities
of growth in thought and act are destroyed, and so on. Some of you may
be displeased with me for talking in this way, but I must tell you the
truth. Perhaps only half a dozen men and women will follow me in all my
life; but they will be real men and women, pure and sincere, and I do
not want a crowd. What can crowds do? The history of the world was made
by a few dozens, whom you can count on your fingers, and the rest were a
rabble. All these secret societies and humbugs make men and women
impure, weak and narrow; and the weak have no will, and can never work.
Therefore have nothing to do with them. All this false love of mystery
should be knocked on the head the first time it comes into your mind. No
one who is the least impure will ever become religious. Do not try to
cover festering sores with masses of roses. Do you think you can cheat
God? None can. Give me a straightforward man or woman; but Lord save me
from ghosts, flying angels, and devils. Be common, everyday, nice
people.

There is such a thing as instinct in us, which we have in common with
the animals, a reflex mechanical movement of the body. There is again a
higher form of guidance, which we call reason, when the intellect
obtains facts and then generalises them. There is a still higher form of
knowledge which we call inspiration, which does not reason, but knows
things by flashes. That is the highest form of knowledge. But how shall
we know it from instinct? That is the great difficulty. Everyone comes
to you, nowadays, and says he is inspired, and puts forth superhuman
claims. How are we to distinguish between inspiration and deception? In
the first place, inspiration must not contradict reason. The old man
does not contradict the child, he is the development of the child. What
we call inspiration is the development of reason. The way to intuition
is through reason. Instinctive movements of your body do not oppose
reason. As you cross a street, how instinctively you move your body to
save yourself from the cars. Does your mind tell you it was foolish to
save your body that way? It does not. Similarly, no genuine inspiration
ever contradicts reason. Where it does it is no inspiration. Secondly,
inspiration must be for the good of one and all, and not for name or
fame, or personal gain. It should always be for the good of the world,
and perfectly unselfish. When these tests are fulfilled, you are quite
safe to take it as inspiration. You must remember that there is not one
in a million that is inspired, in the present state of the world. I hope
their number will increase. We are now only playing with religion. With
inspiration we shall begin to have religion. Just as St. Paul says, "For
now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face." But in the
present state of the world they are few and far between who attain to
that state; yet perhaps at no other period were such false claims made
to inspiration, as now. It is said that women have intuitive faculties,
while men drag themselves slowly upward by reason. Do not believe it.
There are just as many inspired men as women, though women have perhaps
more claim to peculiar forms of hysteria and nervousness. You had better
die as an unbeliever than be played upon by cheats and jugglers. The
power of reasoning was given you for use. Show then that you have used
it properly. Doing so, you will be able to take care of higher things.

We must always remember that God is Love. "A fool indeed is he who,
living on the banks of the Ganga, seeks to dig a little well for water.
A fool indeed is the man who, living near a mine of diamonds, spends his
life in searching for beads of glass." God is that mine of diamonds. We
are fools indeed to give up God for legends of ghosts or flying
hobgoblins. It is a disease, a morbid desire. It degenerates the race,
weakens the nerves and the brain, living in incessant morbid fear of
hobgoblins, or stimulating the hunger for wonders; all these wild
stories about them keep the nerves at an unnatural tension — a slow and
sure degeneration of the race. It is degeneration to think of giving up
God, purity, holiness, and spirituality, to go after all this nonsense!
Reading other men's thoughts! If I must read everyone else's thoughts
for five minutes at a time I shall go crazy. Be strong and stand up and
seek the God of Love. This is the highest strength. What power is higher
than the power of purity? Love and purity govern the world. This love of
God cannot be reached by the weak; therefore, be not weak, either
physically, mentally, morally or spiritually. The Lord alone is true.
Everything else is untrue; everything else should be rejected for the
salve of the Lord. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Serve the Lord and
Him alone.

</div>
