+++
title = "Ramblings on @bronzeagemantis ‘ Bronze Agexa0Mindset"
date = "2020-06-16"

+++
  
  

![The aweful and fierce
guhyakAlI](https://padmavajrablog.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/ct4_ux7wyaab81n.jpg?w=741)

  
I have read that book and some thoughts on it:The book has a rather
pagan sense to it(and in some sense is both a critique of modernity and
tries to invoke the sense of warriors who could have been ‘Gods’
punishment upon the masses’ or like Kalhana described Mihirakula:As a
second Bhairava(in fierceness) on Earth. This is the type of a man of
action,which he idolizes,one bounded by no rule,who in his actions in
enemies is incredibly fierce and terrible(chaNDa) and through his very
power,has the power to alter vidhAtR^i(fate itself) with a few ancient
and a number of modern attempts at this. Few have had such power or
blessings. He’s not a moralist exactly(to which quite a lot on our side
might take a few smelling salts),though is not one who advocates any of
the hedonisms or modern degeneracies. He’s primary a preacher of a
gospel of power in its all conquering dimension and vitality as well. He
also acknowledges the importance of ordinary civilized,healthy life and
gives important suggestions for nationalist orgs(in the Western context
of course) and about the sort of tenancious,right-thinking people needed
to march through institutions like the Army(in the US
context),Government agencies(that are enforcers),etc. Out of these in
the book,I especially liked his insistence on friendship in a struggle
for war and a higher cause,his point about families towards the end and
demographics and about discipline,its value and life on the ascent.  
