+++
title = "On the stotra of the eight names of Gaṇeśa  by Viṣnu from the Brahmavaivartaxa0Purāṇa"
date = "2020-06-23"

+++
<https://sanskritdocuments.org/doc_ganesha/gaNeshAShTakamviShNuBVP.html>
the text of the stotra is at the Sanskrit Dcouments website,I am
translating it here.

Before Viṣṇu begins this stotra to Gaṇeśa,he affiliates these names of
Vināyaka to the Sāmavedic tradition(putranāmāṣṭakaṃ stotraṃ
sāmavedoktamīśvari)

He is known as
Gaṇeśa,Ekadanta,Heramba,Vighnanāyaka,Lambodara,Śūrpakarṇa,Gajānana and
Guhāgraja.

O Mother,beloved of Hara,do listen from me the meaning of these eight
names which is the summary of the stotra and removes all obstructoions.

‘Ga’ stands for knowledge, ‘Na’ stands for mokṣa. The one who is the
Lord of them both is Gaṇeṣa,I bow to Him.

‘Eka’ stands for principal,’danta’ stands for strength. The one who is
the foremost of the strong persons is Ekadanta,and I bow to Him.

‘He’ stands for the poor,and ‘ramba’ stands for the protector,hence the
one who is the protector of them(pālakaṃ dīnalokānaṃ) is Heramba.

‘Vighna’ stands for the dangers,and ‘nāyaka’ stands for its
remover,hence He is known as vighnanāyaka and I adore Him.

The one who was endowed with a protruding belly because of the eating of
the food provided by Viṣṇu and His own father is called lambodara,and I
bow to Him.

The one’s whose ears are like winnowing baskets to remove
obstructions,and bestows wealth and learning is known as Śūrpakarṇa,and
I bow in reverence to Him.

The one on whose head was placed the prasādaṃ(consisting of
flowers,hence a garland) of Viṣnu by the munis,I bow to the
elephant-faced one known as Gaja-vaktra.

He was born earlier than Skanda,hence He is known as Guhāgraja,and I
offer my obeisance to Him.

Oh Durgā,these eight verses consist of many śaktis and different
meanings and is auspicious. Please look into the veda,O Putra(Viṣṇu is
addressing devī here as putra),and nullify your anger.

The one who recites this stotra thrice a day(at each of the sandhyās)
enjoys all worldly pleasures and becomes victorious in the universe like
Garuḍa,the sun of Vinātā who is always victorious over serpents.

With the grace of Gaṇeśvara he attains all knowledge,the one desiring a
son gets a son and one desiring a wife gets a virtuous wife. And the
extremely dull person becomes a great poet and learns all vidyās.
