+++
title = "Tilak"

+++
The brahmins of the coastal strip of the maharaTTa country shot to
prominence under their first hero Balaji Vishvanath who turned the tide
on the Islamic deluge in India. His son
[Bajirao](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/on-bajirao-i.html), and
successor was the greatest luminary of this community who in his brief
lifespan achieved success that nearly unmatched by any other Hindu
general before him. The one other man of his jAti, who came close to his
level of glory was Balgangadhar Tilak- the man who led India’s struggle
against the Chrisitian tyrants from England. The British who were a
fitting adversary if ever there was one (after all Vakimchandra
correctly realized that they were vastly superior enemies of India to
the Mahommedans), realized the threat from Tilak and tried their best
after that to cap Hindu nationalism once and for all.

Aurobindo that other insightful man during the years of the great
struggle had many words to say about his friend Tilak that are worth
citing:  

> “His speeches are, like the featureless brahman, self luminous.
Straightforward, lucid, never turning aside from the point which they
mean to hammer in or wrapping it up in ornamental verbiage, they read
like a series of self-evident propositions.”

Anyone who has read his two great forays into vedic research-The Orion
and The Arctic Home would see this quality shining through.

> “Yet is Mr. Tilak a man of various and no ordinary gifts, and in several
lines of life he might have achieved present distinction or a preeminent
and enduring fame. Though he has never practised, he has a close
knowledge of law and an acute legal mind which, had he cared in the
least degree for wealth and worldly position, would have brought him to
the front at the bar. He is a great sanskrit scholar, a powerful writer
and a strong, subtle and lucid thinker. He might have filled a large
place in the field of contemporary Asiatic scholarship. Even as it is,
his Orion and his Arctic Home have acquired at once a world-wide
recognition and left as strong a mark as can at all be imprinted on the
ever-shifting sands of oriental research. 
>
> His work on the Gita, no mere
commentary but an original criticism and presentation of ethical truth,
is a monumental work, the first prose writing of the front rank in
weight and importance in the Marathi language, and likely to become a
classic. This one book sufficiently proves that had he devoted his
energies in this direction he might easily have filled a large place in
the history of Marathi literature and in the history of ethical thought,
so subtle is the perfection and satisfying force of its style….  
>
> Even these by-products of his genius have some reference to the one
passion of his life, the renewal, if not the surpassing of the past
greatness of the nation by the greatness of its future. His vedic
researches seek to fix its prehistoric point of departure; the
Gita-rahasya takes the scripture which is perhaps the strongest and most
comprehensive production of Indian spirituality and justifies to that
spirituality by its own authoritative ancient message the sense of the
importance of life, of action, of human existence, of man’s labor for
mankind which is indespensible to idealism of the modern spirit.”

Again Aurobindo points his important role in India politics as a
Hindu leader:

> “His separation from the social reform leader Agarkar, had opened the
way for the peculiar role which he has played as a trusted and
accredited leader of conservative and religious India in the path of
democratic politics. It was this position which enabled him to effect
the union of the new political spirit with the tradition and sentiment
of the historic past and of both with the ineradicable religious
temperment of the people, of which these festivals (gaNapati chaturti
festivities) were the symbol. 
>
> The congress movement was for a long time
purely occidental in its mind, character and methods, confined to the
English-educated few, founded on political rights and interests of the
people read in the light of English History and European ideal, but with
no roots either in the past of the country or in the inner spirit of the
nation \[Hindustan\]. Mr. Tilak was the first political leader to break
through the routine of its somewhat academical methods, to bridge the
gulf between the present and the past and to restore continuity to the
political life of the nation. He developed a language and a spirit and
he used methods which indianised the movement and brought it into the
masses.”

This was precisely the point of departure after Tilak’s death, when the
movement slipped back into the hands of the occidental Kashmiris Motilal
and his son Jawaharlal. Chacha Jawahar never understood the
“ineradicable” religious temperament of the Hindu people and instead
sought to build an India along the lines of the bearded German idealist.
It seems clear that Tilak was indeed in the direct line of the legacy of
his co-ethnic Bajirao-I, who before him had turned the national struggle
of the Hindus towards victory.
