+++
title = "The new australopithecine skeleton"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/australopithecus.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/australopithecus.jpg)[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/australopithecus_tibia.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/australopithecus_tibia.jpg)

R and I discussed the new find of Australopithecus afarensis by
Alemseged et al with some excitement. It is not so common that we get
relatively complete remains of the australopithecines. This particular
one from the Hadar formation is the fossil of a juvenile female specimen
that is believed to have been 3 yrs at death based on a chimpanzee
model. The studies are still preliminary and I am sure this find will
advance the understanding of the apes of the human lineage considerably
in the coming years. Yet a few features are striking: 1) The shape of
the scapula is very gorilla-like, and strikingly so in the angle of the
scapular spine. 2) The manual phalanges are long and curved. 3) The
semi-circular canals are very similar to that of the chimpanzees and
gorilla and are not indicative of a decoupled head from trunk as seen in
humans. 4) The face is prognathus and quite like the chimpanzee and the
brain-size in the same range as the surviving non-human African apes.
Yet being a juvenile it provides a new data point in terms of brain size
and suggests that the Australopithecus afarensis was probably born with
a relatively large brain, but it did not grow rapidly as in humans and
finally attained the just the size of non-human apes. 5) The leg is
similar to humans, with the shape of the tibia in particular strongly
indicative of a bipedal stance. The attachment of the tibialis anterior
muscle also seems to closely resemble modern humans.

This melange of characters is peculiar especially given that it combines
the semi-circular canals and scapular architecture typical of gorilla
and chimpanzee with human-type hind-limbs. The one thing it tells us is
that we do not precisely understand the correlation between morphology
and function for the gorilla-type scapula â€“ the gorilla is a predominant
knuckle-walker while evidence strongly favors a bipedal gait for
A.afarensis. As the authors suggest these morphologies may have more to
do with an arboreal involving climbing with the hands being deployed
above the heads. Taken together these suggest that this
australopithecine was probably a capable tree-climber that principally
used its arms to move about in the trees. Thus, it might have lead a
life on the ground like modern apes with increased bipedal locomotion
relative to them, but might scampered up trees to escape predators.

The hyoid bone which is surprisingly preserved is more like a gorilla or
a chimp than that of a human or orangutan. Its morphology suggests that
it allowed for large air sacs. Such air sacs are there in both great
apes and lesser apes. Amongst the gibbons the larger species but not
smaller ones have voluminous air sacs, whereas in the great apes all
except humans have prominent air sacs. These air sacs open via
thin-walled duct just above the vocal membrane and are also supplied
with their own platysma muscle. This appears to be the primitive
condition in apes and was probably lost twice in the smaller gibbons and
Homo. The air-sacs are probably used to generate a loud vocalization
without needing to breathe too much air. In the gorilla it is clear that
the chest-thumping is used to release the air from the sacs to produce
the requisite sound effect. Thus, its presence in A.afarensis suggests
that it was lost relatively late in the line leading to humans. It is
indeed interesting that we have the most elaborate language amongst the
apes while losing the air sacs. So the loss of the air sacs may have
indeed been coupled with the origin of a more elaborate vocal
communication system in the form of language of Homo, which probably
reflects a shift away from extended call sequences. This event it is now
clear happened only after the A.afarensis grade in human evolution.

The lack of enlarged canines in A.afarensis may indicate a lowered
physical component in male dominance. In an accompanying note Wood
suggests that A.afarensis may have instead used its air sacs to shout
down opponents. However, given that other apes with large canines also
have comparable air sacs makes this idea rather fanciful.
