+++
title = "yantra gaNita"

+++
All polygons with n\>4 are vector polygons because they occur as
families of polygons i.e the polygon and its stars (or n-grams)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/definitions.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/definitions.png)

The considerations described here apply to regular polygons that are
chiefly used in yantra construction. All regular polygons are described
with the notation P {n,k}. P{n}, where k=1 is the regular convex
polygon. Higher k results in stars. The polygons are inscribed in
circles where the radius r=1 unit. Each polygon in the family has an
edge-length, AB=l1; A’B’=l2 etc. The pairs of polygons for n\>=5 are
described by pairs of vectors whose diagonal flanking elements=1 (shown
in the figure). The number of roots of the characteristic equation of
the vector i.e. :  
DET \[Vector\]=0 give the number polygons in the family i.e stars and
the base convex polygon. Thus the maximum value of k=(n-1)/2 for odd
polygons and k=(n-2)/2 for even polygons.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/5and6.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/5and6.png)

Thus for a pentagon and hexagon we have quadratic characteristic
equations and 2 polygons each in their families.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/7and8.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/7and8.png)

Likewise for a heptagon and octagon we have cubic characteristic
equations and 3 polygons each in their families.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/9.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/9.png)

For a nonagon and decagon (not shown) we have 4th power equations and 4
polygons per family.  
Polygon P{n,k} contains within it successively smaller interior polygons
including all the lower k polygons of the family i.e: P{n,k-1},
P{n,k-2}…,P{n}. Thus the nonagram P{9,4} include P{9,3}; P{9,2}; P{9},
while P{9,3} contains the remaining two etc. If n and k are relatively
prime, e.g. P{5,2}, the n-gram is an unresolved continuous locus. If k
is a factor of n e.g P{6,2},P{8,2} or P{9,3} the n-gram is a
superposition of k convex regular polygons with number of sides = n/k.
Thus P{6,2}= 2 equilateral triangles, P{8,2} = 2 squares and P{9,3}= 3
equilateral triangles.

The most striking property that was the deep rahasya known to the
tantrics of yore was the relationship of the edges of a family of vector
polygons. It was alluded to by the famed chera magician Narayanan
Nambuthiripad. It had practical use if one need to know in advance the
amount of metal inlay that was required for a yantra. This property was
that the roots of the characteristic equations of give the squares of
the sides of the family of polygons. Thus for P{6,k} we have roots of
the characteristic equation= 1 and 3, which are respectively the squares
of the sides of the hexagon and hexagram. For a P{5,k} polygon we get
3-phi for the pentagon and 2+phi for the pentagram, where phi is the
golden ration (there is a typo in the panel 2 figure). These latter
values obliquely also relates to the construction of the trapezium altar
known as the shmashAna vedI in yajur vedic parlance. The shmashAna-vedI
trapezium is made by constructing a quadrilateral by removing one vertex
of a regular pentagon. The ratio of the parallel sides of the shmashAna
vedi trapezium=phi. This is also known as Ptolemy’s theorem in the
yavana world. The importance of this equation is also in the fact that
when a meditation on the yantra is done the sAdhaka’s spanda patterns
while internalizing the yantra follow the values of the roots of the
characteristic equation.

The characteristic equations also have a symmetry with respect to the
number of sides of the polygon. Thus the pentagon is x^2-5\*x-5=0;
heptagon is x^3-7\*x^2+14\*x-7=0  
This relationship for the heptagon was described by
[Kepler](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/08/johannes-kepler.html)
with much amazement.
