+++
title = "Aptitude, education, the ape and politics"

+++
The yogin experiences, but at the height of his practice there is
neither object nor subject in his experience. The kavi experiences, and
in the pinnacle of his practice his world is unified under increasingly
robust ontologies. When he attains mastery he becomes an AchArya who
expounds shAstra-s. Indeed the great indra bestows on few the profound
shAstra-s as that is indra himself. Hence, the kavi states:

yash ChandasAm R^iShabho vishvarUpaH |  
Chandobhyo .adhyamR^itAt saMbabhUva ||  
sa mendro medhayA spR^iNotu |  
amR^itasya deva dhAraNo bhUyAsam ||

The old thinkers of our tradition had opined that vidyA lies at the
junction between the AchArya and the antevAsin. But the adhyAyin has to
be suitable else the vidyA is not transmitted and even its creation
might be aborted. An adhyAyin who is an embodiment of tamas and lacks
aptitude for the grahaNa of the shAstra should be cast aside like a
stone. Such can indeed be ruinous for the AchArya and the very
transmission of the shAstra-s. Unlike the opinion of the mlechCha-s, our
tradition holds that the adhikAra for shAstrAdhyAya is not for all and
should not be disbursed to all and sundry without appropriate testing of
the adhyAyin’s aptitude and attitude. The more involved a shAstra, fewer
can approach it. Hence, at rarefied heights there are only a few
vidvAn-s who engage in discourse of the shAstra. At this point, these,
in a sense, become like yogin-s, because the lay society cannot scale
the kailAsa-like peaks atop which they are stationed. Thus, like a yogin
meditating in the solitude of a cave in kailAsa these shAstrAdhikArin-s
dwell in the pinnacles of knowledge. The greatest among them are the
sarva-shAstra-vid, who span the shAstra-s like an oceanic vyAsa or a
chANakya or bhIShma pitAmaha. In the society of Arya-s such vidvAn-s are
allowed to remain atop their pinnacles. They are important to the
plebeian because their insights can guide and inform mundane matters
which are central for the former. However, under the influence of the
mlechChAdi the society can turn inimical to the vidvAn-s: It might
choose to place obstacles in their practice, or it might set up fake
individuals who sound like vidvAn-s but peddle hollow and
faith-dependent doctrines. Even more dangerously, because the plebeians
in such a perverted society cannot scale the heights attained by the
vidvAn-s, it might start believing that the little mud mounds, which its
plebeians scale are truly pinnacles of shAstra-s. Finally, there are
those who are not kavi-s, but dharma-virodhaka-s, who because of the
systems of the mlechChAdi might have acquired shAstra-j\~NAna and might
place themselves as AchArya-s. Such might infuse perverted teachings
along side the shAstra-s and penetrate the plebeian masses with
confusion.

.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.

The old Arya society had both the yogin and kavi. The yogin attaining
his state of subject-object-less consciousness occasionally returns to
society and expounds on the profound bliss of that condition. The
plebeian without having the proclivities and aptitude of the yogin wants
to experience the same. Not having the means he turns to a dangerous
proxy known as bhakti and sets off on the unguided path. On the way he
seriously conflates the mantra-shAstra of the yogin with the songs of
bhakti. He is unable to distinguish the charyAgIti-s of a yogin from a
bhakti outpouring. His indulgence in such takes him farther away from
the realism that emerges at the interface of the kavi and his students,
which produces hard works like the dharmashAstra or the arthashAstra.
Thus, we are left with a mass driven by false yearning for the unbroken
consciousness of the inner world but a lack of understanding of the
world. This might be exacerbated by the delusions of secularism and
modernism wafted in by the mlechChAdi. The directives for the path of a
kavi as laid out by kShemendra are ignored and there is neglect of the
study of kANAdaM and pANinIyaM from which understanding of the world
stems.

.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.

In the world confused by the mlechChAdi, the puruSha-dharma as laid out
by the old dharma-shAstra-s is seen as a horrible perversion. In
contrast, the ideals of secularism, modernism, egalitarianism and
blindness to sex, inter-individual and inter-ethnicity differences are
seen as superb guiding principles. The great kAlidAsa had said:  
purANam ity eva na sAdhu sarvaM | na chApi kAvyaM navam ity avidyaM ||  
Yet, before adopting the navam shAstraM and discarding the purANaM we
must apply the tests to check out their relative robustness. For this
just as the yogin strives for to excavate the basis of the experiential
I the kavi needs to unearth the foundations of the objective human
existence. This can only be done when he seeks to answer: Why is this
human ape so constructed?

Continued …
