+++
title = "khilonmAda-charchA"

+++
Visualize a situation where a plasmid encoding a bacteriocin infects a
bacterium. This bacteriocin kills all other conspecifics (to the extent
we can define a conspecific in bacteria). Consequently, the rivals who
might compete for the same resource as the bacterium are killed and it
gets to monopolize the resources. But things are not so straightforward
as this is a typical colicin-like bacteriocin: for the bacteriocin to be
released the cell needs to be lysed. Hence, the advantage of killing
competitors cannot be accrued unless there is sacrifice of self via
lysis. So when we look at it from the viewpoint of fitness the situation
becomes a little more complicated. With respect to bacterial fitness:
The fitness of a solitary bacterium infected by the said plasmid, which
has not clonally proliferated, is not positively affected. It cannot
gain an advantage from the toxicity of the bacteriocin because in order
for that bacteriocin to act it must burst, in the process nullifying its
fitness. However, if it has clonally proliferated, implying that the
plasmid has clonally expanded along with it, then it might accrue a
positive effect on fitness. Typically about 1-5% of the cells carrying
the bacteriocin-producing plasmid undergo lysis releasing the
bacteriocin which kills the competitors. The cells which undergo lysis
have their fitness reduced to 0. However, their kin have a major fitness
increase due to the toxicity of the bacteriocin towards their rivals.
Thus, in this situation by the principle of included fitness, the
fitness of the plasmid-bearing lysed cells is not 0 but positive and
most probably greater than their own typical individual fitness (i.e.,
if they did not sacrifice themselves) due to huge benefit to kin
(Haldane/Hamilton’s inequality: r\*B-C\>0; where (‘r’ is the genetic
relatedness of the beneficiary to the self-sacrificer, i.e., probability
that a random locus is identical by descent in the two; ‘B’ is the
reproductive benefit gained by the beneficiary of the self-sacrifice in
colicin production; ‘C’ is the fitness cost to the self-sacrificer).
This scenario is particularly likely when the kin of the plasmid-bearing
bacteria have formed a biofilm, or a colony, or are are living in a
limited volume, with conspecific competitors, because the sacrifice of
the bacteriocin-releasing cells will directly benefit the kin in the
vicinity. Now from the viewpoint of the fitness of the
bacteriocin-producing plasmid: When the clonal kin of the lysed cells
accrue a fitness increase the plasmid also accrues the same increase as
it resides within and replicates along with them. Whereas the fitness of
the lysed cells is close to 0, the plasmid released from them upon lysis
could transform other cells. Thus, the plasmid’s fitness is unlikely to
be 0, in fact it might even more than that of the host bacteria.

A related situation, although involving distinct species rather than
conspecifics, might be seen in the case of the harlequin ladybird
Harmonia axyridis from Asia which was introduced unthinkingly to North
America for pest-control. Here, it started massively out-competing the
native ladybird Coccinella septempunctata, even though the latter eats
the eggs and larvae of the invasive H.axyridis. Recent studies have
revealed a remarkable basis for this phenomenon: It involves use of a
biological weapon by H.axyridis in the form a microsporidian parasite
similar to Nosema thompsoni. H.axyridis bears this microsporidian in its
blood (haemolymph) but it does not appear to harm it. It is transmitted
inter-generationally, as the eggs are supplied with microsporidian
spores that then perpetuate the infection in the larva. When
C.septempunctata eats the eggs or larvae of H.axyridis the
microsporidian infects the former and causes its death. In this
situation we suspect that H.axyridis incurs a cost for bearing the
microsporidian, but it is greatly offset by the fitness benefit accrued
from the survival of its offspring and and death of its rivals.

Now, there are also other scenarios to consider. A lytic bacteriophage
like T4 might infect a bacterial cell. The phage while injecting its
DNA, also deploys Alt one of its three ADP-ribosyltransferases to modify
all the host RNA polymerase subunits. Now this modified RNA polymerase,
rather than transcribing genes of the host bacterium starts transcribing
viral early genes. Thus, the host machinery now serves the virus to make
more copies of itself eventually lysing the bacterium and releasing its
progeny copies. Here, the bacterium is necessary for the virus to
propagate but its fitness is reduced to 0 even as the virus’s fitness
greatly increases. There could be a more intermediate situation with
other viruses like Lambda. Here the virus might infect a bacterial cell
but not start replication right away to kill it. Instead it adopts a
lysogenic lifestyle and lies integrated in the host genome and
replicating along with it. In this phase, such viruses often tend to
improve the fitness of the host – they typically confer resistance to
other viruses, they might produce toxins that help the bacterium
overwhelm the host it is infecting or produce a toxin to kill rival
bacteria. Thus, the virus infection increases the fitness of the host
temporarily. But one fine moment, typically when the host is down and
things are not looking good, the virus replicates and bursts the cell
releasing its progeny. Thus, in the long term the virus’s fitness tends
to increase whereas that of the bacterium goes down.

Why did we narrate all these well-known biological phenomena? The point
is to find parallels to the West Asian phenomenon of khilonmAda that has
swept over the world. First one might ask if the comparison to the above
genetic replicators valid? After all khilonmAda is a memetic construct.
Being a memetic construct it loads itself in brains and depends on
altering behaviors of the biological organism to increase is copy
number, but is entirely dependent on the biological organism for its
very existence. In this sense it parallels the plasmids and viruses
which are entirely dependent on the host. It has also been rather
successful as the numbers point. This is not unlike many viruses which
are present in enormous numbers in the environment. But the more
specific question is whether it is like a bacteriocin-bearing plasmid
that appears to increase the overall fitness of the host despite certain
costs, or a lytic virus that subverts and reduces host fitness or
something in between as a lysogenic virus that might confer some short
term fitness benefits but in the long term could reduce fitness? Even
before one gets in such comparisons one could say: Given that
religiosity arises from biological determinants, is khilonmAda not any
different from the many other religions, which are comparable meme
complexes, which compete for the same niche provided by the neural
architecture supporting religiosity? So why is it khilonmAda a memetic
virus rather than the others?

If one observed other heathen religions then there is a strong component
of vertical inheritance along with other meme-complexes and even to a
degree the genes. Thus, the various heathen Indo-European religions
mirror the phylogeny of the Indo-European languages. At an even higher
level there are deep homologies seen in the religious traditions of the
out-African Homo sapiens and faint lingering elements of homology going
back to Africa. This reflects a core vertical signal in their phylogeny.
Thus, these memes are similar to core cellular genes that have different
depths of a discernible vertical signal in their evolution. This means
that these religions in large part were organically inherited like genes
from the parents. Of course there are lateral transfers of religious
memes between cultures following organic religions (just as most genes
are laterally transferred), but these are incorporated into the original
framework of the recipient and are often accompanied by spread of genes.
An example of the former which we have discussed on these pages is the
transfer of Indo-Iranian religious memes to central Asian Altaic
traditions. The spread of the dharma to Indonesia is an example of gene
spread accompanying the movement of memes. Thus, the Hindus of Bali show
a significant genetic component that is traceable to bhAratavarSha.
These kinds of lateral transfers of memes are also usually not
accompanied by loss of the organic connections to the land of the
recipient population. In contrast, the khilonmAda \[Footnote 1\]
aggressively propagates breaking the vertical inheritance pattern and
erases all traces of the older meme-complexes within a short time span.
Indeed, it breaks the key pattern of inheritance from parents in one
generation can spread across a large population of genetically unrelated
brains. This pattern indeed is best described by analogies of selfish
elements from the biological world. Hence, the above precedents offered
by plasmids and viruses are correct analogies for discussing the
marUnmAda. To illustrate this analogy further: just like the viral
enzymes such the ADP ribosyltranferase modifies host proteins to now do
things favorable for the virus, khilonmAda makes the bearer do things
favorable for its spread: These include acts such as da’wah, or even
those where he may nullify his fitness by an of ghazwat.

Now, several modern observers note that marUnmAda actually enhances the
fitness of the infected population in modern settings. If one closely
notes the context of fitness enhancement by the khilonmAda we find that
it confers devastating success to the infected individuals when they are
embedded in a population infected by other memes such as modernism,
secularism, liberalism, feminism, and secular humanism. Thus, we could
compare the latter memes to lytic viruses that reduce the fitness of the
infected individuals and the average population fitness. In contrast,
khilonmAda is like a lysogenic virus that confers resistance against
these lytic memetic viruses to individuals it infects, there by raising
their and their population’s average fitness. It might also act like a
lysogenic phage helping the virus’s bacterial host poison its host or
competitors with toxins. Here the khilonmAda favors the “secretion” of
memes such as Islamophilia and the accusation of “Islamophobia”, which
debilitate the defenses of the uninfected competitors against the
bearers of the khilonmAda. In other situations indeed it might enhance
fitness of the bearer by acting somewhat like the bacteriocin-coding
plasmid. The best analogy here is the early phase of khilonmAda, where
it appears to have enhanced the fitness of the
marucharash-chIrashiraH-s. Essentially, it was like a bombshell toxin
that made the infected individuals devitalize competitors in a big way,
even as the khilimoha itself spread both vertically by the reproductive
expansion of the infected marucharash-chIrashiraH-s at the expense of
other West Asian peoples, and laterally by the forcible conversion of
the defeated peoples.

Now this raises the question, if marUnmAda has provided fitness
increments to the infected individual on an average to the infected
population, then does it make sense to switch to it after all, because
it might enhance your fitness. Here is where things get more tricky.
First, infection with marUnmAda is unlikely to enhance fit of the
individual perpetually and in situations other than the above mentioned
cases where it wins:  
1\) When there is a large uninfected population in the vicinity then
infection by khilimoha might benefit the individual because it induces
him to perform acts of ghazwat that allows him to capture women from the
uninfected and increase his fitness by fathering offspring on them.
However, as this population decreases then there are diminishing returns
for ultimately the sex ratio always tends to 1. A situation much like
there being few or no bacteria in their given space of existence that
lack the bacteriocin plasmid. No fitness gain, perhaps only loss. But
this might trigger warfare within the khilimohita population resulting
in deaths that could bring down fitness.

2\) If an uninfected individual voluntarily contracts khilonmAda hoping
that it might enhance his fitness, in most cases this was unlikely to be
the case. For much of its existence khilonmAda ran as a pyramid scheme.
Those who got it first benefit the most and at the expense of those who
got in latter. For example, if a guy decided to become khilonmadita he
is most likely to enter as a lowly ajlaf rather than as an ashraf, a
sheikh or an amir. Indeed he was most likely to be cannon fodder who
became a shahid with nullified fitness in a Jihad rather than being the
recipient of a train of bibi-s to spend his nights enhancing his
fitness. This situation is illustrated on multiple occasions in the
history of marUnmAda in the subcontinent of jambudvIpa. For example, at
the root of the split of the Bahmanid empire in Southern India was the
conflict between the Deccani marUnmatta-s and the amirs and sheikhs
arriving from the maru and central Asia. Despite having become
marUnmatta-s the Deccanis were hardly getting much traction in terms of
accruing benefits that might enhance their fitness – these instead went
to the big beards arriving from abroad. Closer to our times one could
cite the example of how Sajid Mir enhanced his fitness while his
infected stooges, the merry Bombay blasters, brought theirs down to
zero. Here, their fitness erasure was directly induced by the khilonmAda
but their brains being spilled on the streets of Mumbai did not damage
khilonmAda in any serious way. In fact their shahadat or that of any
shahid (not the the type who dies from a bacterial infection of his gut
but in a jihad such as the 9/11 pilots) provided inspiration for many
more in the terrorist state to take the marUnmAda seriously – it had
propagated itself.

3\) One could argue that the infection of a group by khilonmada provides
a virtual kin marker, i.e. makes them feel like an in-group against the
background of uninfected individuals who have no specially identity.
This situation might be compared to certain mobile genetic elements
encoding proteins that allow organisms to distinguish themselves from
their conspecifics and act beneficially towards and self-sacrifice for
others bearing the same genetic element but not the general background
of conspecifics. This could initially enhance the fitness of that group
infected by that genetic element as opposed to those which are not. But
in this group selection scenario the individual’s fitness is not
necessarily raised but those of the group and the khilimoha meme-complex
are. This might help survival of the group in the short term but as
everyone in the niche becomes infected then the utility of the
meme-complex for the group diminishes or vanishes. The infection of the
Chechens in the Caucasus could be presented as an example of this. The
reason it seems to work well for them is that they are surrounded by a
large population of the uninfected. The same phenomenon might also be
invoked in the case of accommodation of marUnmAda by parameshvara in
Malaysia, the eventual conversion of his son late in is life and the
events set in motion by it in the far east. In this context one could
also bring up the case of the pA\~nchanada-uShnIShamoha. This moha
emerged as result of part but not whole of the khilimoha infecting the
Hindu population of the pa\~nchanada. The result was the emergence of a
new recombinant memetic virus, the uShnIShamoha that retained the
self-propagating tendencies of the original khilimoha. This infection
was very mild in terms of fitness reduction, but provided a strong
virtual kin marker that allowed the infected group to prevail and spread
at the expense of the Hindus of the pa\~nchanada also offered protection
to the infected against being overrun by the spreading khilimoha. But as
its numbers increased its utility as such a virtual kin marker
diminished. Nevertheless, it continues to serve this purpose to a degree
in new areas colonized by its carriers, such as North America.

4\) Would it make sense for individuals from a well-structured heathen
society to get infected by the khilimoha? Would it enhance their
fitness? There is a romantic view presented by apologists of the
khilimoha that it helped emancipate the lower rungs of the social
pyramid of heathen societies that were assailed by it. What is not told
(in large part because of other modern constructs) is that the old
well-structured heathen societies were reasonably well-adapted for their
chosen lifestyles. Their pyramidal structure was not in large part a
system for exploitation of those at the bottom by those at the top but
more of a meritocracy contingent on the genetic foundations of their
human resources. Thus, those at the bottom of the hierarchy were often
enriched in traits that would preclude high power cognitive performance
needed for complex tasks. Given this situation, their conversion to
khilimoha would have hardly enhanced their fitness. If anything it might
have depressed it by making them shahids for the jaysh al Islam.
Moreover, khilonmAda has the quality of destroying structure within
societies it conquests because it has a rather simple social model.
Thus, conversion of individuals form a pagan society to the rAkShasamata
results in their being uprooted from their social scaffold as well as,
to a degree, their organic connections to the land. This could result in
a reduction of their fitness. For example, the break down of Hindu
social structure with the spread of Islam resulted in much lower
capability to withstand famine from El Niño oscillations. Thus larger
numbers of those who had converted to Islam in the Bahmanid sultanate
perished (e.g. the [durgAdevI
famine](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/07/31/mahasamanta-%e2%80%9cfeudalism%e2%80%9d/ "mAhAsamanta “feudalism”?")).
This possibly explains why most pagan societies fought the coming of the
khilimoha tooth-and-nail before it was forcibly thrust upon them by
military defeat. If not, it seized them during period of social decline
and breakdown – again a phenomenon prevalent during the take over of the
far east. Finally, given that the rAkShasamata is bloody both within and
without (to paraphrase Samuel Huntington) it confers an edge if it
surrounded by and confronting memetically weakened competitors. However,
if it is the only dominant force then it will inexorably draw the
society to a “basket case” (think Somalia, Sudan and an Arab world
without bhUmitaila) that might have a lower average fitness for an
individual than a well ordered heathen society.

:::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: This is of course also true of the sister Abrahamism, the
pretonmAda; however, for the purposes of simplicity we do not discuss it
in depth in this note. The essential ideas developed here also apply to
it and to a degree its secularized versions such as Marxism, liberalism,
feminism, modernism, secular humanism, secularism, Ayn-Randism,and many
other such. While the pretonmAda came first, the khilonmAda cleared its
clutter and made fashioned itself as the epitome of its essence.
