---
title: II

---
<div>

[←](i_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](iii_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## II

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_02.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *On the way from Calcutta to Cossipore and in the garden of the
late Gopal Lal Seal*. Year: *1897*.\]

Today Swamiji was taking rest at noon in the house of Srijut Girish
Chandra Ghosh.[1](#fn1) The disciple arriving there saluted him and
found that Swamiji was just ready to go to the garden-house of Gopal Lal
Seal. A carriage was waiting outside. He said to the disciple, "Well
come with me." The disciple agreeing, Swamiji got up with him into the
carriage and it started. When it drove up the Chitpur road, on seeing
the Gangâ, Swamiji broke forth in a chant, self-involved:
"गङ्गातरङ्ग-रमणीय-जटा-कलापं" etc.[2](#fn2) The disciple listened in
silent wonder to that wave of music, when after a short while, seeing a
railway engine going towards the Chitpur hydraulic bridge, Swamiji said
to the disciple, "Look how it goes majestically like a lion! " The
disciple replied, "But that is inert matter. Behind it there is the
intelligence of man working, and hence it moves. In moving thus, what
credit is there for it?"

Swamiji: Well, say then, what is the sign of consciousness?

Disciple: Why, sir, that indeed is conscious which acts through
intelligence.

Swamiji: Everything is conscious which rebels against nature: there,
consciousness is manifested. Just try to kill a little ant, even it will
once resist to save its life. Where there is struggle, where there is
rebellion, there is the sign of life, there consciousness is manifested.

Disciple: Sir, can that test be applied also in the case of men and of
nations?

Swamiji: Just read the history of the world and see whether it applies
or not. You will find that excepting yours, it holds good in the case of
all other nations. It is you only who are in this world lying prostrate
today like inert matter. You have been hypnotised. From very old times,
others have been telling you that you are weak, that you have no power,
and you also, accepting that, have for about a thousand years gone on
thinking, "We are wretched, we are good for nothing." (Pointing to his
own body:) This body also is born of the soil of your country; but I
never thought like that. And hence you see how, through His will, even
those who always think us low and weak, have done and are still doing me
divine honour. If you can think that infinite power, infinite knowledge
and indomitable energy lie within you, and if you can bring out that
power, you also can become like me.

Disciple: Where is the capacity in us for thinking that way, sir? Where
is the teacher or preceptor who from our childhood will speak thus
before us and make us understand? What we have heard and have learnt
from all is that the object of having an education nowadays is to secure
some good job.

Swamiji: For that reason is it that we have come forward with quite
another precept and example. Learn that truth from us, understand it,
and realise it and then spread that idea broadcast, in cities, in towns,
and in villages. Go and preach to all, "Arise, awake, sleep no more;
within each of you there is the power to remove all wants and all
miseries. Believe this, and that power will be manifested." Teach this
to all, and, with that, spread among the masses in plain language the
central truths of science, philosophy, history, and geography. I have a
plan to open a centre with the unmarried youths; first of all I shall
teach them, and then carry on the work through them.

Disciple: But that requires a good deal of money. Where will you get
this money?

Swamiji: What do you talk! Isn't it man that makes moneys Where did you
ever hear of money making man? If you can make your thoughts and words
perfectly at one, if you can, I say, make yourself one in speech and
action, money will pour in at your feet of itself, like water.

Disciple: Well, sir, I take it for granted that money will come, and you
will begin that good work. But what will that matter? Before this, also,
many great men carried out many good deeds. But where are they now? To
be sure, the same fate awaits the work which you are going to start.
Then what is the good of such an endeavour?

Swamiji: He who always speculates as to what awaits him in future,
accomplishes nothing whatsoever. What you have understood as true and
good, just do that at once. What's the good of calculating what may or
may not befall in future? The span of life is so, so short — and can
anything be accomplished in it if you go on forecasting and computing
results. God is the only dispenser of results; leave it to Him to do all
that. What have you got to do with on working.

While he was thus going on, the cab reached the gardenhouse. Many people
from Calcutta came to the garden that day to see Swamiji. Swamiji got
down from the carriage, took his seat in the room, and began
conversation with them all. Mr. Goodwin, a Western disciple of Swamiji,
was standing near by, like the embodiment of service, as it were. The
disciple had already made his acquaintance; so he came to Mr. Goodwin,
and both engaged in a variety of talk about Swamiji.

In the evening Swamiji called the disciple and asked him, "Have you got
the Katha Upanishad by heart?"

Disciple: No, sir, I have only read it with Shankara's commentary.

Swamiji: Among the Upanishads, one finds no other book so beautiful as
this. I wish you would all get it by heart. What will it do only to read
it? Rather try to bring into your life the faith, the courage, the
discrimination, and the renunciation of Nachiketâ.

Disciple: Give your blessings, please, that I may realise these.

Swamiji: You have heard of Shri Ramakrishna's words, haven't you? He
used to say, "The breeze of mercy is already blowing, do you only hoist
the sail." Can anybody, my boy, thrust realization upon another? One's
destiny is in one's own hands — the Guru only makes this much
understood. Through the power of the seed itself the tree grows, the air
and water are only aids.

Disciple: There is, sir, the necessity also of extraneous help.

Swamiji: Yes, there is. But you should know that if there be no
substance within, no amount of outside help will avail anything. Yet
there comes a time for everyone to realise the Self. For everyone is
Brahman. The distinction of higher and lower is only in the degree of
manifestation of that Brahman. In time, everyone will have perfect
manifestation. Hence the Shâstras say, "कालेनात्मनि विन्दति — In time,
That is realised in one's self."

Disciples When, alas, will that happen, sir? From the Shastras we hear
how many births we have had to pass in ignorance!

Swamiji: What's the fear? When you have come here this time, the goal
shall be attained in this life. Liberation or Samâdhi — all this
consists in simply doing away with the obstacles to the manifestation of
Brahman. Otherwise the Self is always shining forth like the sun. The
cloud of ignorance has only veiled it. Remove the cloud and the sun will
manifest. Then you get into the state of  "भिद्यते हृदयग्रन्थिः" ("the
knot of the heart is broken") etc. The various paths that you find, all
advise you to remove the obstacles on the way. The way by which one
realises the Self, is the way which he preached to all. But the goal of
all is the knowledge of the Self, the realization of this Self. To it
all men, all beings have equal right. This is the view acceptable to
all.

Disciple: Sir, when I read or hear these words of the Shastras, the
thought that the Self has not yet been realised makes the heart very
disconsolate.

Swamiji: This is what is called longing. The more it grows the more will
the cloud of obstacles be dispelled, and stronger will faith be
established. Gradually the Self will be realised like a fruit on the
palm of one's hand. This realisation alone is the soul of religion.
Everyone can go on abiding by some observances and formalities. Everyone
can fulfil certain injunctions and prohibitions but how few have this
longing for realization! This intense longing — becoming mad after
realising God or getting the knowledge of the Self — is real
spirituality. The irresistible madness which the Gopis had for the Lord,
Shri Krishna, yea, it is intense longing like that which is necessary
for the realization of the Self! Even in the Gopis' mind there was a
slight distinction of man and woman. But in real Self-knowledge, there
is not the slightest distinction of sex.

While speaking thus, Swamiji introduced the subject of *Gita-Govindam*
(of Jayadeva) and continued saying:

Jayadeva was the last poet in Sanskrit literature though he often cared
more for the jingling of words than for depth of sentiment. But just see
how the poet has shown the culmination of love and longing in the Shloka
"पतति पतत्रे" etc.[3](#fn3) Such love indeed is necessary for
Self-realisation. There must be fretting and pining within the heart.
Now from His playful life at Vrindaban come to the Krishna of
Kurukshetra, and see how that also is fascinating — how, amidst all that
horrible din and uproar of fighting, Krishna remains calm, balanced, and
peaceful. Ay, on the very battlefield, He is speaking the Gita to Arjuna
and getting him on to fight, which is the Dharma of a Kshatriya! Himself
an agent to bring about this terrible warfare, Shri Krishna remains
unattached to action — He did not take up arms! To whichsoever phase of
it you look, you will find the character of Shri Krishna perfect. As if
He was the embodiment of knowledge, work, devotion, power of
concentration, and everything! In the present age, this aspect of Shri
Krishna should be specially studied. Only contemplating the Krishna of
Vrindaban with His flute won't do nowadays — that will not bring
salvation to humanity. Now is needed the worship of Shri Krishna
uttering forth the lion-roar of the Gita, of Râma with His bow and
arrows, of Mahâvira, of Mother Kâli. Then only will the people grow
strong by going to work with great energy and will. I have considered
the matter most carefully and come to the conclusion that of those who
profess and talk of religion nowadays in this country, the majority are
full of morbidity — crack-brained or fanatic. Without development of an
abundance of Rajas, you have hopes neither in this world, nor in the
next. The whole country is enveloped in intense Tamas; and naturally the
result is — servitude in this life and hell in the next.

Disciple: Do you expect in view of the Rajas in the Westerners that they
will gradually become Sâttvika?

Swamiji: Certainly. Possessed of a plenitude of Rajas, they have now
reached the culmination of Bhoga, or enjoyment. Do you think that it is
not they, but you, who are going to achieve Yoga — you who hang about
for the sake of your bellies? At the sight of their highly refined
enjoyment, the delineation in *Meghaduta* — "विद्युद्वन्तं ललितवसनाः"
etc.[4](#fn4) — comes to my mind. And your Bhoga consists in lying on a
ragged bed in a muggy room, multiplying progeny every year like a hog! —
Begetting a band of famished beggars and slaves! Hence do I say, let
people be made energetic and active in nature by the stimulation of
Rajas. Work, work, work; "नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनाय" — There is no other
path of liberation but this."

Disciple: Sir, did our forefathers possess this kind of Rajas?

Swamiji: Why, did they not? Does not history tell us that they
established colonies in many countries, and sent preachers of religion
to Tibet, China, Sumatra, and even to far-off Japan? Do you think there
is any other means of achieving progress except through Rajas?

As conversation thus went on, night approached; and meanwhile Miss
Müller came there. She was an English lady, having great reverence for
Swamiji. Swamiji introduced the disciple to her, and after a short talk
Miss Müller went upstairs.

Swamiji: See, to what a heroic nation they belong! How far-off is her
home, and she is the daughter of a rich man — yet how long a way has she
come, only with the hope of realising the spiritual ideal!

Disciple: Yes, sir, but your works are stranger still! How so many
Western ladies and gentlemen are always eager to serve you! For this
age, it is very strange indeed!

Swamiji: If this body lasts, you will see many more things. If I can get
some young men of heart and energy, I shall revolutionize the whole
country. There are a few in Madras. But I have more hope in Bengal. Such
clear brains are to be found scarcely in any other country. But they
have no strength in their muscles. The brain and muscles must develop
simultaneously. Iron nerves with an intelligent brain — and the whole
world is at your feet.

Word was brought that supper was ready for Swamiji. He said to the
disciple, "Come and have a look at my food." While going on with the
supper, he said, "It is not good to take much fatty or oily substance.
Roti is better than Luchi. Luchi is the food of the sick. Take fish and
meat and fresh vegetables, but sweets sparingly." While thus talking, he
inquired, "Well, how many Rotis have I taken? Am I to take more? He did
not remember how much he took and did not feel even it he yet had any
appetite. The sense of body faded away so much while he was talking!

He finished after taking a little more. The disciple also took leave and
went back to Calcutta. Getting no cab for hire, he had to walk; and
while walking, he thought over in his mind how soon again he could come
the next day to see Swamiji.

1.  [^](#txt1)The famous actor and dramatist of Bengal and a foremost
    devotee of Shri Ramakrishna.
2.  [^](#txt2)From Vyâsa's Hymn to Vishvanâtha, meaning "whose matted
    locks look charming with the waves of the Ganga playing among them".
3.  [^](#txt3)"पतति पतत्रे विचलति पत्रे शङ्कितभवदुपयानम् ।  
    रचयति शयनं सचकितनयनं पश्यति तव पन्थानम् ॥"  
      
    "At the flying of a bird or the stirring of a leaf, she fancies you
    are coming; she arranges your bed with eyes all alert looking
    towards the way you would come."
4.  [^](#txt4)विद्युद्वन्तं ललितवसनाः सेन्द्रचापं सचित्राः  
    सङ्गीताय प्रहतमुरजाः स्निग्धगम्भीरघोषम् ।  
    अन्तस्तोयं मणिमायभुवस्तुङ्गमभ्रंलिहाग्राः  
    प्रासादास्त्वां तुलयितुमलं यत्र तैस्तैर्विशेषैः ॥  
      
    — "The mansions of that city may well be compared with you, O cloud,
    there is correspondence in features: while flashes of lightning play
    within you, they have charmingly attired damsels moving within them;
    while you have the rainbow, they have their paintings; you have your
    deep, rolling rumble, they have their drums sounding forth music,
    you contain pellucid water within you, they have their interior
    bedecked with transparent gems; you soar so high, their roofs also
    kiss the sky" (Meghaduta, II. 1). Kalidasa thus introduces his
    description of the enjoyments of Alakâpuri. So the reference here is
    not only to the first verse quoted but also to the whole description
    which follows.

</div>
