---
title: X

---
<div>

[←](ix_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](xi_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## X

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_07e10.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *The Alambazar Math*. Year: *1897*.\]

After Swamiji's first return to Calcutta from the West, he always used
to place before the zealous young men who visited him the lofty ideals
of renunciation, and anyone expressing his desire of accepting Sannyasa
would receive from him great encouragement and kindness. So, inspired by
his enthusiasm some young men of great good fortune gave up their
worldly life in those days and became initiated by him into Sannyasa.
The disciple was present at the Alambazar Math the day the first four of
this batch were given Sannyasa by Swamiji.

Often has the disciple heard it from the Sannyasins of the Math that
Swamiji was repeatedly requested by his brother-monks not to admit one
particular candidate into Sannyasa, whereupon Swamiji replied: "Ah, if
even *we* shrink from working out the salvation of the sinful, the
heavy-laden, the humiliated, and the afflicted in soul, who else are to
take care of them in this world? No, don't you please stand against me
in this matter." So Swamiji's strong opinion triumphed, and always the
refuge of the helpless, he resolved out of his great love to give him
Sannyasa.

The disciple had been staying at the Math for the last two days, when
Swamiji called him and said: "Well, you belong to the priestly class;
tomorrow you get them to perform their Shrâddha, and the next day I
shall give them Sannyasa. So get yourself ready by consulting the books
of ceremonials today." The disciple bowed this mandate of Swamiji, and
the ceremony was duly gone through.

But the disciple became very much depressed at the thought of the great
sternness of Sannyasa. Swamiji detecting his mental agitation asked him,
"Well, I see, you feel some dread in your mind at all this experience,
is it not so?" And when the disciple confessed it to be so Swamiji said:
"From this day these four are dead to the world, and new bodies, new
thoughts, new garments will be theirs from tomorrow — and shining in the
glory of Brahman they will live like flaming fire! 'न कर्मणा न प्रजया
धनेन त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः — Not by work, nor by progeny, nor by
wealth, but by renunciation alone some (rare ones) attained Immortality'
(Kaivalya Upanishad)."

After the ceremony, the four Brahmacharins bowed at the feet of Swamiji.
He blessed them and said, "You have the enthusiasm to embrace the
loftiest vow of human life; blessed indeed is your birth, blessed your
family, blessed the mothers who held you in their womb! 'कुलं पवित्रं
जननी कृतार्था — The whole family-line becomes hallowed, the mother
achieves her highest!'"

That day after supper, Swamiji talked of the ideal of Sannyasa alone. To
the zealous candidates for Sannyasa, he said: The real aim of Sannyasa
is "आत्मनो मोक्षार्थं जगद्धिताय च — For one's highest freedom and for
the good of the world". Without having Sannyasa none can really be a
knower of Brahman — this is what the Vedas and the Vedanta proclaim.
Don't listen to the words of those who say, "We shall both live the
worldly life and be knowers of Brahman." That is the flattering
self-consolation of cryptopleasure-seekers. He who has the slightest
desire for worldly pleasures, even a shred of some such craving, will
feel frightened at the thought of the path you are going to tread; so,
to give himself some consolation he goes about preaching that impossible
creed of harmonising Bhoga and Tyâga. That is all the raving of
lunatics, the frothing of the demented — idle theories contrary to the
scriptures, contrary to the Vedas. No freedom without renunciation.
Highest love for God can never be achieved without renunciation.
Renunciation is the word — "नान्यः पन्था विद्यते अयनाय — There's no
other way than this." Even the Gita says, "काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासं
संन्यासं कवयो विदुः — The sages know Sannyasa to be the giving up of all
work that has desire for its end."

Nobody attains freedom without shaking off the coils of worldly worries.
The very fact that somebody lives the worldly life proves that he is
tied down to it as the bond-slave of some craving or other. Why
otherwise will he cling to that life at all? He is the slave either of
lust or of gold, of position or of fame, of learning or of scholarship.
It is only after freeing oneself from all this thraldom that one can get
on along the way of freedom. Let people argue as loud as they please, I
have got this conviction that unless all these bonds are given up,
unless the monastic life is embraced, none is going to be saved, no
attainment of Brahmajnâna is possible.

Disciple: Do you mean, sir, that merely taking up Sannyasa will lead one
to the goal?

Swamiji: Whether the goal is attained or not is not the point before us
now. But until you get out of this wheel of Samsâra, until the slavery
of desire is shaken off, you can't attain either Bhakti or Mukti. To the
knower of Brahman, supernatural powers or prosperity are mere
trivialities.

Disciple: Sir, is there any special time for Sannyasa, and are there
different kinds of it?

Swamiji: There is no special time prescribed for a life of Sannyasa. The
Shruti says: "यदहरेव विरजेत् तदहरेव प्रव्रहेत् — Directly the spirit of
renunciation comes, you should take to Sannyasa." The *Yogavâsishtha*
also says:

युवैव धर्मशीलः स्यात् अनित्यं खलु जीवितम्।  
को हि जानाति कस्याद्य मृत्युकालो भविष्यति॥

— "Owing to life itself being frail and uncertain, one should be devoted
to religion even in one's youth. For who knows when one's body may fall
off?"

The Shâstras are found to speak of four kinds of Sannyasa: (1) Vidvat,
(2) Vividishâ, (3) Markata, (4) Âtura. The awakening of real
renunciation all at once and the consequent giving up of the world
through Sannyasa is something that never happens unless there are strong
Samskâras or tendencies, developed from previous birth. And this is
called the Vidvat Sannyasa. Vividisha Sannyasa is the case of one who,
out of a strong yearning for the knowledge of the Self through the
pursuit of scriptural study and practice, goes to the man of realisation
and from him embraces Sannyasa to give himself up to those pursuits.
Markata Sannyasa is the case of a man who is driven out of the world by
some of its chastisements such as the death of a relative or the like
and then takes to Sannyasa, though in such a case the renouncing spirit
does not endure long. Shri Ramakrishna used to say of it, "With this
kind of renunciation one hastens away to the up-country and then happens
to get hold of a nice job; and then eventually perhaps arranges to get
his wife brought over to him or perhaps takes to a new one!" And last,
there is another kind of Sannyasa which the Shastras prescribe for a man
who is lying on his death-bed, the hope of whose life has been given up.
For then, if he dies, he dies with the holiest of vows upon him, and in
his next birth the merit of it will accrue to him. And in case he
recovers, he shall not go back to his old life again but live the rest
of his days in the noble endeavour after Brahmajnana. Swami Shivananda
gave this kind of Sannyasa to your uncle. The poor man died; but through
that initiation he will come to a new birth of higher excellence. After
all there is no other way to the knowledge of the Self but through
Sannyasa.

Disciple: What then, sir, will be the fate of the householders?

Swamiji: Why, through the merit of good Karma, they shall have this
renunciation in some future birth of theirs. And directly this
renunciation comes, there is an end of all troubles — with no further
delay he gets across this mystery of life and death. But then all rules
have their exceptions. A few men, one or two, may be seen to attain the
highest freedom by the true fulfilment of the householder's Dharma, as
we have amongst us Nâg Mahâshaya, for instance.

Disciple: Sir, even the Upanishads etc. do not clearly teach about
renunciation and Sannyasa.

Swamiji: You are talking like a madman! Renunciation is the very soul of
the Upanishads. Illumination born of discriminative reflection is the
ultimate aim of Upanishadic knowledge. My belief, however, is that it
was since the time of Buddha that the monastic vow was preached more
thoroughly all over India, and renunciation, the giving up of
sense-enjoyment, was recognised as the highest aim of religious life.
And Hinduism has absorbed into itself this Buddhistic spirit of
renunciation. Never was a great man of such renunciation born in this
world as Buddha.

Disciple: Do you then mean, sir, that before Buddha's advent there was
very little of the spirit of renunciation in the country, and there were
hardly any Sannyasins at all?

Swamiji: Who says that? The monastic institution was there, but the
generality of people did not recognise it as the goal of life; there was
no such staunch spirit for it, there was no such firmness in spiritual
discrimination. So even when Buddha betook himself to so many Yogis and
Sâdhus, nowhere did he acquire the peace he wanted. And then to realise
the Highest he fell back on his own exertions, and seated on a spot with
the famous words, "इहासने शुष्यतु मे शरीरं — Let my body wither away on
this seat" etc., rose from it only after becoming the Buddha, the
Illumined One. The many monasteries that you now see in India occupied
by monks were once in the possession of Buddhism. The Hindus have only
made them their own now by modifying them in their own fashion. Really
speaking, the institution of Sannyasa originated with Buddha; it was he
who breathed life into the dead bones of this institution.

Swami Ramakrishnananda, a brother-disciple of Swamiji, interposed, "But
the ancient law-books and Puranas are good authority that all the four
Ashramas had existed in India before Buddha was born." Swamiji replied,
"Most of the Puranas, the codes of Manu and others, as well as much of
the Mahâbhârata form but recent literature. Bhagavân Buddha was much
earlier than all that." "On that supposition," rejoined Swami
Ramakrishnananda, "discussions about Buddhism would be found in the
Vedas, Upanishads, the law-books, Puranas, and the like. But since such
discussions are not found in these ancient books, how can you say that
Buddha antedated them all? In a few old Puranas, of course, accounts of
the Buddhistic doctrine are partially given; but from these, it can't be
concluded that the scriptures of the Hindus such as the law-books and
Puranas are of recent date."

Swamiji: Please read history, (Evidently, during the argumentation,
Swamiji was taking his stand on the conclusions of modern historical
studies, thereby giving his encouragement and support to such new
efforts and methods. But we know from one of his letters to Swami
Swarupananda (C.W. [Vol.
V](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/114_swarup.htm) ,) that Swamiji
broke off later on from the position of these modern scholars and worked
out the pre-Buddhistic origin of much of modern Hinduism.) and you will
find that Hinduism has become so great only by absorbing all the ideas
of Buddha.

Swami Ramakrishnananda: It seems to me that Buddha has only left
revivified the great Hindu ideas, by thoroughly practicing in his life
such principles as renunciation, non-attachment, and so on.

Swamiji: But this position can't be proved. For we don't get any history
before Buddha was born. If we accept history only as authority, we have
to admit that in the midst of the profound darkness of the ancient
times, Buddha only shines forth as a figure radiant with the light of
knowledge.

Now the topic of Sannyasa was resumed and Swamiji said: Wheresoever
might lie the origin of Sannyasa, the goal of human life is to become a
knower of Brahman by embracing this vow of renunciation. The supreme end
is to enter the life of Sannyasa. They alone are blessed indeed who have
broken off from worldly life through a spirit of renunciation.

Disciple: But many people are of opinion nowadays, sir, that with the
increase of wandering monks in the country, much harm has been done to
its material progress. They assert it on the ground that these monks
idly roam about depending on householders for their living, that these
are of no help to the cause of social and national advancement.

Swamiji: But will you explain to me first what is meant by the term
material or secular advancement?

Disciple: Yes, it is to do as people in the West are doing by securing
the necessaries of life through education, and promoting through science
such objects in life as commerce, industry, communications, and so on.

Swamiji: But can all these be ever brought about, if real Rajas is not
awakened in man? Wandering all over India, nowhere I found this Rajas
manifesting itself. It is all Tamas and Tamas! The masses lie engulfed
in Tamas, and only among the monks could I find this Rajas and Sattva.
These people are like the backbone of the country. The real Sannyasin is
a teacher of householders. It is with the light and teaching obtained
from them that householders of old triumphed many a time in the battles
of life. The householders give food and clothing to the Sadhus, only in
return for their invaluable teachings. Had there been no such mutual
exchange in India, her people would have become extinct like the
American Indians by this time. It is because the householders still give
a few morsels of food to the Sadhus that they are yet able to keep their
foothold on the path of progress. The Sannyasins are not idle. They are
really the fountain-head of all activity. The householders see lofty
ideals carried into practice in the lives of the Sadhus and accept from
them such noble ideas; and this it is that has up till now enabled them
to fight their battle of life from the sphere of Karma. The example of
holy Sadhus makes them work out holy ideas in life and imbibe real
energy for work. The Sannyasins inspire the householders in all noble
causes by embodying in their lives the highest principle of giving up
everything for the sake of God and the good of the world, and as a
return the householders give them a few doles of food. And the very
disposition and capacity to grow that food develops in the people
because of the blessings and good wishes of the all-renouncing monks. It
is because of their failure to understand the deeper issues that people
blame the monastic institution. Whatever may be the case in other
countries, in this land the bark of householders' life does not sink
only because the Sannyasins are at its helm.

Disciple: But, sir, how many monks are to be found who are truly devoted
to the good of men?

Swamiji: Ah, quite enough if one great Sannyasin like Shri Ramakrishna
comes in a thousand years! For a thousand years after his advent, people
may well guide themselves by those ideas and ideals he leaves behind. It
is only because this monastic institution exists in the country that men
of his greatness are born here. There are defects, more or less, in all
the institutions of life. But what is the reason that in spite of its
faults, this noble institution stands yet supreme over all the other
institutions of life? It is because the true Sannyasins forgo even their
own liberation and live simply for doing good to the world. If you don't
feel grateful to such a noble institution, fie on you again and again!

While speaking these words, Swamiji's countenance became aglow. And
before the eyes of the disciple he shone as the very embodiment of
Sannyasa.

Then, as if realising deep within his soul the greatness of this
institution, self-absorbed, he broke forth in sweetest symphony:

"वेदान्तवाक्येषु सदा रमन्तो  
भिक्षान्नमात्रेण च तुष्टिमन्तः।  
अशोकमन्त:करणे चरन्तः  
कौपीनवन्त: खलु भाग्यवन्तः॥

— "Brooding blissful in mind over the texts of the Vedanta, quite
contented with food obtained as alms and wandering forth with a heart
untouched by any feeling of grief, thrice blessed are the Sannyasins,
with only their loin-cloth for dress."

Resuming the talk, he went on: For the good of the many, for the
happiness of the many is the Sannyasin born. His life is all vain,
indeed, who, embracing Sannyasa, forgets this ideal. The Sannyasin,
verily, is born into this world to lay down his life for others, to stop
the bitter cries of men, to wipe the tears of the widow, to bring peace
to the soul of the bereaved mother, to equip the ignorant masses for the
struggle for existence, to accomplish the secular and spiritual
well-being of all through the diffusion of spiritual teachings and to
arouse the sleeping lion of Brahman in all by throwing in the light of
knowledge. Addressing then his brothers of the Order, he said: Our life
is "आत्मनो मोक्षार्थं जगद्धिताय च — for the sake of our self-liberation
as well as for the good of the world". So what are you sitting idle for?
Arise, awake; wake up yourselves, and awaken others. Achieve the
consummation of human life before you pass off — "Arise, awake, and stop
not till the goal is reached."

</div>
