+++
title = "shrI rAmAnuja deshika, one of the last great kaumAra tantrics"

+++
The below note is neither meant as a sectarian effusion nor a historical
account. It is a hagiography and just that.  
sarva-bhUtAmakaM manmanobodhakaM sat-kR^ipAsAgaraM devasenApate pAhi mAM
pAhi mAM pAhi mAM deva tubhyaM namo deva tubhyaM namo deva tubhyaM namaH
||

The shrI-vaiShNava AchArya, sudarshana sUrI, was proceeding to
shrIperaMputtur after visiting the old temple of viShNu at venkaTagiri
(not Tirupati) and consecrating a shalagraman there. On his way back on
his horse cart he had to pass by the shrine housing the great vAyu
li\~Nga of the terrible rudra, kAlahasti. rudra’s presence was felt here
in the form in which he had destroyed gajAsura. The zealous vaiShNava
who did not recognize the greatness of The god, asked his henchmen to
draw the curtains in his cart and he closed his eyes so that even by
error he might not cast his eyes on the shrine of rudra. When he was a
safe from kAlahasti distance he opened his eyes but to his horror he had
turned blind. Shocked he uttered the verse:  
sarvAtmatA te shrutiShu prasiddhA satyaiva sA kAlakarIsha nUnam |  
apashyatastvA madhunA samastaM yato na me dR^iShTipathaM prayAti ||

He was constantly tormented by bhUta-s and agents of sharabha. He
recalled the great vaiShNava tantric, the master of pA\~ncharAtra
prayoga, rAma deshika and wanted to seek his aid. That night he had a
dream that shri rAma deshika had already attained mokSha but he appeared
in his dream and asked him to seek the aid of his illustrious student,
the accomplished tantric shri rAmAnuja deshika. He met rAmAnuja deshika
at Tiruttani who performed an appropriate rite to release sudarshana
from the grip of rudra’s wrath, even as viShvaksena was brought back to
life by kAla bhairava, when he had drunk viShNu’s blood from the
skull-bowl fashioned of brahmA’s severed fifth head.

rAmAnuja deshika, was born in kA\~nchipuraM in family of devote
vaiShNava brAhmaNa-s of the ubhaya vedAnta stream who regularly sung the
DP4000 and lit lamps at viShNu shrines. rAmAnuja was a natural poet and
mastered kAvya and alaMkAra at an early age in addition to the study of
the taittirIya school of the yajur veda. He then proceeded to study the
mantra shAstra with the great tantric guru rAma deshika who had mastered
the entire lore of pA\~ncharatra mantras. Having initiated rAmAnuja into
all of them he asked him to perform purashcharaNa of the 104 mighty
astra mantras of viShNu, which leads one to highest pA\~ncharAtric
siddhi. In order to do this he proceeded to a desolate spot near
Tiruttani where he began his japa in seclusion. One day as he was
wandering in the forests of the Nagari hills he saw mysterious
vaikhAnasa brAhmaNa wearing a yellow dress. The brAhmaNa saw him but did
not speak anything but merely gestured to him the way kApAlika’s do.
That night he had a dream in which kumAra communicated to him the
bagalAmukhi vidyA-s. He did japa of those mantras and attained siddhi —
he had become the master of the sAmkhyAyana tantraM. Then that same
brahmin came by and asked him to accompany him to Tirupati. As they were
ascending the slopes to have a view of the great nArAyaNa, the brahmin
gave him two mighty mantra-s, that of the goddess trailokya-vijayA
(along with its saMputIkaraNa for the mantra of vilistengA) and viShNu
trailokyamohana. Then he asked him to proceed to Bellary after having
seen the image of the deva on Tirumala.

As rAmAnuja was proceeding to Bellary a jaina mantravadin attacked him
with the mantra of kurukullA, but he retaliated with the
trailokya-vijayA spell and destroyed the jaina’s entire mantra bala.
rAmAnuja passed through to Bellary which was in a precarious condition
due to the ravages of the green-robed, bearded, ruffianly Meccan demons.
Here, after he had finished his mantra japa, he suddenly saw an
apparition of the great war-god kumAra, with six heads wielding several
terrifying weapons. He spontaneously composed two poems to kumAra in the
daNDaka and bhuja\~Nga meters. At that point he met the last
kaumArAchArya of the va\~Nga lineage (from what is now in the terrorist
state of Bangladesh), kumAra-guru , who gave him all the kaumAra
mantras. He instantaneously attained the siddhi of all but two, which
are the most secret – the krodha-kumAra mantra and vkR^itagraha mantra.

He was asked to go to nAgArjunakoNDa and perform their japa. As he was
performing the purashcharaNa he saw the dreadful skanda appearing with a
single head and he uttered a 4-syllabled mantra. That mantra became
varAha, who held in his hand a great sword dripping with the blood of
hiraNyAkSha, with an upavIta of 3 intertwined snakes. Then from the
snout of varAha emerged that awful emanation of kumAra, krodha-rAja
kumAra, with 6 heads, who is irresistible. With these mantra-s he had
attained the height of tantric perfection, he was called a deshika. He
was the master of the kaumAra lore, an impregnable mantra-vAdin. After
his marriage he was proceeding with his wife to kumAra parvata when he
was attacked by the turuShka-s on the way who tried to seize his wife.
He deployed the krodha-rAja ShaNmukha hR^idaya mantra and got ready to
fight them with his small band. The mahAshUla of kumAra entered his
weapons and they killed 80 turuShkas sending the rest scampering over
the country side. Having reached kumAra parvata he installed himself
there for worshiping the deity.
