+++
title = "mantra of trailokyavijayA"

+++
The mantra of the goddess trailokyavijayA is provided by the
yuddha-jayArNava tantraM. A somewhat corrupt version of this tantra is
incorporated into the agni purANa. Stand-alone manuscripts of the YJA
walso exist, though they have not been edited or published. In addition
to the version of the agni-purANa I had access to a hand-written
transcript on paper. The Dutch explorers have recovered a corrupt
version of the same in their collection of Hindu mantras known as
stuti-s and stava-s from Indonesia (now only surviving in Bali). All
these with a single input from oral tradition help to obtain the
critical version of the trailokyavijayA mantra as per the available
traditions. trailokyavijayA is meditated upon as being deep blue in
color, having 20 hands, and standing on corpses of slaughtered foes.

OM hUM kShUM hrUM OM namo bhagavatI daMShTriNI bhImavaktre mahograrUpe
hili hili raktanetre kili kili mahAnisvane kulu OM vidyuj-jihve kulu OM
nir-mAMse kaTa kaTa gonasAbharaNe chili chili shava-mAlA-dhAriNI drAvaya
OM mahAraudrI sArdra-charmakR^itkR^itAmbare vijR^imbha OM nR^itya
asilatAdhAriNI bhrukuTI-kR^itApA\~Nge viShama-netra-kR^itAnane
vasA-medho-vilipta-gAtre kaha 2 OM hasa 2 kruddha 2 OM nIla-jImUta-varNe
megha-mAlA-dhAriNI prajvala OM GhaNTA-ki\~Nki\~Ni vibhUShita-sharIre OM
simhisthe aruNavarNe OM hrAm hrIM hrUM raudra-rUpe hUM hrIM klIM OM hrIM
hUM OM AkarSha OM dhUna 2 oM he haH khaH vajriNi hUM kShUM kShAM
krodha-rUpiNI prajjvala 2 oM bhIma-bhIShaNe bhindi OM mahAkAye Chindi oM
karAlinI kiTi 2 mahA-bhUta-mAtaH sarva-duShTa-nivAriNI jaye OM vijaye OM
trailokyavijaye hUM phaT svAhA
