+++
title = "The enigma of ash mounds"

+++
These thoughts sprung in course of one of those extended conversations
that we had. As we passed by train to the city of our birth we saw the
typical landscape of the southern Deccan plains: The clusters of
castellated granite hills and rock spurs of granite. These granite
landscapes immensely fascinated us, and in our early days we spent a
great deal of effort investigating their geology. We then had our
encounter with their archaeology which we never fathomed till we ran
into Allchinâ€™s work. Allchin, a British archaeologist, spent decades
studying Indian dung and this is precisely what caught our attention. We
had seen the little hills of ash and where various villages dotted the
Kanada and Telugu countryside known as Budihalli-s or ash villages (bUdi
as is vibhUti or ash). Sadly, these remarkable sites are vanishing
rapidly these days under the action of both local and the government
development schemes and we may lose our as it is tenuous link to the
past. The Budihal itself was a center of great archaeological
investigation by the Indian successors of Allchin, and have produced
much new data. We summarize below some data and speculations on the
archaeology and history of the ash mounds and associated peninsular
prehistoric sites:

Indian prehistory shows a sharp archaeo-cultural divide in the
peninsula, geographically corresponding to the boundary between the
heart land of the Maharatta country and the Telugu and Kanada zones
below. 

To the north of this divide the sub-continent is marked by a
transition from the neolithic to the chalcolithic, though the neolithic
elements persist even after the emergence of the chalcolithic in some
places like Gujarat. Finally, the chalcolithic gives way to the Iron
age, though the exact temporal point of this transition is being
obfuscated by the agendas of the Witzelite indologists. 

To the south of
the divide there is instead an extended Stone age and a sudden
transition to the Iron age in the first half of the first millennium
before the common era. This transition to the Iron age is associated
with the spread of the megalithic culture through south India. The
chalcolithic in the north is dominated by the rather uniform, highly
urbanized Sarasvati-Sindhu or Harappan zone that spreads from
Afghanistan to Kaothe in Maharashtra. Surrounding the Harappan zone are
other comparable chalcolithic cultures albeit with a lower level of
urbanization. In the Maharashtra region, this circum-Harappan
chalcolithic assumes the form of the Kayatha, Malwa, Daimabad, and Jorwe
cultures stretching all the way from around 2500-1400 BCE. The Stone age
South India just below the Maharashtran chalcolithic zone is dominated
by neolithic pastoralists and agriculturists, of whom the most striking
in the band from north and East Karnataka to South and west Andhra is
the ash mound culture.

The chalcolithic zone to the north of the divide is rather congruent
with the spread of Indo-Aryan languages, while the neolithic to the
south of the divide is congruent with the main spread of the Dravidian
languages. In terms of crop cultivation too a marked difference is seen
between the chalcolithic zone and the neolithic zone. The ash mound
culture and its other neighboring South Indian neolithic cultures
primarily cultivated two dals (pulses) i.e. mung and horse gram and two
millets. The ash mound people appear to have supplemented their above
grain diet with cattle meat. In contrast, in the neighboring
chalcolithic in Maharashtra we see a very different agricultural set up
with wheat, barley, lentils and peas.

The Ash mound cultures proper are dated by Allchin and subsequent Hindu
archaeologists as spanning the period from 2800 BC to 1200 BC. It is
distinguished by the presence of huge mounds of ash up to 26 feet in
height that are composed almost solely of burnt cattle dung ash. These
ash mounds were formed by episodic burning of dung over several rounds,
probably accumulated from rather large herds of cattle. The cattle
appear to have been mainly humped bovines which are also depicted in the
rock art associated with the granite hills in the vicinity of the Ash
mound sites. Though there is also evidence for limited husbandry of
goats/sheep. The Ash mounds themselves do not seem to be associated with
permanent habitations, which are instead seen in the vicinity on top or
the base of the granite hills. There is clear evidence for butchering of
cattle using stone tools in these settlements in the vicinity. The
community probably consisted of pastoralists tending cattle, primarily
associated with the cattle dung, and farmers in the vicinity associated
with the cultivation of pulses and grains. 

Kosambi and his successors
thought that the dung burning was a means of sanitation. But we believe
he was wrong and Allchin was correct in interpreting the mounds as a
dung-burning ritual. Modern pastoralists and associated farmers value
the dung as manure and fuel. Unless relatively pure dung does not burn
easily. Further, no modern pastoralist shows any such sanitary practice
of dung burning in modern India. It is hence possible that they set up
these periodic dung fires for a grand ritual. The fires may have been
set up in dry winters or summers, and seen from the top of the granite
hills, where the Stone age shamans might have drawn their rock graffiti
and pounded on the cupules in the granite to produce musical displays.
