---
title: ON THE BOUNDS OF HINDUISM

---
<div>

[←](on_indian_women.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](../notes_from_lectures_and_discourses/on_karma-yoga.htm)

  

## ON THE BOUNDS OF HINDUISM

(*Prabuddha Bharata, April, 1899*)

Having been directed by the Editor, writes our representative, to
interview Swami Vivekananda on the question of converts to Hinduism, I
found an opportunity one evening on the roof of a Ganga houseboat. It
was after nightfall, and we had stopped at the embankment of the
Ramakrishna Math, and there the Swami came down to speak with me.

Time and place were alike delightful. Overhead the stars, and around —
the rolling Ganga; and on one side stood the dimly lighted building,
with its background of palms and lofty shade-trees.

"I want to see you, Swami", I began, "on this matter of receiving back
into Hinduism those who have been perverted from it. Is it your opinion
that they should be received?"

"Certainly," said the Swami, "they can and ought to be taken."

He sat gravely for a moment, thinking, and then resumed. "Besides," he
said, "we shall otherwise decrease in numbers. When the Mohammedans
first came, we are said — I think on the authority of Ferishta, the
oldest Mohammedan historian — to have been six hundred millions of
Hindus. Now we are about two hundred millions. And then every man going
out of the Hindu pale is not only a man less, but an enemy the more.

"Again, the vast majority of Hindu perverts to Islam and Christianity
are perverts by the sword, or the descendants of these. It would be
obviously unfair to subject these to disabilities of any kind. As to the
case of born aliens, did you say? Why, born aliens have been converted
in the past by crowds, and the process is still going on.

"In my own opinion, this statement not only applies to aboriginal
tribes, to outlying nations, and to almost all our conquerors before the
Mohammedan conquest, but also in the Purânas. I hold that they have been
aliens thus adopted.

"Ceremonies of expiation are no doubt suitable in the case of willing
converts, returning to their Mother-Church, as it were; but on those who
were alienated by conquest — as in Kashmir and Nepal — or on strangers
wishing to join us, no penance should be imposed."

"But of what caste would these people be, Swamiji?" I ventured to ask.
"They must have some, or they can never be assimilated into the great
body of Hindus. Where shall we look for their rightful place?"

"Returning converts", said the Swami quietly, "will gain their own
castes, of course. And new people will make theirs. You will remember,"
he added, "that this has already been done in the case of Vaishnavism.
Converts from different castes and aliens were all able to combine under
that flag and form a caste by themselves — and a very respectable one
too. From Râmânuja down to Chaitanya of Bengal, all great Vaishnava
Teachers have done the same."

"And where should these new people expect to marry?" I asked.

"Amongst themselves, as they do now", said the Swami quietly.

"Then as to names," I enquired, "I suppose aliens and perverts who have
adopted non-Hindu names should be named newly. Would you give them
caste-names, or what?"

"Certainly," said the Swami, thoughtfully, "there is a great deal in a
name!" and on this question he would say no more.

But my next enquiry drew blood. "Would you leave these new-comers,
Swamiji, to choose their own form of religious belief out of
many-visaged Hinduism, or would you chalk out a religion for them?"

"Can you ask that?" he said. "They will choose for themselves. For
unless a man chooses for himself, the very spirit of Hinduism is
destroyed. The essence of our Faith consists simply in this freedom of
the Ishta."

I thought the utterance a weighty one, for the man before me has spent
more years than any one else living I fancy, in studying the common
bases of Hinduism in a scientific and sympathetic spirit — and the
freedom of the Ishta is obviously a principle big enough to accommodate
the world.

But the talk passed to other matters, and then with a cordial good night
this great teacher of religion lifted his lantern and went back into the
monastery, while I by the pathless paths of the Ganga, in and out
amongst her crafts of many sizes, made the best of my way back to my
Calcutta home.

</div>
