+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "July 20, 2021"

+++
Ibn Khaldun was a remarkable scholar, for many reasons. If you have used
the term Asabiyyah or heard of it, then you have him to thank. His work
is a glistening blade of reason tearing apart the shroud of darkness
which covered the High Middle Ages. To us, he shows a unique ability to
detach his own atomicity from the chaos around him & dissect his own
culture with nothing else but the power of his rational mind. An ability
perhaps only mirrored by the Ancient Greeks. He begins his magnum opus,
**Muqaddimah** by making a prefactory statement on the importance of the
authority of truth arrived at by logic, the spectre held by the logos of
man;  
  
*Little effort is being made to get at the truth. The critical eye, as a
rule, is not sharp. Errors and unfounded assumptions are closely allied
and familiar elements in historical information. Blind trust in
tradition is an inherited trait in human beings. Occupation with the
(scholarly) disciplines on the part of those who have no genuine claim
to them is widespread. But the pasture of stupidity is unwholesome for
mankind. No one can stand up against the authority of truth, and the
evil of falsehood is to be fought with enlightening speculation. The
reporter merely dictates and passes on (the material). It takes critical
insight to sort out the hidden truth; it takes knowledge to lay truth
bare and polish it so that critical insight may be applied to it. Still,
after all has been, said, I am conscious of imperfections when I look at
the work of scholars past and present. I confess my inability to
penetrate so difficult a subject. I wish that men of scholarly
competence and wide knowledge would look at the book with a critical,
rather than a complacent eye, and silently correct and overlook the
mistakes they come upon. The capital of knowledge that an individual
scholar has to offer is small. Admission (of one’s shortcomings) saves
from censure. Kindness from colleagues is hoped for. It is God whom I
ask to make our deeds acceptable in His sight. He is a good protector.*.

Khaldun’s self-reflective criticism was not unique to him but certainly
tastes good to our modern tastebuds. We cherish thinkers who are capable
of pressing pause, taking back a look at their own mistakes and telling
us about it. Works filled with uncritical and senseless arrogance or
those that privilege divine revelation over reason leave our mouths
sour, longing for the *rasa* of more balanced thoughts. What made
Khaldun truly one of a kind was he attempted to give us a Theory of
Civilization using naturalistic epistemology.

*In the work, I commented on civilization, on urbanization, and on the
essential characteristics of human social organization, in a way that
explains to the reader how and why things are as they are, and shows him
how the men who constituted a dynasty first came upon the historical
scene. As a result, he will wash his hands of any blind trust in
tradition. Civilization may be either desert (Bedouin) civilization as
found in outlying regions and mountains, in hamlets (near) pastures in
waste regions, and on the fringes of sandy deserts; or it may be
sedentary civilization as found in cities, villages, towns, and small
communities that serve the purpose of protection and fortification by*.

He goes on to explain why the *polis* is the natural outcome of man’s
social nature and his need for relying upon community to consume all the
goods that he cannot produce himself and for protection against the
dangers of the natural world. He says that aggressiveness and injustice
are the nature of man so every social order needs a restraining moral
influence. A panacea is needed for the aggression of man against each
other. This is where royal authority comes in. Authority therefore is
necessary for the existence of the social order. Khaldun points out
hierarchies exist even amongst bees and locusts. He now disagrees with
the Islamic theologians who say a divinely revealed book and prophecy is
necessary for moral order and says  
  
*This proposition of the philosophers is not logical, as one can see.
Existence and human life can materialize without (the existence of
prophecy) through injunctions a person in authority may devise on his
own or with the help of a group feeling that enables him to force the
others to follow him wherever he wants to go. People who have a
(divinely revealed) book and who follow the prophets are few in number
in comparison with the Magians who have none. The latter constitute the
majority of the world’s inhabitants. Still, they have possessed
dynasties and monuments, not to mention life itself. They still possess
these things at this time in the intemperate zones to the north and the
south. This is in contrast with human life in the state of anarchy, with
no one to exercise a restraining influence. That would be
impossible.*  
  
To be continued.

