+++
title = "HANUMAN JAYANTI"
date = "April 20, 2019"

+++
![57262718_10161666453540574_5845078343824703488_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57262718_10161666453540574_5845078343824703488_n-1.jpg?w=676)

Today \[yesterday for those of us to the west of the International Date
Line\] is an important religious observance, commemorating the triumph
of an incarnate-and-born form of Deus Pater – sent from on high to help
out Mankind (particularly via severance of the chains of sin upon the
soul) in fulfilment of a covenant made some time beforehand with a
particularly favoured scriptural figure. It’s also Easter.

Confused? Especially by the image? Let me explain.

This is pretty much one of my favourite depictions of HanumanJi –
Bajrang Bali; for it goes quite a bit further than most illustrations of
Hanuman, which basically present Him as a very strong Monkey- (Vanara)
lord wielding a Gada (mace) and often engaged in the carrying out of one
or more of His mythological exploits from the Ramayana \[frequently,
lifting an entire mountain for the purposes of bringing a particular
herb which grows upon it to the battlefield in order to treat a friend
and cherished comrade who’d been poisoned by what i suppose we could
call an Ancient Aryan WMD going off\].

Indeed, it presents the \*Essence\* of Hanuman.

As Hanuman, you see, is an Avatar of Lord Shiva; and is directly cited
as Son of Vayu \[another name for Shiva – you may be more familiar with
the Nordic/Germanic cognate of Vayu-Vata … Odin/Woden/Vatan\]. This
elegant and eloquent depiction, therefore, shows \*exactly\* that, by
combining directly the customary iconographic features of \*both\* Shiva
\*and\* Hanuman. Hence the Jatta-hair (with Rudrakshamala about it), the
Cobra-coiled about the neck, the big-cat garment, the Trishula & Damaru,
and the three-lined Tripundra markings. On that familiar, friendly (to
us, anyway), Monkey-visage and powerfully sculpted musculature.

\[As a brief side-note – you may be wondering where the Vajra/Gada which
so often characterizes Hanuman (indeed, it is the underpinning of His
very frequent kenning/alternate-theonymic: Bajrang Bali\] is to be found
in this image. As it happens, the Trishula, both in shape and majesty
and other such symbolism, has an equivalent value in a number of key
senses. So there it is. Continuing the combination/emanation
myth-theme!\]

So what was I getting at with the intro-blurb, other than a riff off the
fact that today’s also Good Friday? \[a fact which Tristan observed with
some amusement, that my Mandir was also noting\]

Well, today is Hanuman Jayanti. “Jayanti” being one of those delightful
Sanskrit terms which has several meanings – including “Birthday” and
“Victory/Triumph”. The “incarnate-and-born form of Deus Pater” line
references the fact of Hanuman being a born Avatar of Mahadev – and I am
here making a multilingual, multi-\[Indo-European\] mythological
reference to the identity of Shiva-Rudra as Dyaus Pitar … the Sky
Father, which is also the mytho-linguistic predicate for the later Roman
“Deus Pater” … that the Catholics have ‘borrowed’ the name and wording
of to refer to their trinity’s “God the Father” in Latin-language
Christian liturgy.

\[if you’re wondering – what happened, in part, was a shift of “Deus”
from its much more archaic sense correlate with its PIE ancestor
“Deiwos”, meaning ‘Shining One’ \[the “Dyaus” in “Dyaus Pitar” also
being closely linked to “Day” \[Latin: Diem/Dies\], and the life-giving
& regulating Supernal Radiance which, you know, characterizes a Day … to
a more general term for a “God”, in a parallel for the development of
the Sanskrit term “Deva” in pretty much the same manner. And, from
there, in the ecclesiastical later Latin of the Christian Church – to
one God in particular. We shall leave, for now, my frequent observation
around the linguistic derivation of “Jupiter” and “Zeus Pater” from the
same source being somewhat ‘obscured’ by syncretization with the ‘Storm
Lord’ figure of the IE pantheon, presumably under influence from
Mesopotamian or other religious setups\]

The “Sent from On High to Help Out Mankind” hailing, speaks not only to
the prima facie obvious role of Hanuman in the context of the Ramayana,
but also to Hanuman’s well-renowned nature as one of the most genial,
jovial \[see what I did there?\] Gods – a Friend to Man, a swift ally,
and a caring compatriot to us down here on Earth.

\[As a sign of just how far this occasionally gets taken, even when
\*not\* putting a unique (and much more successful, as it is inverted)
Hindu spin on that age-old “if the Mountain won’t come to Mohammed”
proverb, it is said that Valmiki, the author of the most prominent
iteration of the Ramayana, encountered Hanuman up in the Mountains while
journeying to seek inspiration for his literary efforts. And noticed
that Hanuman was, in fact, writing His Own account of the events of the
Ramayana, which He shared some of with Valmiki. Valmiki burst into
tears, overcome with both the sheer beauty of Bajrang Bali’s rendition …
and the fact that even an author as eloquent as he would be unable to
ever produce anything of comparable marvel and excellence and
magnificent beauty. Seeing this, Hanuman without a second thought cast
His draft into the nearby glacial stream – determining that it would
cheer up Valmiki to be now able to write the most renowned Ramayana as
the result of the loss of its superior. There’s apparently a Temple in
India which claims to possess a fragmentary portion of the HanumanJi
Ramayana, written in an ancient script upon preserved palm-leaves; but
that, I shall have to look into at some other time\]

Hanuman is also regarded as capable of ‘severing the bonds of previous
\[negative\] Karma’ – hence the line around the breaking of the ‘chains
of sin upon the soul’; which is, in no small part, why my amazing Didi
Pooja recommended Hanuman connection to me, during my … previous period
of tribulation which lead me to Mandir in the first place all those
years ago. \[The offering of a cucumber, due to figurate-symbolic
thoughts around immortality, is a further element, i suppose, in my
‘parallel metaphor’ for today😛\]

And as applies the ‘fulfilment of a covenant made some time beforehand
with a particularly favoured scriptural figure’ … this refers to two key
parts of the mythonarrative conditions placed upon Sri Ravan during the
context of His becoming amongst the foremost of Lord Shiva’s Devotees.
The first of which refers to the curse placed upon Ravana by NandiJi
that His Kingdom would be destroyed by Monkeys; and the second, the
condition placed upon Ravana by Mahadev when Shiva gave Him the Boon of
Chandrahas \[one of my favourite Sanskrit visual-puns – a curved sword
Whose name means something along the lines of ‘The Glinting
Laughter/Smile of the Moon’ , Shiva also being Moon Deity, Crowned with
the Crescent, Chandrasekhar😀\] following Ravana’s extensive tapas
dedications to the Lord – that providing the sword was used for good
purposes, it would remain invincible .. but should its employment turn
to evil, it would desert its bearer in His hour of greatest need. A
‘covenant’ of Devotee and (Ishta-)Deva , of pious conduct and Divine
Reciprocity!

Anyway, having explained my introduction at some length, we shall now
segue briefly through#NASanalysis:

You see, in many key ways, our understandings of Shiva & Hanuman
directly reflect those of Odin & Thor. For in our reckoning, They are
the Same Deities. This latter identification of Hanuman-(as)-Thor shall
be covered in greater detail in a forthcoming eponymously titled work
through Arya Akasha.

However, for the moment, we shall note that in addition to the strong
iconographic and scriptural-textual coterminities, Hanuman & Thor also
occupy strikingly \[ha\] similar mythological positions – as the Friend
to Man, the courageous empowerer/intervener wilfully prayed to, and a
much more ‘approachable’ Figure than the oft-abjectly terrifying and
downright ‘spooky’ Spear-God Odin-Rudra.

Further, due to the way in which Patrilineal Reincarnation works in the
Nordic reckoning of metaphysics and the soul, the notion of a Son as an
‘Incarnation’ of His Father makes a rather resounding sense.

And while some might point towards Lord Indra as a logical correlate to
Thor within the Vedic/Hindu Pantheon – RigVeda 10.86 quite directly
states that for theological purposes, Lord Indra and ‘The Monkey’, are
one and the same.

A situation which is somewhat mirrored, curiously enough, with the
attestation for Thor as the ‘curious/unwise’ Ape, in Nordic scriptural
materials.

So there you have it. A look at some of the mythology & comparative
mythography of Lord Hanuman, in the form of a commentary upon and
spurred by this excellent image of Hanuman as Avatar of Lord Shiva !

BAJRANG BALI KI JAYE ! ! !

\[-C.A.R.\]
