---
title: THE PSYCHIC PRANA

---
<div>

[←](prana.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) /
[Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_control_of_psychic_prana.htm)

  

CHAPTER IV

## THE PSYCHIC PRANA

According to the Yogis, there are two nerve currents in the spinal
column, called Pingalâ and Idâ, and a hollow canal called Sushumnâ
running through the spinal cord. At the lower end of the hollow canal is
what the Yogis call the "Lotus of the Kundalini". They describe it as
triangular in form in which, in the symbolical language of the Yogis,
there is a power called the Kundalini, coiled up. When that Kundalini
awakes, it tries to force a passage through this hollow canal, and as it
rises step by step, as it were, layer after layer of the mind becomes
open and all the different visions and wonderful powers come to the
Yogi. When it reaches the brain, the Yogi is perfectly detached from the
body and mind; the soul finds itself free. We know that the spinal cord
is composed in a peculiar manner. If we take the figure eight
horizontally (¥) there are two parts which are connected in the middle.
Suppose you add eight after eight, piled one on top of the other, that
will represent the spinal cord. The left is the Ida, the right Pingala,
and that hollow canal which runs through the centre of the spinal cord
is the Sushumna. Where the spinal cord ends in some of the lumbar
vertebrae, a fine fibre issues downwards, and the canal runs up even
within that fibre, only much finer. The canal is closed at the lower
end, which is situated near what is called the sacral plexus, which,
according to modern physiology, is triangular in form. The different
plexuses that have their centres in the spinal canal can very well stand
for the different "lotuses" of the Yogi.

The Yogi conceives of several centres, beginning with the Mulâdhâra, the
basic, and ending with the Sahasrâra, the thousand-petalled Lotus in the
brain. So, if we take these different plexuses as representing these
lotuses, the idea of the Yogi can be understood very easily in the
language of modern physiology. We know there are two sorts of actions in
these nerve currents, one afferent, the other efferent; one sensory and
the other motor; one centripetal, and the other centrifugal. One carries
the sensations to the brain, and the other from the brain to the outer
body. These vibrations are all connected with the brain in the long run.
Several other facts we have to remember, in order to clear the way for
the explanation which is to come. This spinal cord, at the brain, ends
in a sort of bulb, in the medulla, which is not attached to the brain,
but floats in a fluid in the brain, so that if there be a blow on the
head the force of that blow will be dissipated in the fluid, and will
not hurt the bulb. This is an important fact to remember. Secondly, we
have also to know that, of all the centres, we have particularly to
remember three, the Muladhara (the basic), the Sahasrara (the
thousand-petalled lotus of the brain) and the Manipura (the lotus of the
navel).

Next we shall take one fact from physics. We all hear of electricity and
various other forces connected with it. What electricity is no one
knows, but so far as it is known, it is a sort of motion. There are
various other motions in the universe; what is the difference between
them and electricity? Suppose this table moves — that the molecules
which compose this table are moving in different directions; if they are
all made to move in the same direction, it will be through electricity.
Electric motion makes the molecules of a body move in the same
direction. If all the air molecules in a room are made to move in the
same direction, it will make a gigantic battery of electricity of the
room. Another point from physiology we must remember, that the centre
which regulates the respiratory system, the breathing system, has a sort
of controlling action over the system of nerve currents.

Now we shall see why breathing is practised. In the first place, from
rhythmical breathing comes a tendency of all the molecules in the body
to move in the same direction. When mind changes into will, the nerve
currents change into a motion similar to electricity, because the nerves
have been proved to show polarity under the action of electric currents.
This shows that when the will is transformed into the nerve currents, it
is changed into something like electricity. When all the motions of the
body have become perfectly rhythmical, the body has, as it were, become
a gigantic battery of will. This tremendous will is exactly what the
Yogi wants. This is, therefore, a physiological explanation of the
breathing exercise. It tends to bring a rhythmic action in the body, and
helps us, through the respiratory centre, to control the other centres.
The aim of Prânâyâma here is to rouse the coiled-up power in the
Muladhara, called the Kundalini.

Everything that we see, or imagine, or dream, we have to perceive in
space. This is the ordinary space, called the Mahâkâsha, or elemental
space. When a Yogi reads the thoughts of other men, or perceives
supersensuous objects he sees them in another sort of space called the
Chittâkâsha, the mental space. When perception has become objectless,
and the soul shines in its own nature, it is called the Chidâkâsha, or
knowledge space. When the Kundalini is aroused, and enters the canal of
the Sushumna, all the perceptions are in the mental space. When it has
reached that end of the canal which opens out into the brain, the
objectless perception is in the knowledge space. Taking the analogy of
electricity, we find that man can send a current only along a wire, (The
reader should remember that this was spoken before the discovery of
wireless telegraphy. — Ed.) but nature requires no wires to send her
tremendous currents. This proves that the wire is not really necessary,
but that only our inability to dispense with it compels us to use it.

Similarly, all the sensations and motions of the body are being sent
into the brain, and sent out of it, through these wires of nerve fibres.
The columns of sensory and motor fibres in the spinal cord are the Ida
and Pingala of the Yogis. They are the main channels through which the
afferent and efferent currents travel. But why should not the mind send
news without any wire, or react without any wire? We see this is done in
nature. The Yogi says, if you can do that, you have got rid of the
bondage of matter. How to do it? If you can make the current pass
through the Sushumna, the canal in the middle of the spinal column, you
have solved the problem. The mind has made this network of the nervous
system, and has to break it, so that no wires will be required to work
through. Then alone will all knowledge come to us — no more bondage of
body; that is why it is so important that we should get control of that
Sushumna. If we can send the mental current through the hollow canal
without any nerve fibres to act as wires, the Yogi says, the problem is
solved, and he also says it can be done.

This Sushumna is in ordinary persons closed up at the lower extremity;
no action comes through it. The Yogi proposes a practice by which it can
be opened, and the nerve currents made to travel through. When a
sensation is carried to a centre, the centre reacts. This reaction, in
the case of automatic centres, is followed by motion; in the case of
conscious centres it is followed first by perception, and secondly by
motion. All perception is the reaction to action from outside. How,
then, do perceptions in dreams arise? There is then no action from
outside. The sensory motions, therefore, are coiled up somewhere. For
instance, I see a city; the perception of that city is from the reaction
to the sensations brought from outside objects comprising that city.
That is to say, a certain motion in the brain molecules has been set up
by the motion in the incarrying nerves, which again are set in motion by
external objects in the city. Now, even after a long time I can remember
the city. This memory is exactly the same phenomenon, only it is in a
milder form. But whence is the action that sets up even the milder form
of similar vibrations in the brain? Not certainly from the primary
sensations. Therefore it must be that the sensations are coiled up
somewhere, and they, by their acting, bring out the mild reaction which
we call dream perception.

Now the centre where all these residual sensations are, as it were,
stored up, is called the Muladhara, the root receptacle, and the
coiled-up energy of action is Kundalini, "the coiled up". It is very
probable that the residual motor energy is also stored up in the same
centre, as, after deep study or meditation on external objects, the part
of the body where the Muladhara centre is situated (probably the sacral
plexus) gets heated. Now, if this coiled-up energy be roused and made
active, and then consciously made to travel up the Sushumna canal, as it
acts upon centre after centre, a tremendous reaction will set in. When a
minute portion of energy travels along a nerve fibre and causes reaction
from centres, the perception is either dream or imagination. But when by
the power of long internal meditation the vast mass of energy stored up
travels along the Sushumna, and strikes the centres, the reaction is
tremendous, immensely superior to the reaction of dream or imagination,
immensely more intense than the reaction of sense-perception. It is
super-sensuous perception. And when it reaches the metropolis of all
sensations, the brain, the whole brain, as it were, reacts, and the
result is the full blaze of illumination, the perception of the Self. As
this Kundalini force travels from centre to centre, layer after layer of
the mind, as it were, opens up, and this universe is perceived by the
Yogi in its fine, or causal form. Then alone the causes of this
universe, both as sensation and reaction, are known as they are, and
hence comes all knowledge. The causes being known, the knowledge of the
effects is sure to follow.

Thus the rousing of the Kundalini is the one and only way to attaining
Divine Wisdom, superconscious perception, realisation of the spirit. The
rousing may come in various ways, through love for God, through the
mercy of perfected sages, or through the power of the analytic will of
the philosopher. Wherever there was any manifestation of what is
ordinarily called supernatural power or wisdom, there a little current
of Kundalini must have found its way into the Sushumna. Only, in the
vast majority of such cases, people had ignorantly stumbled on some
practice which set free a minute portion of the coiled-up Kundalini. All
worship, consciously or unconsciously, leads to this end. The man who
thinks that he is receiving response to his prayers does not know that
the fulfilment comes from his own nature, that he has succeeded by the
mental attitude of prayer in waking up a bit of this infinite power
which is coiled up within himself. What, thus, men ignorantly worship
under various names, through fear and tribulation, the Yogi declares to
the world to be the real power coiled up in every being, the mother of
eternal happiness, if we but know how to approach her. And Râja-Yoga is
the science of religion, the rationale of all worship, all prayers,
forms, ceremonies, and miracles.

</div>
