---
title: THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA

---
<div>

[←](the_psychic_prana.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) /
[Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](pratyahara_and_dharana.htm)

  

CHAPTER V

## THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA

We have now to deal with the exercises in Prânâyâma. We have seen that
the first step, according to the Yogis, is to control the motion of the
lungs. What we want to do is to feel the finer motions that are going on
in the body. Our minds have become externalised, and have lost sight of
the fine motions inside. If we can begin to feel them, we can begin to
control them. These nerve currents go on all over the body, bringing
life and vitality to every muscle, but we do not feel them. The Yogi
says we can learn to do so. How? By taking up and controlling the motion
of the lungs; when we have done that for a sufficient length of time, we
shall be able to control the finer motions.

We now come to the exercises in Pranayama. Sit upright; the body must be
kept straight. The spinal cord, although not attached to the vertebral
column, is yet inside of it. If you sit crookedly you disturb this
spinal cord, so let it be free. Any time that you sit crookedly and try
to meditate you do yourself an injury. The three parts of the body, the
chest, the neck, and the head, must be always held straight in one line.
You will find that by a little practice this will come to you as easy as
breathing. The second thing is to get control of the nerves. We have
said that the nerve centre that controls the respiratory organs has a
sort of controlling effect on the other nerves, and rhythmical breathing
is, therefore, necessary. The breathing that we generally use should not
be called breathing at all. It is very irregular. Then there are some
natural differences of breathing between men and women.

The first lesson is just to breathe in a measured way, in and out. That
will harmonise the system. When you have practiced this for some time,
you will do well to join to it the repetition of some word as "Om," or
any other sacred word. In India we use certain symbolical words instead
of counting one, two, three, four. That is why I advise you to join the
mental repetition of the "Om," or some other sacred word to the
Pranayama. Let the word flow in and out with the breath, rhythmically,
harmoniously, and you will find the whole body is becoming rhythmical.
Then you will learn what rest is. Compared with it, sleep is not rest.
Once this rest comes the most tired nerves will be calmed down, and you
will find that you have never before really rested.

The first effect of this practice is perceived in the change of
expression of one's face; harsh lines disappear; with calm thought
calmness comes over the face. Next comes beautiful voice. I never saw a
Yogi with a croaking voice. These signs come after a few months'
practice. After practicing the above mentioned breathing for a few days,
you should take up a higher one. Slowly fill the lungs with breath
through the Idâ, the left nostril, and at the same time concentrate the
mind on the nerve current. You are, as it were, sending the nerve
current down the spinal column, and striking violently on the last
plexus, the basic lotus which is triangular in form, the seat of the
Kundalini. Then hold the current there for some time. Imagine that you
are slowly drawing that nerve current with the breath through the other
side, the Pingalâ, then slowly throw it out through the right nostril.
This you will find a little difficult to practice. The easiest way is to
stop the right nostril with the thumb, and then slowly draw in the
breath through the left; then close both nostrils with thumb and
forefinger, and imagine that you are sending that current down, and
striking the base of the Sushumnâ; then take the thumb off, and let the
breath out through the right nostril. Next inhale slowly through that
nostril, keeping the other closed by the forefinger, then close both, as
before. The way the Hindus practice this would be very difficult for
this country, because they do it from their childhood, and their lungs
are prepared for it. Here it is well to begin with four seconds, and
slowly increase. Draw in four seconds, hold in sixteen seconds, then
throw out in eight seconds. This makes one Pranayama. At the same time
think of the basic lotus, triangular in form; concentrate the mind on
that centre. The imagination can help you a great deal. The next
breathing is slowly drawing the breath in, and then immediately throwing
it out slowly, and then stopping the breath out, using the same numbers.
The only difference is that in the first case the breath was held in,
and in the second, held out. This last is the easier one. The breathing
in which you hold the breath in the lungs must not be practiced too
much. Do it only four times in the morning, and four times in the
evening. Then you can slowly increase the time and number. You will find
that you have the power to do so, and that you take pleasure in it. So
very carefully and cautiously increase as you feel that you have the
power, to six instead of four. It may injure you if you practice it
irregularly.

Of the three processes for the purification of the nerves, described
above, the first and the last are neither difficult nor dangerous. The
more you practice the first one the calmer you will be. Just think of
"Om," and you can practice even while you are sitting at your work. You
will be all the better for it. Some day, if you practice hard, the
Kundalini will be aroused. For those who practice once or twice a day,
just a little calmness of the body and mind will come, and beautiful
voice; only for those who can go on further with it will Kundalini be
aroused, and the whole of nature will begin to change, and the book of
knowledge will open. No more will you need to go to books for knowledge;
your own mind will have become your book, containing infinite knowledge.
I have already spoken of the Ida and Pingala currents, flowing through
either side of the spinal column, and also of the Sushumna, the passage
through the centre of the spinal cord. These three are present in every
animal; whatever being has a spinal column has these three lines of
action. But the Yogis claim that in an ordinary man the Sushumna is
closed; its action is not evident while that of the other two is
carrying power to different parts of the body.

The Yogi alone has the Sushumna open. When this Sushumna current opens,
and begins to rise, we get beyond the sense, our minds become
supersensuous, superconscious — we get beyond even the intellect, where
reasoning cannot reach. To open that Sushumna is the prime object of the
Yogi. According to him, along this Sushumna are ranged these centres,
or, in more figurative language, these lotuses, as they are called. The
lowest one is at the lower end of the spinal cord, and is called
Mulâdhâra, the next higher is called Svâdhishthâna, the third Manipura,
the fourth Anâhata, the fifth Vishuddha, the sixth Âjnâ and the last,
which is in the brain, is the Sahasrâra, or "the thousand-petalled". Of
these we have to take cognition just now of two centres only, the
lowest, the Muladhara, and the highest, the Sahasrara. All energy has to
be taken up from its seat in the Muladhara and brought to the Sahasrara.
The Yogis claim that of all the energies that are in the human body the
highest is what they call "Ojas". Now this Ojas is stored up in the
brain, and the more Ojas is in a man's head, the more powerful he is,
the more intellectual, the more spiritually strong. One man may speak
beautiful language and beautiful thoughts, but they, do not impress
people; another man speaks neither beautiful language nor beautiful
thoughts, yet his words charm. Every movement of his is powerful. That
is the power of Ojas.

Now in every man there is more or less of this Ojas stored up. All the
forces that are working in the body in their highest become Ojas. You
must remember that it is only a question of transformation. The same
force which is working outside as electricity or magnetism will become
changed into inner force; the same forces that are working as muscular
energy will be changed into Ojas. The Yogis say that that part of the
human energy which is expressed as sex energy, in sexual thought, when
checked and controlled, easily becomes changed into Ojas, and as the
Muladhara guides these, the Yogi pays particular attention to that
centre. He tries to take up all his sexual energy and convert it into
Ojas. It is only the chaste man or woman who can make the Ojas rise and
store it in the brain; that is why chastity has always been considered
the highest virtue. A man feels that if he is unchaste, spirituality
goes away, he loses mental vigour and moral stamina. That is why in all
the religious orders in the world which have produced spiritual giants
you will always find absolute chastity insisted upon. That is why the
monks came into existence, giving up marriage. There must be perfect
chastity in thought, word, and deed; without it the practice of
Raja-Yoga is dangerous, and may lead to insanity. If people practice
Raja-Yoga and at the same time lead an impure life, how can they expect
to become Yogis?

</div>
