+++
title = "‘Occasionalism’ in the thought of Al-Ghazali & The Bhagavadxa0Gita"
date = "June 25, 2017"

+++
A curious 7 a.m thought for a Sunday morning, about the nature of
‘Causality’.

Now, the standard paradigm for understanding why things happen is a
non-metaphysical one. It basically goes “somebody/something performs an
action, it has an effect”. This is so straightforward it doesn’t even
really require stating. We just \*know\* it implicitly.

But as with almost any seemingly ‘straightforward’ statement, there’s
always the potential for a Philosopher somewhere to come along and
bugger it all up.

Enter a chap by the name of Al-Ghazali – an Iranian thinker who may
singlehandedly have changed the course of ‘Islamic’ cultural and
material development.

Prior to his influence, it is well-known and attested that the Islamic
World were the illuminated inheritors of much of the Greek scientific
and philosophic tradition. Little wonder then, particularly part and
parcel with what they had managed to uplift \[in some cases, arguably by
stealing\] from the Vedic peoples to their own immediate East, that they
lead the world in scientific understanding and development for so long.

However, there is always something of an innate tension between the
‘foreign bodies’ which are taken into a culture or religion’s literary
corpus, and the authentic indigenous elements of belief. And with Islam,
it was no exception. Despite the continued prominence of the ‘Greek
Learning’ across the Islamic world for quite some time \[with the
Andalusians keeping the fires burning in particular prominence – perhaps
ironically continuing to possess European knowledge and actively
implementing same long after these kernels had faded from European
understanding, and before they had been reintroduced in strength
following Byzantium’s hard times in the East\], there was a determined
push-back against these thinkers and their thought lead by men such a
Al-Ghazali.

In his ‘Incoherence of the Philosophers’, Al-Ghazali made the case for
what is today known as ‘occasionalism’. A way of thinking about
‘causality’ which dispenses with the ‘ordinary’ approach of
understanding things happening as being the result of peoples’ actions
or natural causations … and instead interposing the hand of teh Divine
into pretty much everything.

WIth this in mind, to use Al-Ghazali’s own example, if I were to set a
piece of cotton alight, it would not be the case that the fire is
burning it and producing smoke as a result of flame, combustion, and a
complex set of chemical procedures.

Instead, it is something which happens because \*God Burns The Cotton\*.

A moment’s consideration will reveal why this becomes essentially
problematic for anybody attempting to adhere to the rigorous standards
of the scientific method … although in fairness to Al-Ghazali, he was
actually attempting to argue that the observable laws of the Universe
are not so much ‘not there’ \[with The Almighty doing things on a whim
instead\], but instead strictures which Allah places upon himself in
order to govern his own conduct \[hence why things generally happen in
the same way each time if the same conditions are applied/in place\],
but which are breakable as and when they are needed to be \[thus
explaining how ‘Miracles’ occur\].

Following so far? Good.

Because I recently realized that there’s actually a vaaaguely similar
element of doctrine to be found in Hindu metaphysics, specifically from
that most excellent of philosophical treatises, the Bhagavad Gita.

In Chapter 11, Arjuna asks to be shown Lord Krishna in His Divine
Magnificence – and is granted an experience of Vishvarup Darshan
\[‘Divine Appearance/Theophany of the Whole-Universe Form’\], wherein
exactly what it says on the tin, Arjuna winds up beholding Krishna
pretty much \*as\* the Universe. And, importantly, in Verse 32 as
‘All-Destroying Time’ \[this is the bit which everybody often quotes
from Robert Oppenheimer about becoming ‘Death, Destroyer of Worlds’ –
for you see, in Sanskrit, the term used for ‘Death’ here, Kala, can
\*also\* mean Time … which is some brilliant use of language, if you ask
me, because it is after all Time that ultimately kills all of us in the
end 😛 \].

Now, the meaning of this phrase is easily misconstrued \[you can find my
explication of some better approaches to its meaning other than the
strictly literal in a previous posting of art of this scene\], but by
rendering it as ‘Time’ and understanding that the context is a
battlefield, something becomes clearer. Krishna is of course saying that
\*he\* is ‘causality’. And that ultimately, that which results from
one’s actions is \*his\* doing. \[this is, again by way of context, the
advice Lord Krishna hands down to Arjuna about why he should not feel
strong compunction about acting to kill his kin on the battlefield of
Kurukshetra – both because, on one level, the warriors he fights are
dead anyway \[with ambiguity in some interpretations as to whether this
is simply because they are by their very nature ‘mortal’ and thus
condemned to die – or whether they are, as stated later in the text,
\[already\] dead because God wills it\].

What does this mean in practice, in context of this writing I am doing?
Well, it would appear that philosophical doctrine often thought to have
come first from Iran in 11th Century A.D. … might actually find earlier,
greater expression in Indian literature from many, many centuries
earlier than that 😛

Although there is more.

You see, it is never implied in this part of the text that God will
simply decide to break rules of causality in manner that Al-Ghazali
contends is how ‘Miracles’ happen. Instead, inexorable march of ‘Time’ –
of events following causes, and the like, is just presented as-is. Which
some might think of as somewaht ‘fatalistic’ … but instead \[for reasons
I won’t go into in depth here – future commentary-piece, perhaps\] may
arguably be thought of as the opposite.

In any case, worthy of quoting is the follow-up line to be found in
Verse 33. Which states that now Krishna has shown Arjuna the nature of
Causality for this particular battle … he must “Get Up And Attain Glory”
– recognizing his role as an implement/instrument of Divine Willl, and
Doing The Things to make the Events which must happen … happen.

If this was the God of Al-Ghazali, one presumes that the divinity in
question might simply have directly intervened instead of first showing
a man his ‘position/role’ in the Divine Plan, and telling him to carry
it out.

What I am basically arcing towards, then, is notion that despite the
fact that ‘occasionalism’ is ARGUABLY present in
causationary-metaphysics of Bhagavad Gita, what we find here is rather
different in pracice. Perhaps due to differences in understanding of
‘God’ concept between Indo-Europeans and Abrahamics \[there’s a
fascinating piece I will have to write up at osme point in the near
future concerning role of Odin in all of this…} – which means that in
effect, events DO still follow proximate causes \[hence the requirement
for Arjuna to do his Duty\] rather than the sort of ‘break in the chain
of causation caused by ineffable divine fiat’ which Al-Ghazali’s
doctrine can turn on in potentia.\[an ironic turn of phrase, but you
presumably get what i mean\]

Odd thoughts for a little after 7 on a Sunday morn 😛
