+++
title = "Ardhanarishvara ; Valentine’s Day"
date = "February 14, 2019"

+++
![1908233_10153862668145574_1996361189_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/1908233_10153862668145574_1996361189_n.jpg?w=676)

The Ardhanarishvara dual-aspect of Mahadev & Mata JI.

Now, ‘Ardhanarishvara’, directly translated, means ‘Half \[Ardha\] Woman
\[Nari\] Sovereign \[Ishvara\]’.

And while I can see why misunderstandings have lead to this particular
shared form of the Divine Couple being co-opted, appropriated, and
flagrantly misrepresented in the modern day by an array of people and
clickbait-publishers looking to push a particular agenda …

… the reality is that this is NOT an manifestation of the of
‘transsexual’ or ‘intersex’ identity.

But rather, something quite the opposite – namely, a married union so
perfect in its coteriminity that husband and wife \[interestingly, also
translations of “Nara” and “Nari” respectively\] are, effectively, as
One.

This also has implications per the ’emanation’ principle enunciated
around the concept of ‘Hiranyagarbha’ – whereby one of the initial
‘divisions’ of the foremost/’forerunner’ manifestations of the
hypostasis of Brahman \[‘The Absolute’ – \*not\* to be confused with
“Brahma”\] , is into the two portions cognate with Lord Shiva and Lady
Parvati \[I am simplifying, particularly in terms of accurate
theonymics, for a foreign and non-specialist audience\].

The \*re-unification\* of the Two back into One, therefore, is in
symbolic terms, a ‘making whole of the world’ \[as can be seen , in
particular, in and around the Chandraghanta-to-Kushmanda portion of the
NavaDurga mythic cycle – for greater detail upon, consult my
Brahmacharini, Chandraghanta, Kushmanda, and other, subsequent
commentaries available over at[Arya
Akasha](https://www.facebook.com/AryaAkasha/?__xts__%5B0%5D=68.ARB7IM9ErbrcwegZB7Na-UT5h4ojV8Ldtqf5FQ-hzkUgHsssZKuNHTtaeHj1Ys6tY0z_m29wLgp0o8WJMCYHlE20e33hAB_snW7yCqWHhfZpz0OmDh-SdhkdwEySFlgYz7E0XIbzYLcSwu3fQRhGUzOLF-Ya3_gvmsknsl7E6qCkPqZICPGHT5h39_SJUDoSr-95AeVmokjMC7SmS3M3Zjde-44Stgmsz477pg&__xts__%5B1%5D=68.ARAb3E0-mkH4CQ4HjyFSonAvq8NwjMFEu-ICXkFQYta2kOfd3Cf1_kBGCzLtkguVS6Kiw7hhM3ma9lR48sKDdJgEM75MQ6GrRWeKCJ4nqlq9RpuMl9yd2B0WmmdYl7EuR-QY8Hxrmna6Z1AwjPoiboVYbe61td4fKxuSx41EX2McWYO6_bkIHNZM8kN4POWPKWglrdjYBWWNXZuO6G46lqFparvcL5uYUOV7ew&__tn__=K-R&eid=ARB9WhGf2OEjHbLg8jnFlxgF_i1hZHw4KuFEr9bZ5O0sRTkK-2sCcA5DADcMyTkCv4rwp5HvXI6zocC0&fref=mentions)\];
and is a ‘re-ascension’ \*back to\* the fundamental unity implied in Adi
Para Shakti .

A glorious transcension of the imperfections inherent in the Maya-loka;
and the overcoming of “intersubjectivity” , via the force of love. \[at
some point, I should get around to writing up how this latter point also
occurs, in somewhat modified form, in the recent Western
film,Interstellar; and other suppositions on gravity, quantum
entanglement, and the like, that may yet be of further relevancy. But
that is another story, for another time.\]

‘Unity-In-Power’. What a concept.

ॐ नमः शिवाय  
जय माता दी

![](https://static.xx.fbcdn.net/images/emoji.php/v9/t6c/1/16/2764.png)❤
