+++
title = "The silent journey"

+++
After the glorious morning on April 11 th 1986 we were basking in the
exhilaration of having seen the Halley’s comet in its closest
apparition. The vaishya from lATa was excited at the successful sighting
under clear skies. That afternoon we decided to catch some sleep to make
up for the marathon astronomy session. It was the second great revival
of astronomy for us and we were looking forward for another great
session with vaishya shreShTha spanning the whole night. Vidrum called
upon us in the evening along with duShTanetra to go on a cycle venture.
We asked him to avoid duShTanetra and went beside the vaishnava’s temple
where we chatted for a while with Mis-creant and K in the quadrangle of
the latter’s housing colony. All of them wanted to join us to sight the
comet the next morning. I told vidrum and the yoshas that it was their
responsibility find their way to our observing spot on hanumatadri early
in the morning, because me and vaishya shreShTha were going to observe
all night round. Vidrum, a bold rock-climber, agreed to join us even
earlier. Vidrum after arriving looked at the planets with us for some
time, but soon lost interest and said he wanted to visit a
“bhUt-bungalow” that Mis-creant had claimed to have discovered. So he
clambered down a rock face and proceeded to the BB where he vanished. It
was an abandoned house originally built by a clever but evil and fallen
brahmin. After a while Vidrum returned stating that he had seen strange
happening out there.

We decide to check it out too and followed him. The air was still and
occasionally stirred by the noise of crickets. Vidrum felt a cold spot
in one corner but we did not. Suddenly we saw a cat sneak in and proceed
till the middle of the room and run away. Vidrum took that as a positive
sign and moved forward. Vidrum inexplicably slipped and fell down. He
was lying on the floor and uttering rubbish. He produced two words
Plinkplonkplinkton and Stick-tail over and over again and asked us to
watch out. After some time he regained normalcy and we silently returned
back to our observing spot without uttering a word.  
\~\~  
On the Hockey patch next to purIShAdri we encountered Plinkplonkplinkton
and Stick-tail, the first bad and the second good.
