+++
title = "Saturday – Shani Dev’s Day – Saturn’sxa0Day"
date = "August 10, 2019"

+++
![67930178_10162121616750574_2091569869660094464_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/67930178_10162121616750574_2091569869660094464_n.jpg?w=676)

“Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,  
By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,  
“Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “art sure no
craven,  
Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore—  
Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night’s Plutonian shore!””  
– Edgar Allen Poe, The Raven

It is Saturday – The Day of Lord Shani (Saturn); depicted here mounted
upon His Vahana, the Crow. Often regarded as something of a baelful
figure – and certainly, one of paramount potency as one of the
DharmaRajas, Rulers of Law and Justice, with Dread Gaze and Dire Effects
for the Offending Of – in actuality, art not so. And provided one lives
a proper, righteous, and \*pious\* life, then the auspiciousness and
growth bestowed to the Devotee, even through His portenteous trials and
hardships, further serve to demonstrate why Lord Shani is Shiva – both
in terms of ‘luck’ or positive fortune, as well as in the more
\*literal\* sense \[Shani turns up within the Thousand Name Hymn of
Shiva; Shani is possessed of the terrifying glare of destruction; Shani
beheads Ganesha in some myths; and further intra-Indo-European
cross-corpus comparison around Saturn, Cronus, etc. besides; in addition
to proper consideration of the relevant iconography\]

Now, when I equate Shaani with Saturn, I am not simply speaking
‘mythologically’ – but rather, \*astrologically\*, as the planet Saturn,
one of the nine NavaGraha, is thought to represent Lord Shani within the
night sky and among the auspices of one’s birth-chart. It is this which,
in part, explicates some of the saliencies of Shani upon the individual
; but it also provides the explanation for the name – Shaani, you see,
translates directly as “Slow”, or occasionally more figuratively as
“Wanderer”; in reference to the planet’s lengthy 27-year course about
the Sun in orbit \[Saturn takes 29.5 years to complete one orbit, but
spends approximately two and a half years, or thereabouts, traversing a
single Astrological Sign in our reckoning – hence the difference between
the numbers. This is the length of time it takes from its being in the
house of one’s birth, say, through to re-entering that sign later on in
the individual’s life\]. And certainly, as the luminary role of ‘honour’
midst the well-storied ‘Twenty-Seven Club’ would appear to considerably
attest, the twenty seventh year of our lives has ever tended to be a
tumultuous or even outright deadly one.

Still, while I have earlier maintained that the ‘trials’ of Lord Shani
are actually opportunities for the uncovering of hidden treasures within
us, it is nevertheless often considered a rather good idea to attempt to
appease the baelful gaze of ShaaniDev, so that it is averted – or,
taking things several steps further, endeavouring to carry out
appropriate Hanuman-related worship so as to directly ward off the Dark
Deity in question.

Now, from a comparative mythography perspective, this is particularly
interesting. As Hanuman and Shani are running off the Striker/Thunderer
\[Son\] and Sky Father/Lord of the Anncestors(Dead) figures,
respectively \[for further, albeit brief discussion upon this, I would
recommend my previous commentaries from mid-July, “THUNDERSTRUCK”, and
“Sky-Earth-Thunder”\], and more particularly, given that the way in
which Hanuman establishes Shani’s healthy respect \*by repeatedly
bashing His Own Head with Shaani upon it with stones\* … it is not hard
to see how this may perhaps recall whatever lies at the root of the
somewhat fraught familial relations which lie at the heart of
Theogenesis in the Greco-Roman understanding – wherein, as you will
recall, first Cronus is subdued by Zeus following the former’s being
\*fed\* rocks, and second Zeus finds Himself with one \*Almighty\*
Headache, leading directly to the birth of Athena, after He had
attempted to imitate \[the opposite, in this context, of ‘to ape’\] His
Own Father in these regards.

However, other tales take a somewhat different perspective upon the
establishment of the concordial relations between HanumanJI and
ShaaniDev; and the accounting of the Ramayana is particularly
interesting in this light. Per this telling, Ravana in His arrogant
majesty, had sought to imprison the Grahas Themselves as decorative
ornaments to His Palace-kingdom of Lanka. He had also, prior to becoming
a \[relatively speaking – I stress the ‘relative’\] more pious and
humble figure following His encounter with Shiva afore Kailash, managed
to get a Curse bestowed upon Him by NandiJi that His Kingdom would be
undone by (a) monk(y/ies).

This is often taken by the more literal minded to refer to either Lord
Ram’s employment of the army of the Vanaras to aid first in crossing the
strait separating Lanka from the mainland of India and thence waging war
against Sri Ravan and His Hosts, or simply to Hanuman, His Tail Aflame
due to the attempted torture of Ravana’s minions \[who apparently hadn’t
worked out that when dealing with a seemingly invulnerable being,
setting part of said being \*on fire\* is only going to lead to a
\*rather annoyed\* being running around spreading fire everywhere He
goes in fairly direct consequence\] burning down the City of Lanka as
Bajrangi made His escape across its rooftops.

Yet the rather more ‘subtle’ interpretation is that it may perhaps refer
to a third explanation – Lord Hanuman, in the course of His
reconnaissance/escape of/from Lanka in search of Sita, happened across
the imprisoned Lord Shaani, and loosed His bonds, freeing Him. The
grateful Lord Shaani thanked Hanuman, Who is also, as it happens, often
regarded as the One who loosens the fetters of the bonds of Karma upon
the Devotee as well \[said bonds of Karma also being very much within
Lord Shaani’s direct purview in His role as the Bringer of Justice,
Bestower of Consequence, and Lord of Lawful Outcome(s) – thence also, of
course, and in common with His Half-Brother Lord Yama, Death\] ; and
then proceeded to turn His Destroyer Gaze upon the Imperial Capital of
Ravan. \[in either case, the utilization of Bajrangi – the
‘Adamantine’/’Thunderbolt’ – to carry out a pair of Curses bestowed by
the Sky Father, Shiva, upon Ravana for the latter’s unjust and
ultimately severely impious conduct, would have interesting resonances
with the occasional identification of the ‘Sickle’ or ‘Scythe’ of
Kronus/Saturn as in fact being an Adamantine ‘Harpe’ blade.\]

This, in its own way, also illustrates another fundamental principle
relating not only to ShaaniDev, but also to the Divine Concept of
Justice and Law all up. “The Long Arc of the Universe”, it is said,
“bends ultimately toward Justice”. Which, if you are of a certain sort
of view, may perhaps be taken as indicating the ultimate death-sentence
upon \*everything\* and \*all\* \[or just about, anyway\], that is the
Pralaya, the #EKPYROSISWHENN that lies at the conclusion spasms of the
Current Yuga.

But which I have often taken rather less ‘fatalistically’, as having the
illustrative evocation of the \*weapon\* via which Justice is thought to
be delivered in our reckoning – a \*Bow\*, an \*Arch\*, firing
\*Arrows\* in \*Arcing Shot\*, when the Bow is bent so that the
bow-string \[identified quite directly with Dharma, with Rta Itself, as
applies the Bow-String of Brihaspati – Another Form of Lord Shiva!\] may
roaringly, resoundingly twang in the manner of the plucked string of a
musical instrument as it flies ultimately toward the richly deserving
target. Truly, there is something intriguing in the fact that the most
fearsome and formidable subjugators of Their foes, in our pantheon, tend
to be equipped with Bows as Weapons of Mass Destruction – Rudra,
Brhaspati, Durga, Bhadra Devi, Rama & Laxman, … Kamadeva … \[although in
that last case, His Arrow was responded to with another Destructive Gaze
that was immediately, if not ultimately the superior force, so make of
that what you will\] .

In any case, the “Long Arc” here also refers to Time – which, as I noted
in my previous commentaries upon Kaal, Kali, KaalBhairavJi, and ‘Time
And I Against Any Other Two’, is oftn regarded amongst Indo-Europeans as
being amidst the mightiest forces in the universe. The substantive
length of Time which Saturn takes to make its orbit of our Sun (the
longest of any of those caelestial bodies identified as doing such, in
antiquity), helps to explain why this planet was associated also with
the concepts not only of Time, but with Aging and Ancestry, as well.

To relate this back to our comparative mythographic and etymological
discussion, there are two-and-a-half speculated lines of etymological
derivation for the Ancient Greek figure of Kronus. One of which, hinges
around the notion of ‘Cutting’, Proto-Indo-European: (S)Ker, which is
occasionally connected to what may be another PIE root: “Ker” or
“K(w)er”, that refers to ‘making’ or ‘doing’, and which supplies the
underpinning for the subsequent Sanskrit : “Karma”. Whether or not one
subscribes to the view that these terms are, in fact, the same – or, at
the very least, closely related – it is not hard to see how they bear a
somewhat more than figurative importance for both Shaani, as well as the
other identifiable ‘faces’ of this Indo-European Deific Complex.

Partially, this is due to the ‘cutting weapon’ or device which we find
Saturn/Kronos equipped with \[‘Scythe’, interestingly enough, actually
descends from a slightly different PIE root again, referring to the act
of ‘sawing’- however attained its “C” , via a splicing in of “sci” style
cutting words from Romance languages some centuries ago\]; or the
‘Scarification’ which also descends from the same principle and
particle, and which may underpin the ‘disfigurements’, often (although
not at all exclusively) about the area of the leg, borne by these
figures \[in addition to the rather famous Classical examples … Lord
Yama is also said in some sources to have a weak leg due to a curse, and
Shaani is also upon occasion referred to as “Crooked”, especially in
terms of “Gaze” (although that may also be thought of the other way
around – as \*inflicting\* the sanction thusly implied in the ensuing
wrack and ruin); interestingly, the Proto-Indo-Iranian covering this
concept, Krdhus, and which gives us the later the Sanskrit ‘Krdhu’ – is
quote close to the Sanskrit ‘Krodh’, meaning “Anger”, “Wrathful”, that
is also one of ShaniDev’s names. “Kona” and “Ara”, two of Lord Shaani’s
other Names, can also carry this ‘bent’ connotation; which may \*also\*
figuratively refer to the notion of His Anger as expressed through His
Attentions being that which one would otherwise want to \*avoid\* and to
‘bend’ or otherwise divert away from one, lest dire and disabling
consequences theretofore ensue).

This second of these, the notion of ‘Scars’, also figuratively connects
with this other “K(w)er” particle – as ‘Sanskara’ in Saskrit, refers to
the process of ‘imprinting’ or ‘shaping’ through the actions and effects
of our ‘actions’, that produce the effect often colloquially referred to
in modern English as “Karma”. Or, perhaps less prosaically, to the
Proto-Germanic “Skardaz” – meaning to be ‘banged up’, damaged, cut and
wounded … which is how we may feel as a \*result\* of this Lord of
Karma’s attentions upon us.

But to go back to the ‘Sword’ point, it is intriguing here to note not
only the sword-saliency with these other comparative representatiosn of
the Divine complex in question \[the aforementioned Harpe of Kronus, the
Sickle of Saturn, etc.\], nor the array of descendant “(S)ker” words
referring to swords, knives, daggers, and keen sharpness in later
Indo-European languages. But also the more ‘figurative’ import of this
feature – both as the potential ‘severer’ of the ties of previous
actions pon us (in the manner of a Judge, properly satisfied
\[especially of repentance or restitution\], bringing to an end one’s
sentence) , and in a not entirely unrelated sense, as the cutter of the
threads that are lives (reaping-tense), as Death – the final sanction
and Judgement, after which, the \*real\* Karmatic-Dharmatic assessment,
in the Underworld, can Begin.

Of perhaps further interest, especially as this pertains to
Kronus/Chronus as Time, is the identification in the Devi Mahatmyam
speaking of the emanation of Durga, wherein the Sword which She wields
is given (back) to Her by Kaal – Time/Death. In some other tellings, Her
Sword is bestowed by Yama (Death); Yama and Shaani both wielding Swords
amidst Their general panoply of armament, for reasons above somewhat
explicated.

But to go back to these other potential etymologies … while it has been
suggested that the \*direct\* linkage of Cronus to “Crow” is perhaps a
bit fanciful, I nevertheless believe that as applies the \*general\*
Indo-European deific complex that we are here discussing, there are some
solid reasons to support a figurative and conceptual derivation shared
here.

The Corvids – Ravens and Crows – have a number of viablee etymologies
for their names. Some of these descend from the ‘Cawing’ noise made by
the creatures \[the ‘language of the birds’ being the ability to
understand that which is said, to reference me some Hegel, albeit about
an Owl, although also connected to Pallas, to get back to the Poe-m with
which we began, ‘at twilight’, after dark. Ratri, Shani, Kaal, Kali –
these are ‘Dark Ones’, of fearful, fearsome visage, but deep wisdom and
secrets for Those to whom They choose to impart Their Treasures. Found
otherwise, and near exclusively, beyond “Nightly Shore”\].

But this is not the only possible derivation. Greek “Corax” apparently
perhaps comes to us from that same ‘(S)Ker’ PIE particle aforementioned,
potentially referring to the sharpness of the bird’s beak, and the
ripping of dead flesh which it, as a carrion bird, engages in upon the
battlefield’s dead. \[The latter of which may helps to explain the Black
Bird’s strong associations with Odin, as well as with Death, more
generally\].

I am also something of a personal fan of another origin – the “Krewh”
term in Proto-Indo-European, one of two words for “Blood” \[the other
being ‘Heshr’ – ‘Living Blood’/’Warm
Blood’/’Blood-That’s-Still-Inside-You’\], and which refers to “cold
blood”, the blood coming out of a wound, especially one that has proven
fatal, and is strongly associated also with “Death”, with “Cruelty”,
with “Torture”, with “Dead Flesh” \[that is to say, ‘carrion’ – hence
another way in which we can refer to Corvids .. Kravyada, referring to
their frequent choice of diet\]; but also with ‘hardness’, ‘coldness’
\[compare Greek-stem “Cryo-“, “Krios”, “Kruos”\] … and thence also a
certain ‘severity’ of disposition. \[In case it be thought that I may be
‘inventing’ from ‘whole cloth’, it is perhaps worth pointing out the
derivation of “Krow” in various Celtic languages\]

All rather strongly correlate with how Shaani has customarily been
regarded in Hindu mythoreligious and astrological thought.

Yet there is one further and more ‘conceptual’ linkage between the
Corvid and the deific coomplex that I shall briefly consider, afore we
move to this piece’s slow-coming \[aptly enough\] concluding sentences.

That of the Crow, the Raven, as Pitrs – Ancestors \[the “Pitr” particle
derives from the same root as “Pater”, and thence connotes not just
“forefathers”, but also an august position of honour and respect, and
even ‘leadership’ amongst them\].

Now, a Pitr \*can\* refer to somebody still living, and “PitrJi” is an
honorific term of respect for one’s own immediate \[male\] ancestor. But
generally speaking, especially as we are talking about them in the
context of their appearance back amongst us as Ravens, Crows
\[‘Yamadutas’ – Emissaries of Lord Yama, also\]  
, it rather more often means our \*departed\* forebears – and
especially, the archaic primarch-primogenitors of our lines of ancestry,
who reside in Pitr-Loka, and who may even make the surviving transition
between one Cycle of the World and the Next. \[A perhaps comparable #NAS
element might be ound in the identification of some Ancestors as
becoming Aelves, Alfs, and surviving Ragnarok in a part of Alfheim –
although more work should be done to more \*properly\* flesh out, no pun
intended, this potential and perhaps even pan-Indo-European linkage\].

The association of Lord Shaani with the Corvid, therefore, not only
relates also in the more predictable sense to “Death”, nor of the
Croaking, Cawing sound of the Bird as potentially signifying that a
Death (-sentence) is nigh impending .. but \*also\* with the notion that
Justice is something correctly apprehended and applied by the Ancestors.
Either in the more ‘contemporarily’ relevant sense that we are
constantly to measure ourselves up in thought, word, blessing,
aspiration, narrative(s), and deed, to the conduct of our Ancestors
\[the “peer-pressure of hundreds of generations of your more illustrious
forebears”, to paraphrase a comrade’s enlightened view upon the matter\]
– and To Whom you may literally wind up having to explain yourself to,
at some point in your metempsychotic future… ; or because their society
was perceived to be a more ‘golden’ one, more nobly virtuous, and true.

In either case, it makes abundant sense that ShaaniDeva would appear
astride one. And not least because He is also running of that same ‘Sky
Father’ deific complex I aforementioned .. and is therefore, in a very
real sense, the ‘Primus Inter Patres’ – the First Among the
(Fore)Fathers!

The Classical figures of Pluto, of Hades, of Dis Pater, are of clear
relevancy and saliency here. As, of course, is Odin \[‘Grim and
Ancient’, to quote the Poe-m, once more, with which we began\].

But let us, appropriately enough although entirely unplannedly (by me,
at any rate…), begin to provide som measure of conclusion in this, the
27th \[and subsequent\] paragraph\[s\].

It has been said that Lord Shaani is Stern, that He is Severe, that He
can be, after a sense, “Cruel” and quick to “Anger”. All of these things
are, of course, ultimately and unutterably true. Yet they somewhat
severely miss the point. Shaani is also \*Just\*. And if a punishment, a
woe, is visited upon one, this does not necessarily nor
innately-intrinsically mean that it was an entirely undeserved, or at
least, “uncalled” for one. Not in all cases, at any rate. The lessons
may indeed be “cruel”, but that does not, in and of themselves, make
them “unnecessary” as a direct correlate nor result. \[They may also
“continue, until the \[comprehension\] improves”, to quote a certain
other wise axiom which I sourced from somewhere else…\] Rather, “Stern
Father” archetypal conduct perhaps regrettably foremost in mind, it is
perhaps necessary to quote th words attributed to Genghis Khan:

“I am the punishment of God – If you had not committed great sins, God
would not have sent a punishment like me upon you.”

नमस्ते शनि मन्यव उतो त इषवे नमः।  
नमस्ते अस्तु धन्वने बाहुभ्याम् उत ते नमः॥
