+++
title = "Warrior-Women of thexa0Steppe?"
date = "August 18, 2019"

+++
![69496339_10162156006140574_7207724853841887232_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/69496339_10162156006140574_7207724853841887232_n.jpg?w=676)

‘Scythian’ female horse archer; broadly representative of a perhaps
surprisingly viable typology of the Indo-European folk of the Steppe.

In my previous piece on Naga Panchami, I briefly mentioned the flawed
speculative etymology of Sauromatai, the Sarmatians – noting that some
had sought to suggest it derived from scale-like armour and serpentine
standards of this Indo-European steppe people; whereas a rather more
extraordinary, but perhaps better supported recent attempt had instead
speculated that it was the prominence of the Sarmatians’ \*Women\*
rather than their \*serpents\* that had in fact supplied the
underpinnings of the name.

Now, if you’re familiar at all with the Scythians, then the spectacle of
a lethally proficient Indo-European woman of the Steppes will almost
surely conjure within your recollection the various tales of Amazons.
And while it’s quite likely that the vast majority of even
contemporaneous Classical treatments of the subject were … fanciful in
the extreme, it’s nevertheless also considered reasonably plausible
that, as with most enduring legends, there’s a grain of truth in there
somewhere.

Before going any further, it’s probably necessary to briefly address the
problematic ‘politicization’ of these sorts of probings.

That is to say that – without getting into value-judgments about the
current currents of female empowerment in modern culture and society –
there is often a temptation to significantly \*over-read\* into both
archaeological and textual sources, to see hints of modern morality that
\*simply aren’t there\*.

This can range from endeavours at taking this or that Greek-era source
in a directly \*literal\* and uncritical fashion, largely if not
entirely because it supports one’s agenda \[and seriously, as undeniably
/cool/ as Herodotus’ account of Queen Tomyris of the Massagetae killing
Cyrus of Persia is … even Herodotus wasn’t \*quite\* sure that that was
what had \*actually\* happened, to take but one example\]; through to
the perhaps more understandable ‘correlation/causation’ confusion of
persons happening across internet mention of some latest find of a
Germanic or other grave-site containing a (likely) female skeleton, plus
a weapon, and instantly declaring that this is a “SHIELDMAIDEN”.

The generalized effect is often to attempt to promote a rather
questionable in the extreme perspective that this or that \[or, worse,
\*all\*\] ancient societies were somehow more egalitarian in many
respects than the relatively contemporaneous United States of America –
and so therefore, some 21st or latter 20th century political project is
implicitly justified.

Which is, needless to say, \*not\* a good idea – either from a
historical perspective (because it’s placing the ‘present’ in front of
the ‘past’, and meaning we don’t get a very good look at the actual
realities of the latter, through the wafting smoke of the polemical\],
or from a political perspective (because … I really think it’s kinda
obvious why people should be thinking twice about \*just how far\* they
want to go with attempting to guide present-day progressive causes via
recourse to Bronze Age slash Early Iron Age moralities. I mean, you
\*can\* … it’s just … actually, I think we’ll save that for a \*future\*
article-series – ‘Bronze Age Solutions For Modern Problems’ .).

But I digress.

The fact of the matter, is that as applies a perhaps surprisingly
prominent quotient of the Scythian & Sarmatian burials, what we appear
to have is actual, tangible evidence of martially proficient women. Now,
again, it is important to reiterate that this does \*not\* mean that
\*every\* Indo-European Steppe woman was some kind of Amazon – whether
in the literal, or the literary sense.

But whereas many times, when we encounter mention of a female burial
bearing weapons, it later turns out that the weapons are merely symbolic
of her or her family’s relative status, and are simply ‘correlate’ with
her body in the grave, rather than having any real nor intrinsic linkage
to who she was and what she did in life … with many of these Scythian &
Sarmatian ‘warrior women’ burials, it’s different.

We actually find characteristic bone-stressors indicating that they
actually \*used\* their weapons in life; we find signs and
signifer-remains of previous injuries that can only have been sustained
upon the field of battle; we find evidence that these women could, and
did, ride horses \[again, bone-stressors, this time located in the
legs\]; alongside an array of other, uniquely \*feminine\* grave-goods.

What makes this \*particularly\* interesting – from my perspective,
anyway – is to consider these findings in light of the ongoing
supposition that the Indo-European Steppe peoples ‘kept alive’
traditional features of far earlier Indo-European cultures far more so
than some other and more immediately sedentary branches of the race.

The phenomenon of martially proficient, and perhaps even politically
powerful female figures within these cultures, then, might plausibly tie
in with the maintained subsequent prominence of female and feminine War
Goddesses Who turn up in almost all Indo-European descendant
mythoreligions.

Again, I am not enjoining support for the occasionally rather lurid
over-readings into what has been passed down to us, in favour of this or
that present-day political-reformer’s cause.

And as applies the Goddesses aforementioned, there are most definitely
other elements which have gone into what is likely going on there \[for
a far more in-depth and detailed discussion upon which, perhaps consult
my ‘BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY’ piece
published on Indian Independence Day last year\].

But at the same time, an interesting element of Indo-European history
and heritage to look into.
