---
title: THE NATURE OF THE SOUL AND ITS GOAL

---
<div>

[←](the_methods_and_purpose_of_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_importance_of_psychology.htm)

  

## THE NATURE OF THE SOUL AND ITS GOAL

The earliest idea is that a man, when he dies, is not annihilated.
Something lives and goes on living even after the man is dead. Perhaps
it would be better to compare the three most ancient nations — the
Egyptians, the Babylonians, and the ancient Hindus — and take this idea
from all of them. With the Egyptians and the Babylonians, we find a sort
of soul idea — that of a double. Inside this body, according to them,
there is another body which is moving and working here; and when the
outer body dies, the double gets out and lives on for a certain length
of time; but the life of the double is limited by the preservation of
the outer body. If the body which the double has left is injured in any
part, the double is sure to be injured in that part. That is why we find
among the ancient Egyptians such solicitude to preserve the dead body of
a person by embalming, building pyramids, etc. We find both with the
Babylonians and the ancient Egyptians that this double cannot live on
through eternity; it can, at best, live on for a certain time only, that
is, just so long as the body it has left can be preserved.

The next peculiarity is that there is an element of fear connected with
this double. It is always unhappy and miserable; its state of existence
is one of extreme pain. It is again and again coming back to those that
are living, asking for food and drink and enjoyments that it can no more
have. It is wanting to drink of the waters of the Nile, the fresh waters
which it can no more drink. It wants to get back those foods it used to
enjoy while in this life; and when it finds it cannot get them, the
double becomes fierce, sometimes threatening the living with death and
disaster if it is not supplied with such food.

Coming to Aryan thought, we at once find a very wide departure. There is
still the double idea there, but it has become a sort of spiritual body;
and one great difference is that the life of this spiritual body, the
soul, or whatever you may call it, is not limited by the body it has
left. On the contrary, it has obtained freedom from this body, and hence
the peculiar Aryan custom of burning the dead. They want to get rid of
the body which the person has left, while the Egyptian wants to preserve
it by burying, embalming, and building pyramids. Apart from the most
primitive system of doing away with the dead, amongst nations advanced
to a certain extent, the method of doing away with the bodies of the
dead is a great indication of their idea of the soul. Wherever we find
the idea of a departed soul closely connected with the idea of the dead
body, we always find the tendency to preserve the body, and we also find
burying in some form or other. On the other hand, with those in whom the
idea has developed that the soul is a separate entity from the body and
will not be hurt if the dead body is even destroyed, burning is always
the process resorted to. Thus we find among all ancient Aryan races
burning of the dead, although the Parsees changed it to exposing the
body on a tower. But the very name of the tower (Dakhma) means a
burning-place, showing that in ancient times they also used to burn
their bodies. The other peculiarity is that among the Aryans there was
no element of fear with these doubles. They are not coming down to ask
for food or help; and when denied that help, they do not become
ferocious or try to destroy those that are living. They rather are
joyful, are glad at getting free. The fire of the funeral pyre is the
symbol of disintegration. The symbol is asked to take the departed soul
gently up and to carry it to the place where the fathers live, where
there is no sorrow, where there is joy for ever, and so on.

Of these two ideas we see at once that they are of a similar nature, the
one optimistic, and the other pessimistic — being the elementary. The
one is the evolution of the other. It is quite possible that the Aryans
themselves had, or may have had, in very ancient times exactly the same
idea as the Egyptians. In studying their most ancient records, we find
the possibility of this very idea. But it is quite a bright thing,
something bright. When a man dies, this soul goes to live with the
fathers and lives there enjoying their happiness. These fathers receive
it with great kindness; this is the most ancient idea in India of a
soul. Later on, this idea becomes higher and higher. Then it was found
out that what they called the soul before was not really the soul. This
bright body, fine body, however fine it might be, was a body after all;
and all bodies must be made up of materials, either gross or fine.
Whatever had form or shape must be limited, and could not be eternal.
Change is inherent in every form. How could that which is changeful be
eternal? So, behind this bright body, as it were, they found something
which was the soul of man. It was called the Âtman, the Self. This Self
idea then began. It had also to undergo various changes. By some it was
thought that this Self was eternal; that it was very minute, almost as
minute as an atom; that it lived in a certain part of the body, and when
a man died, his Self went away, taking along with it the bright body.
There were other people who denied the atomic nature of the soul on the
same ground on which they had denied that this bright body was the soul.

Out of all these various opinions rose Sânkhya philosophy, where at once
we find immense differences. The idea there is that man has first this
gross body; behind the gross body is the fine body, which is the vehicle
of the mind, as it were; and behind even that is the Self, the
Perceiver, as the Sânkhyas call it, of the mind; and this is
omnipresent. That is, your soul, my soul, everyone's soul is everywhere
at the same time. If it is formless, how can it be said to occupy space?
Everything that occupies space has form. The formless can only be
infinite. So each soul is everywhere. The second theory put forward is
still more startling. They all saw in ancient times that human beings
are progressive, at least many of them. They grew in purity and power
and knowledge; and the question was asked: Whence was this knowledge,
this purity, this strength which men manifested? Here is a baby without
any knowledge. This baby grows and becomes a strong, powerful, and wise
man. Whence did that baby get its wealth of knowledge and power? The
answer was that it was in the soul; the soul of the baby had this
knowledge and power from the very beginning. This power, this purity,
this strength were in that soul, but they were unmanifested; they have
become manifested. What is meant by this manifestation or
unmanifestation? That each soul is pure and perfect, omnipotent and
omniscient, as they say in the Sankhya; but it can manifest itself
externally only according to the mind it has got. The mind is, as it
were, the reflecting mirror of the soul. My mind reflects to a certain
extent the powers of my soul; so your soul, and so everyone's. That
mirror which is clearer reflects the soul better. So the manifestation
varies according to the mind one possesses; but the souls in themselves
are pure and perfect.

There was another school who thought that this could not be. Though
souls are pure and perfect by their nature, this purity and perfection
become, as they say, contracted at times, and expanded at other times.
There are certain actions and certain thoughts which, as it were,
contract the nature of the soul; and then also other thoughts and acts,
which bring its nature out, manifest it. This again is explained. All
thoughts and actions that make the power and purity of the soul get
contracted are evil actions, evil thoughts; and all those thoughts and
actions which make the soul manifest itself — make the powers come out,
as it were — are good and moral actions. The difference between the two
theories is very slight; it is more of less a play on the words
expansion and contraction. The one that holds that the variation only
depends on the mind the soul has got is the better explanation, no
doubt, but the contracting and expanding theory wants to take refuge
behind the two words; and they should be asked what is meant by
contraction of soul, or expansion. Soul is a spirit. You can question
what is meant by contraction or expansion with regard to material,
whether gross which we call matter, or fine, the mind; but beyond that,
if it is not matter, that which is not bound by space or by time, how to
explain the words contraction and expansion with regard to that? So it
seems that this theory which holds that the soul is pure and perfect all
the time, only its nature is more reflected in some minds than in
others, is the better. As the mind changes, its character grows, as it
were, more and more clear and gives a better reflection of the soul.
Thus it goes on, until the mind has become so purified that it reflects
fully the quality of the soul; then the soul becomes liberated.

This is the nature of the soul. What is the goal? The goal of the soul
among all the different sects in India seems to be the same. There is
one idea with all, and that is liberation. Man is infinite; and this
limitation in which he exists now is not his nature. But through these
limitations he is struggling upward and forward until he reaches the
infinite, the unlimited, his birthright, his nature. All these
combinations and recombinations and manifestations that we see round us
are not the aim or the goal, but merely by the way and in passing. These
combinations as earths and suns, and moons and stars, right and wrong,
good and bad, our laughter and our tears, our joys and sorrows, are to
enable us to gain experience through which the soul manifests its
perfect nature and throws off limitation. No more, then, is it bound by
laws either of internal or external nature. It has gone beyond all law,
beyond all limitation, beyond all nature. Nature has come under the
control of the soul, not the soul under the control of nature, as it
thinks it is now. That is the one goal that the soul has; and all the
succeeding steps through which it is manifesting, all the successive
experiences through which it is passing in order to attain to that goal
— freedom — are represented as its births. The soul is, as it were,
taking up a lower body and trying to express itself through that. It
finds that to be insufficient, throws it aside, and a higher one is
taken up. Through that it struggles to express itself. That also is
found to be insufficient, is rejected, and a higher one comes; so on and
on until a body is found through which the soul manifests its highest
aspirations. Then the soul becomes free.

Now the question is: If the soul is infinite and exists everywhere, as
it must do, if it is a spirit, what is meant by its taking up bodies and
passing through body after body? The idea is that the soul neither comes
nor goes, neither is born nor dies. How can the omnipresent be born? It
is meaningless nonsense to say that the soul lives in a body. How can
the unlimited live in a limited space? But as a man having a book in his
hands reads one page and turns it over, goes to the next page, reads
that, turns it over, and so on, yet it is the book that is being turned
over, the pages that are revolving, and not he — he is where he is
always — even so with regard to the soul. The whole of nature is that
book which the soul is reading. Each life, as it were, is one page of
that book; and that read, it is turned over, and so on and on, until the
whole of the book is finished, and that soul becomes perfect, having got
all the experiences of nature. Yet at the same time it never moved, nor
came, nor went; it was only gathering experiences. But it appears to us
that we are moving. The earth is moving, yet we think that the sun is
moving instead of the earth, which we know to be a mistake, a delusion
of the senses. So is also this, delusion that we are born and that we
die, that we come or that we go. We neither come nor go, nor have we
been born. For where is the soul to go? There is no place for it to go.
Where is it not already?

Thus the theory comes of the evolution of nature and the manifestation
of the soul. The processes of evolution, higher and higher combinations,
are not in the soul; it is already what it is. They are in nature. But
as nature is evolving forward into higher and higher combinations, more
and more of the majesty of the soul is manifesting itself. Suppose here
is a screen, and behind the screen is wonderful scenery. There is one
small hole in the screen through which we can catch only a little bit of
that scenery behind. Suppose that hole becomes increased in size. As the
hole increases in size, more and more of the scenery behind comes within
the range of vision; and when the whole screen has disappeared, there is
nothing between the scenery and you; you see the whole of it. This
screen is the mind of man. Behind it is the majesty, the purity, the
infinite power of the soul, and as the mind becomes clearer and clearer,
purer and purer, more of the majesty of the soul manifests itself. Not
that the soul is changing, but the change is in the screen. The soul is
the unchangeable One, the immortal, the pure, the ever-blessed One.

So, at last, the theory comes to this. From the highest to the lowest
and most wicked man, in the greatest of; human beings and the lowest of
crawling worms under our feet, is the soul, pure and perfect, infinite
and ever-blessed. In the worm that soul is manifesting only an
infinitesimal part of its power and purity, and in the greatest man it
is manifesting most of it. The difference consists in the degree of
manifestation, but not in the essence. Through all beings exists the
same pure and perfect soul.

There are also the ideas of heavens and other places, but these are
thought to be second-rate. The idea of heaven is thought to be a low
idea. It arises from the desire for a place of enjoyment. We foolishly
want to limit the whole universe with our present experience. Children
think that the whole universe is full of children. Madmen think the
whole universe a lunatic asylum, and so on. So those to whom this world
is but sense-enjoyment, whose whole life is in eating and feasting, with
very little difference between them and brute beasts — such are
naturally found to conceive of places where they will have more
enjoyments, because this life is short. Their desire for enjoyment is
infinite, so they are bound to think of places where they will have
unobstructed enjoyment of the senses; and we see, as we go on, that
those who want to go to such places will have to go; they will dream,
and when this dream is over, they will be in another dream where there
is plenty of sense-enjoyment; and when that dream breaks, they will have
to think of something else. Thus they will be driving about from dream
to dream.

Then comes the last theory, one more idea about the soul. If the soul is
pure and perfect in its essence and nature, and if every soul is
infinite and omnipresent, how is it that there can be many souls? There
cannot be many infinites. There cannot be two even, not to speak of
many. If there were two infinites, one would limit the other, and both
become finite. The infinite can only be one, and boldly the last
conclusion is approached — that it is but one and not two.

Two birds are sitting on the same tree, one on the top, the other below,
both of most beautiful plumage. The one eats the fruits, while the other
remains, calm and majestic, concentrated in its own glory. The lower
bird is eating fruits, good and evil, going after sense-enjoyments; and
when it eats occasionally a bitter fruit, it gets higher and looks up
and sees the other bird sitting there calm and majestic, neither caring
for good fruit nor for bad, sufficient unto itself, seeking no enjoyment
beyond itself. It itself is enjoyment; what to seek beyond itself? The
lower bird looks at the upper bird and wants to get near. It goes a
little higher; but its old impressions are upon it, and still it goes
about eating the same fruit. Again an exceptionally bitter fruit comes;
it gets a shock, looks up. There the same calm and majestic one! It
comes near but again is dragged down by past actions, and continues to
eat the sweet and bitter fruits. Again the exceptionally bitter fruit
comes, the bird looks up, gets nearer; and as it begins to get nearer
and nearer, the light from the plumage of the other bird is reflected
upon it. Its own plumage is melting away, and when it has come
sufficiently near, the whole vision changes. The lower bird never
existed, it was always the upper bird, and what it took for the lower
bird was only a little bit of a reflection.

Such is the nature of the soul. This human soul goes after
sense-enjoyments, vanities of the world; like animals it lives only in
the senses, lives only in momentary titillations of the nerves. When
there comes a blow, for a moment the head reels, and everything begins
to vanish, and it finds that the world was not what it thought it to be,
that life was not so smooth. It looks upward and sees the infinite Lord
a moment, catches a glimpse of the majestic One, comes a little nearer,
but is dragged away by its past actions. Another blow comes, and sends
it back again. It catches another glimpse of the infinite Presence,
comes nearer, and as it approaches nearer and nearer, it begins to find
out that its individuality — its low, vulgar, intensely selfish
individuality — is melting away; the desire to sacrifice the whole world
to make that little thing happy is melting away; and as it gets
gradually nearer and nearer, nature begins to melt away. When it has
come sufficiently near, the whole vision changes, and it finds that it
was the other bird, that this infinity which it had viewed as from a
distance was its own Self, this wonderful glimpse that it had got of the
glory and majesty was its own Self, and it indeed was that reality. The
soul then finds That which is true in everything. That which is in every
atom, everywhere present, the essence of all things, the God of this
universe — know that thou art He, know that thou art free.

</div>
