---
title: THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY

---
<div>

[←](the_nature_of_the_soul_and_its_goal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](nature_and_man.htm)

  

## THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY

The idea of psychology in the West is very much degraded. Psychology is
the science of sciences; but in the West it is placed upon the same
plane as all other sciences; that is, it is judged by the same criterion
— utility.

How much practical benefit will it do to humanity? How much will it add
to our rapidly growing happiness? How much will it detract from our
rapidly increasing pain? Such is the criterion by which everything is
judged in the West.

People seem to forget that about ninety per cent of all our knowledge
cannot, in the very nature of things, be applied in a practical way to
add to our material happiness or to lessen our misery. Only the smallest
fraction of our scientific knowledge can have any such practical
application to our daily lives. This is so because only an infinitely
small percentage of our conscious mind is on the sensuous plane. We have
just a little bit of sensuous consciousness and imagine that to be our
entire mind and life; but, as a matter of fact, it is but a drop in the
mighty ocean of subconscious mind. If all there is of us were a bundle
of sense-perceptions, all the knowledge we could gain could be utilised
in the gratification of our sense-pleasures. But fortunately such is not
the case. As we get further and further away from the animal state, our
sense-pleasures become less and less; and our enjoyment, in a rapidly
increasing consciousness of scientific and psychological knowledge,
becomes more and more intense; and "knowledge for the sake of
knowledge", regardless of the amount of sense-pleasures it may conduce
to, becomes the supreme pleasure of the mind.

But even taking the Western idea of utility as a criterion by which to
judge, psychology, by such a standard even, is the science of sciences.
Why? We are all slaves to our senses, slaves to our own minds, conscious
and subconscious. The reason why a criminal is a criminal is not because
he desires to be one, but because he has not his mind under control and
is therefore a slave to his own conscious and subconscious mind, and to
the mind of everybody else. He must follow the dominant trend of his own
mind; he cannot help it; he is forced onward in spite of himself, in
spite of his own better promptings, his own better nature; he is forced
to obey the dominant mandate of his own mind. Poor man, he cannot help
himself. We see this in our own lives constantly. We are constantly
doing things against the better side of our nature, and afterwards we
upbraid ourselves for so doing and wonder what we could have been
thinking of, how we could do such a thing! Yet again and again we do it,
and again and again we suffer for it and upbraid ourselves. At the time,
perhaps, we think we desire to do it, but we only desire it because we
are forced to desire it. We are forced onward, we are helpless! We are
all slaves to our own and to everybody else's mind; whether we are good
or bad, that makes no difference. We are led here and there because we
cannot help ourselves. We say we think, we do, etc. It is not so. We
think because we have to think. We act because we have to. We are slaves
to ourselves and to others. Deep down in our subconscious mind are
stored up all the thoughts and acts of the past, not only of this life,
but of all other lives we have lived. This great boundless ocean of
subjective mind is full of all the thoughts and actions of the past.
Each one of these is striving to be recognised, pushing outward for
expression, surging, wave after wave, out upon the objective mind, the
conscious mind. These thoughts, the stored-up energy, we take for
natural desires, talents, etc. It is because we do not realise their
true origin. We obey them blindly, unquestioningly; and slavery, the
most helpless kind of slavery, is the result; and we call ourselves
free. Free! We who cannot for a moment govern our own minds, nay, cannot
hold our minds on a subject, focus it on a point to the exclusion of
everything else for a moment! Yet we call ourselves free. Think of it!
We cannot do as we know we ought to do even for a very short space of
time. Some sense-desire will crop up, and immediately we obey it. Our
conscience smites us for such weakness, but again and again we do it, we
are always doing it. We cannot live up to a high standard of life, try
as we will. The ghosts of past thoughts, past lives hold us down. All
the misery of the world is caused by this slavery to the senses. Our
inability to rise above the sense-life — the striving for physical
pleasures, is the cause of all the horrors and miseries in the world.

It is the science of psychology that teaches us to hold in check the
wild gyrations of the mind, place it under the control of the will, and
thus free ourselves from its tyrannous mandates. Psychology is therefore
the science of sciences, without which all sciences and all other
knowledge are worthless.

The mind uncontrolled and unguided will drag us down, down, for ever —
rend us, kill us; and the mind controlled and guided will save us, free
us. So it must be controlled, and psychology teaches us how to do it.

To study and analyse any material science, sufficient data are obtained.
These facts are studied and analysed and a knowledge of the science is
the result. But in the study and analysis of the mind, there are no
data, no facts acquired from without, such as are equally at the command
of all. The mind is analysed by itself. The greatest science, therefore,
is the science of the mind, the science of psychology.

In the West, the powers of the mind, especially unusual powers, are
looked upon as bordering on witchcraft and mysticism. The study of
higher psychology has been retarded by its being identified with mere
alleged psychic phenomena, as is done by some mystery-mongering order of
Hindu fakirs.

Physicists obtain pretty much the same results the world over. They do
not differ in their general facts, nor in the results which naturally
follow from such facts. This is because the data of physical science are
obtainable by all and are universally recognised, and the results are
logical conclusions based upon these universally recognised facts. In
the realm of the mind, it is different. Here there are no data, no facts
observable by the physical senses, and no universally recognised
materials therefore, from which to build a system of psychology after
their being equally experimented upon by all who study the mind.

Deep, deep within, is the soul, the essential man, the Âtman. Turn the
mind inward and become united to that; and from that standpoint of
stability, the gyrations of the mind can be watched and facts observed,
which are to be found in all persons. Such facts, such data, are to be
found by those who go deep enough, and only by such. Among that large
class of self-styled mystics the world over, there is a great difference
of opinion as to the mind, its nature, powers, etc. This is because such
people do not go deep enough. They have noticed some little activity of
their own and others' minds and, without knowing anything about the real
character of such superficial manifestations, have published them as
facts universal in their application; and every religious and mystical
crank has facts, data, etc., which, he claims, are reliable criteria for
investigation, but which are in fact nothing more or less than his own
imaginings

If you intend to study the mind, you must have systematic training; you
must practice to bring the mind under your control, to attain to that
consciousness from which you will be able to study the mind and remain
unmoved by any of its wild gyrations. Otherwise the facts observed will
not be reliable; they will not apply to all people and therefore will
not be truly facts or data at all.

Among that class who have gone deeply into the study of the mind, the
facts observed have been the same, no matter in what part of the world
such persons may be or what religious belief they may have. The results
obtained by all who go deep enough into the mind are the same.

The mind operates by perception and impulsion. For instance, the rays of
the light enter by eyes, are carried by the nerves to the brain, and
still I do not see the light. The brain then conveys the impulse to the
mind, but yet I do not see the light; the mind then reacts, and the
light flashes across the mind. The mind's reaction is impulsion, and as
a result the eye perceives the object.

To control the mind you must go deep down into the subconscious mind,
classify and arrange in order all the different impressions, thoughts,
etc., stored up there, and control them. This is the first step. By the
control of the subconscious mind you get control over the conscious.

</div>
