---
title: THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY AND CHRISTIANITY

---
<div>

[←](introduction_to_jnana-yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](worshipper_and_worshipped.htm)

  

## THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY AND CHRISTIANITY

(*Notes of a lecture delivered at the Unitarian Church, in Oakland,
California, on February 28, 1900*)

Between all great religions of the world there are many points of
similarity; and so startling is this likeness, at times, as to suggest
the idea that in many particulars the different religions have copied
from one another.

This act of imitation has been laid at the door of different religions;
but that it is a superficial charge is evident from the following facts:

Religion is fundamental in the very soul of humanity; and as all life is
the evolution of that which is within, it, of necessity, expresses
itself through various peoples and nations.

The language of the soul is one, the languages of nations are many;
their customs and methods of life are widely different. Religion is of
the soul and finds expression through various nations, languages, and
customs. Hence it follows that the difference between the religions of
the world is one of expression and not of substance; and their points of
similarity and unity are of the soul, are intrinsic, as the language of
the soul is one, in whatever peoples and under whatever circumstances it
manifests itself. The same sweet harmony is vibrant there also, as it is
on many and diverse instruments.

The first thing in common in all great religions of the world is the
possession of an authentic book. When religious systems have failed to
have such a book, they have become extinct. Such was the fact of the
religions of Egypt. The authentic book is the hearthstone, so to speak,
of each great religious system, around which its adherents gather, and
from which radiates the energy and life of the system.

Each religion, again, lays the claim that its particular book is the
only authentic word of God; that all other sacred books are false and
are impositions upon poor human credulity; and that to follow another
religion is to be ignorant and spiritually blind.

Such bigotry is characteristic of the orthodox element of all religions.
For instance, the orthodox followers of the Vedas claim that the Vedas
are the only authentic word of God in the world; that God has spoken to
the world only through the Vedas; not only that, but that the world
itself exists by virtue of the Vedas. Before the world was, the Vedas
were. Everything in the world exists because it is in the Vedas. A cow
exists because the name cow is in the Vedas; that is, because the animal
we know as a cow is mentioned in the Vedas. The language of the Vedas is
the original language of God, all other languages are mere dialects and
not of God. Every word and syllable in the Vedas must be pronounced
correctly, each sound must be given its true vibration, and every
departure from this rigid exactness is a terrible sin and unpardonable.

Thus, this kind of bigotry is predominant in the orthodox element of all
religions. But this fighting over the letter is indulged in only by the
ignorant, the spiritually blind. All who have actually attained any real
religious nature never wrangle over the form in which the different
religions are expressed. They know that the life of all religions is the
same, and, consequently, they have no quarrel with anybody because he
does not speak the same tongue.

The Vedas are, in fact, the oldest sacred books in the world. Nobody
knows anything about the time when they were written or by whom. They
are contained in many volumes, and I doubt that any one man ever read
them all.

The religion of the Vedas is the religion of the Hindus, and the
foundation of all Oriental religions; that is, all other Oriental
religions are offshoots of the Vedas; all Eastern systems of religion
have the Vedas as authority.

It is an irrational claim to believe in the teachings of Jesus Christ
and at the same time to hold that the greater part of his teachings have
no application at the present time. If you say that the reason why the
powers do not follow them that believe (as Christ said they would) is
because you have not faith enough and are not pure enough — that will be
all right. But to say that they have no application at the present time
is to be ridiculous.

I have never seen the man who was not at least my equal. I have
travelled all over the world; I have been among the very worst kind of
people — among cannibals — and I have never seen the man who is not at
least my equal. I have done as they do — when I was a fool. Then I did
not know any better; now I do. Now they do not know any better; after a
while they will. Every one acts according to his own nature. We are all
in process of growth. From this standpoint one man is not better than
another.

</div>
