---
title: THE PREPARATION

---
<div>

[←](../../volume_3/buddhistic_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Addresses on
Bhakti-Yoga](addresses_on_bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_first_steps.htm)

  

## THE PREPARATION

The best definition given of Bhakti-Yoga is perhaps embodied in the
verse: "May that love undying which the non-discriminating have for the
fleeting objects of the senses never leave this heart of mine — of me
who seek after Thee!" We see what a strong love men, who do not know any
better, have for sense-objects, for money, dress, their wives, children,
friends, and possessions. What a tremendous clinging they have to all
these things! So in the above prayer the sage says, "I will have that
attachment, that tremendous clinging, only to Thee." This love, when
given to God, is called Bhakti. Bhakti is not destructive; it teaches us
that no one of the faculties we have has been given in vain, that
through them is the natural way to come to liberation. Bhakti does not
kill out our tendencies, it does not go against nature, but only gives
it a higher and more powerful direction. How naturally we love objects
of the senses! We cannot but do so, because they are so real to us. We
do not ordinarily see anything real about higher things, but when a man
has seen something real beyond the senses, beyond the universe of
senses, the idea is that he can have a strong attachment, only it should
be transferred to the object beyond the senses, which is God. And when
the same kind of love that has before been given to sense-objects is
given to God, it is called Bhakti. According to the sage Râmânuja, the
following are the preparations for getting that intense love.

The first is Viveka. It is a very curious thing, especially to people of
the West. It means, according to Ramanuja, "discrimination of food".
Food contains all the energies that go to make up the forces of our body
and mind; it has been transferred, and conserved, and given new
directions in my body, but my body and mind have nothing essentially
different from the food that I ate. Just as the force and matter we find
in the material world become body and mind in us, so, essentially, the
difference between body and mind and the food we eat is only in
manifestation. It being so, that out of the material particles of our
food we construct the instrument of thought, and that from the finer
forces lodged in these particles we manufacture thought itself, it
naturally follows, that both this thought and the instrument will be
modified by the food we take. There are certain kinds of food that
produce a certain change in the mind; we see it every day. There are
other sorts which produce a change in the body, and in the long run have
a tremendous effect on the mind. It is a great thing to learn; a good
deal of the misery we suffer is occasioned by the food we take. You find
that after a heavy and indigestible meal it is very hard to control the
mind; it is running, running all the time. There are certain foods which
are exciting; if you eat such food, you find that you cannot control the
mind. It is obvious that after drinking a large quantity of wine, or
other alcoholic beverage, a man finds that his mind would not be
controlled; it runs away from his control.

According to Ramanuja, there are three things in food we must avoid.
First, there is Jâti, the nature, or species of the food, that must be
considered. All exciting food should be avoided, as meat, for instance;
this should not be taken because it is by its very nature impure. We can
get it only by taking the life of another. We get pleasure for a moment,
and another creature has to give up its life to give us that pleasure.
Not only so, but we demoralise other human beings. It would be rather
better if every man who eats meat killed the animal himself; but,
instead of doing so, society gets a class of persons to do that business
for them, for doing which, it hates them. In England no butcher can
serve on a jury, the idea being that he is cruel by nature. Who makes
him cruel? Society. If we did not eat beef and mutton, there would be no
butchers. Eating meat is only allowable for people who do very hard
work, and who are not going to be Bhaktas; but if you are going to be
Bhaktas, you should avoid meat. Also, all exciting foods, such as
onions, garlic, and all evil-smelling food, as "sauerkraut". Any food
that has been standing for days, till its condition is changed, any food
whose natural juices have been almost dried ups any food that is
malodorous, should be avoided.

The next thing that is to be considered as regards food is still more
intricate to Western minds — it is what is called Âshraya, i.e. the
person from whom it comes This is rather a mysterious theory of the
Hindus. The idea is that each man has a certain aura round him, and
whatever thing he touches, a part of his character, as it were, his
influence, is left on it. It is supposed that a man's character emanates
from him, as it were, like a physical force, and whatever he touches is
affected by it. So we must take care who touches our food when it is
cooked; a wicked or immoral person must not touch it. One who wants to
be a Bhakta must not dine with people whom he knows to be very wicked,
because their infection will come through the food.

The other form of purity to be observed is Nimitta, or instruments. Dirt
and dust must not be in food. Food should not be brought from the market
and placed on the table unwashed. We must be careful also about the
saliva and other secretions. The lips ought never, for instance, to be
touched with the fingers. The mucous membrane is the most delicate part
of the body, and all tendencies are conveyed very easily by the saliva.
Its contact, therefore, is to be regarded as not only offensive, but
dangerous. Again, we must not eat food, half of which has been eaten by
someone else. When these things are avoided in food, it becomes pure;
pure food brings a pure mind, and in a pure mind is a constant memory of
God.

Let me tell you the same thing as explained by another commentator,
Shankarâchârya, who takes quite another view. This word for food, in
Sanskrit, is derived from the root, meaning to gather. Âhâra means
"gathered in". What is his explanation? He says, the passage that when
food is pure the mind will become pure really means that lest we become
subject to the senses we should avoid the following: First as to
attachment; we must not be extremely attached to anything excepting God.
See everything, do everything, but be not attached. As soon as extreme
attachment comes, a man loses himself, he is no more master of himself,
he is a slave. If a woman is tremendously attached to a man, she becomes
a slave to that man. There is no use in being a slave. There are higher
things in this world than becoming a slave to a human being. Love and do
good to everybody, but do not become a slave. In the first place,
attachment degenerates us, individually, and in the second place, makes
us extremely selfish. Owing to this failing, we want to injure others to
do good to those we love. A good many of the wicked deeds done in this
world are really done through attachment to certain persons. So all
attachment excepting that for good works should be avoided; but love
should be given to everybody. Then as to jealousy. There should be no
jealousy in regard to objects of the senses; jealousy is the root of all
evil, and a most difficult thing to conquer. Next, delusion. We always
take one thing for another, and act upon that, with the result that we
bring misery upon ourselves. We take the bad for the good. Anything that
titillates our nerves for a moment we think; as the highest good, and
plunge into it immediately, but find, when it is too late, that it has
given us a tremendous blow. Every day, we run into this error, and we
often continue in it all our lives. When the senses, without being
extremely attached, without jealousy, or without delusion, work in the
world, such work or collection of impressions is called pure food,
according to Shankaracharya. When pure food is taken, the mind is able
to take in objects and think about them without attachment, jealousy or
delusion; then the mind becomes pure, and then there is constant memory
of God in that mind.

It is quite natural for one to say that Shankara's meaning is the best,
but I wish to add that one should not neglect Ramanuja's interpretation
either. It is only when you take care of the real material food that the
rest will come. It is very true that mind is the master, but very few of
us are not bound by the senses. We are all controlled by matter; and as
long as we are so controlled, we must take material aids; and then, when
we have become strong, we can eat or drink anything we like. We have to
follow Ramanuja in taking care about food and drink; at the same time we
must also take care about our mental food. It is very easy to take care
about material food, but mental work must go along with it; then
gradually our spiritual self will become stronger and stronger, and the
physical self less assertive. Then will food hurt you no more. The great
danger is that every man wants to jump at the highest ideal, but jumping
is not the way. That ends only in a fall. We are bound down here, and we
have to break our chains slowly. This is called Viveka, discrimination.

The next is called Vimoka, freedom from desires. He who wants to love
God must get rid of extreme desires, desire nothing except God. This
world is good so far as it helps one to go to the higher world. The
objects of the senses are good so far as they help us to attain higher
objects. We always forget that this world is a means to an end, and not
an end itself. If this were the end we should be immortal here in our
physical body; we should never die. But we see people every moment dying
around us, and yet, foolishly, we think we shall never die; and from
that conviction we come to think that this life is the goal. That is the
case with ninety-nine per cent of us. This notion should be given up at
once. This world is good so far as it is a means to perfect ourselves;
and as soon as it has ceased to be so, it is evil. So wife, husband,
children, money and learning, are good so long as they help us forward;
but as soon as they cease to do that, they are nothing but evil. If the
wife help us to attain God, she is a good wife; so with a husband or a
child. If money help a man to do good to others, it is of some value;
but if not, it is simply a mass of evil, and the sooner it is got rid
of, the better.

The next is Abhyâsa, practice. The mind should always go towards God. No
other things have any right to withhold it. It should continuously think
of God, though this is a very hard task; yet it can be done by
persistent practice. What we are now is the result of our past practice.
Again, practice makes us what we shall be. So practice the other way;
one sort of turning round has brought us this way, turn the other way
and get out of it as soon as you can. Thinking of the senses has brought
us down here — to cry one moment, to rejoice the next, to be at the
mercy of every breeze, slave to everything. This is shameful, and yet we
call ourselves spirits. Go the other way, think of God; let the mind not
think of any physical or mental enjoyment, but of God alone. When it
tries to think of anything else, give it a good blow, so that it may
turn round and think of God. As oil poured from one vessel to another
falls in an unbroken line, as chimes coming from a distance fall upon
the ear as one continuous sound, so should the mind flow towards God in
one continuous stream. We should not only impose this practice on the
mind, but the senses too should be employed. Instead of hearing foolish
things, we must hear about God; instead of talking foolish words, we
must talk of God. Instead of reading foolish books, we must read good
ones which tell of God.

The greatest aid to this practice of keeping God in memory is, perhaps,
music. The Lord says to Nârada, the great teacher of Bhakti, "I do not
live in heaven, nor do I live in the heart of the Yogi, but where My
devotees sing My praise, there am I". Music has such tremendous power
over the human mind; it brings it to concentration in a moment. You will
find the dull, ignorant, low, brute-like human beings, who never steady
their mind for a moment at other times, when they hear attractive music,
immediately become charmed and concentrated. Even the minds of animals,
such as dogs, lions, cats, and serpents, become charmed with music.

The next is Kriyâ, work — doing good to others. The memory of God will
not come to the selfish man. The more we come out and do good to others,
the more our hearts will be purified, and God will be in them. According
to our scriptures, there are five sorts of work, called the fivefold
sacrifice. First, study. A man must study every day something holy and
good. Second, worship of God, angels, or saints, as it may be. Third,
our duty to our forefathers. Fourth, our duty to human beings. Man has
no right to live in a house himself, until he builds for the poor also,
or for anybody who needs it. The householder's house should be open to
everybody that is poor and suffering; then he is a real householder. If
he builds a house only for himself and his wife to enjoy, he will never
be a lover of God. No man has the right to cook food only for himself;
it is for others, and he should have what remains. It is a common
practice in India that when the season's produce first comes into the
market, such as strawberries or mangoes, a man buys some of them and
gives to the poor. Then he eats of them; and it is a very good example
to follow in this country. This training will make a man unselfish, and
at the same time, be an excellent object-lesson to his wife and
children. The Hebrews in olden times used to give the first fruits to
God. The first of everything should go to the poor; we have only a right
to what remains. The poor are God's representatives; anyone that suffers
is His representative. Without giving, he who eats and enjoys eating,
enjoys sin. Fifth, our duty to the lower animals. It is diabolical to
say that all animals are created for men to be killed and used in any
way man likes. It is the devil's gospel, not God's. Think how diabolical
it is to cut them up to see whether a nerve quivers or not, in a certain
part of the body. I am glad that in our country such things are not
countenanced by the Hindus, whatever encouragement they may get from the
foreign government they are under. One portion of the food cooked in a
household belongs to the animals also. They should be given food every
day; there ought to be hospitals in every city in this country for poor,
lame, or blind horses, cows, dogs, and cats, where they should be fed
and taken care of.

Then there is Kalyâna, purity, which comprises the following: Satya,
truthfulness. He who is true, unto him the God of truth comes. Thought,
word, and deed should be perfectly true. Next Ârjava,
straightforwardness, rectitude. The word means, to be simple, no
crookedness in the heart, no double-dealing. Even if it is a little
harsh, go straightforward, and not crookedly. Dayâ, pity, compassion.
Ahimsâ, not injuring any being by thought, word, or deed. Dâna, charity.
There is no higher virtue than charity. The lowest man is he whose hand
draws in, in receiving; and he is the highest man whose hand goes out in
giving. The hand was made to give always. Give the last bit of bread you
have even if you are starving. You will be free in a moment if you
starve yourself to death by giving to another. Immediately you will be
perfect, you will become God. People who have children are bound
already. They cannot give away. They want to enjoy their children, and
they must pay for it. Are there not enough children in the world? It is
only selfishness which says, "I'll have a child for myself".

The next is Anavasâda — not desponding, cheerfulness. Despondency is not
religion, whatever else it may be. By being pleasant always and smiling,
it takes you nearer to God, nearer than any prayer. How can those minds
that are gloomy and dull love? If they talk of love, it is false; they
want to hurt others. Think of the fanatics; they make the longest faces,
and all their religion is to fight against others in word and act. Think
of what they have done in the past, and of what they would do now if
they were given a free hand. They would deluge the whole world in blood
tomorrow if it would bring them power. By worshipping power and making
long faces, they lose every bit of love from their hearts. So the man
who always feels miserable will never come to God. It is not religion,
it is diabolism to say, "I am so miserable." Every man has his own
burden to bear. If you are miserable, try to be happy, try to conquer
it.

God is not to be reached by the weak. Never be weak. You must be strong;
you have infinite strength within you. How else will you conquer
anything? How else will you come to God? At the same time you must avoid
excessive merriment, Uddharsha, as it is called. A mind in that state
never becomes calm; it becomes fickle. Excessive merriment will always
be followed by sorrow. Tears and laughter are near kin. People so often
run from one extreme to the other. Let the mind be cheerful, but calm.
Never let it run into excesses, because every excess will be followed by
a reaction.

These, according to Ramanuja, are the preparations for Bhakti.

</div>
