---
title: THE NEED OF SYMBOLS

---
<div>

[←](the_teacher_of_spirituality.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Addresses on
Bhakti-Yoga](addresses_on_bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_chief_symbols.htm)

  

## THE NEED OF SYMBOLS

Bhakti is divided into two portions. One is called Vaidhi, formal or
ceremonial; the other portion is called Mukhyâ, supreme. The word Bhakti
covers all the ground between the lowest form of worship and the highest
form of life. All the worship that you have seen in any country in the
world, or in any religion, is regulated by love. There is a good deal
that is simple ceremony; there is also a good deal which, though not
ceremony, is still not love, but a lower state. Yet these ceremonies are
necessary. The external part of Bhakti is absolutely necessary to help
the soul onward. Man makes a great mistake when he thinks that he can at
once jump to the highest state. If a baby thinks he is going to be an
old man in a day, he is mistaken; and I hope you will always bear in
mind this one ideal, that religion is neither in books, nor in
intellectual consent, nor in reasoning. Reason, theories, documents,
doctrines, books, religious ceremonies, are all *helps* to religion:
religion itself consists in *realisation*. We all say, "There is a God."
Have you seen God? That is the question. You hear a man say, "There is
God in heaven." You ask him if he has seen Him, and if he says he has,
you would laugh at him and say he is a maniac. With most people religion
is a sort of intellectual assent and goes no further than a document. I
would not call it religion. It is better to be an atheist than to have
that sort of religion. Religion does not depend on our intellectual
assent or dissent. You say there is a soul. Have you seen the soul? How
is it we all have souls and do not see them? You have to answer the
question and find out the way to see the soul. If not, it is useless to
talk of religion. If any religion is true, it must be able to show us
the soul and show us God and the truth in ourselves. If you and I fight
for all eternity about one of these doctrines or documents, we shall
never come to any conclusion. People have been fighting for ages, and
what is the outcome? Intellect cannot reach there at all. We have to go
beyond the intellect; the proof of religion is in direct perception. The
proof of the existence of this wall is that we see it; if you sat down
and argued about its existence or non-existence for ages, you could
never come to any conclusion; but directly you see it, it is enough. If
all the men in the world told you it did not exist, you would not
believe them, because you know that the evidence of your own eyes is
superior to that of all the doctrines and documents in the world.

To be religious, you have first to throw books overboard. The less you
read of books, the better for you; do one thing at a time. It is a
tendency in Western countries, in these modern times, to make a
hotchpotch of the brain; all sorts of unassimilated ideas run riot in
the brain and form a chaos without ever obtaining a chance to settle
down and crystallise into a definite shape. In many cases it becomes a
sort of disease, but this is not religion. Then some want a sensation.
Tell them about ghosts and people coming from the North Pole or any
other remote place, with wings or in any other form, and that they are
invisibly present and watching over them, and make them feel uncanny,
then they are satisfied and go home; but within twenty-four hours they
are ready for a fresh sensation. This is what some call religion. This
is the way to the lunatic asylum, and not to religion. The Lord is not
to be reached by the weak, and all these weird things tend to weakness.
Therefore go not near them; they only make people weak, bring disorder
to the brain, weaken the mind, demoralise the soul, and a hopeless
muddle is the result. You must bear in mind that religion does not
consist in talk, or doctrines, or books, but in realisation; it is not
learning, but *being*. Everybody knows, "Do not steal", but what of it?
That man has really known who has not stolen. Everybody knows, "Do not
injure others", but of what value is it? Those who have not done so have
realised it, they know it and have built their character on it. Religion
is realising; and I will call you a worshipper of God when you have
become able to realise the Idea. Before that it is the spelling of the
weird, and no more. It is this power of realisation that makes religion.
No amount of doctrines or philosophies or ethical books, that you may
have stuffed into your brain, will matter much, only what you *are* and
what you have *realised*. So we have to realise religion, and this
realisation of religion is a long process. When men hear of something
very high and wonderful, they all think they will get that, and never
stop for a moment to consider that they will have to work their way up
to it; they all want to jump there. If it is the highest, we are for it.
We never stop to consider whether we have the power, and the result is
that we do not do anything. You cannot take a man with a pitchfork and
push him up there; we all have to work up gradually. Therefore the first
part of religion is Vaidhi Bhakti, the lower phase of worship.

What are these lower phases of worship? They are various. In order to
attain to the state where we can realise, we must pass through the
concrete — just as you see children learn through the concrete first —
and gradually come to the abstract. If you tell a baby that five times
two is ten, it will not understand; but if you bring ten things and show
how five times two is ten, it will understand. Religion is a long, slow
process. We are all of us babies here; we may be old, and have studied
all the books in the universe, but we are all spiritual babies. We have
learnt the doctrines and dogmas, but realised nothing in our lives. We
shall have to begin now in the concrete, through forms and words,
prayers and ceremonies; and of these concrete forms there will be
thousands; one form need not be for everybody. Some may be helped by
images, some may not. Some require an image outside, others one inside
the brain. The man who puts it inside says, "I am a superior man. When
it is inside it is all right; when it is outside, it is idolatry, I will
fight it." When a man puts an image in the form of a church or a temple,
he thinks it is holy; but when it is in a human form, he objects to it!

So there are various forms through which the mind will take this
concrete exercise; and then, step by step, we shall come to the abstract
understanding, abstract realisation. Again, the same form is not for
everyone; there is one form that will suit you, and another will suit
somebody else, and so on. All forms, though leading to the same goal,
may not be for all of us. Here is another mistake we generally make. My
ideal does not suit you; and why should I force it on you? My fashion of
building churches or reading hymns does not suit you; why should I force
it on you? Go into the world and every fool will tell you that his form
is the only right one, that every other form is diabolical, and he is
the only chosen man ever born in the universe. But in fact, all these
forms are good and helpful. Just as there are certain varieties in human
nature, so it is necessary that there should be an equal number of forms
in religion; and the more there are, the better for the world. If there
are twenty forms of religion in the world, it is very good; if there are
four hundred, so much the better — there will be the more to choose
from. So we should rather be glad when the number of religions and
religious ideas increase and multiply, because they will then include
every man and help mankind more. Would to God that religions multiplied
until every man had his own religion, quite separate from that of any
other! This is the idea of the Bhakti-Yogi.

The final idea is that my religion cannot be yours, or yours mine.
Although the goal and the aim are the same, yet each one has to take a
different road, according to the tendencies of his mind; and although
these roads are various, they must all be true, because they lead to the
same goal. It cannot be that one is true and the rest not. The choosing
of one's own road is called in the language of Bhakti, Ishta, the chosen
way.

Then there are words. All of you have heard of the power of words, how
wonderful they are! Every book — the Bible, the Koran, and the Vedas —
is full of the power of words. Certain words have wonderful power over
mankind. Again, there are other forms, known as symbols. Symbols have
great influence on the human mind. But great symbols in religion were
not created indefinitely. We find that they are the natural expressions
of thought. We think symbolically. All our words are but symbols of the
thought behind, and different people have come to use different symbols
without knowing the reason why. It was all behind, and these symbols are
associated with the thoughts; and as the thought brings the symbol
outside, so the symbol, on the contrary, can bring the thought inside.
So one portion of Bhakti tells about these various subjects of symbols
and words and prayers. Every religion has prayers, but one thing you
must bear in mind — praying for health or wealth is not Bhakti, it is
all Karma or meritorious action. Praying for any physical gain is simply
Karma, such as a prayer for going to heaven and so forth. One that wants
to love God, to be a Bhakta, must discard all such prayers. He who wants
to enter the realms of light must first give up this buying and selling
this "shopkeeping" religion, and then enter the gates. It is not that
you do not get what you pray for; you get everything, but such praying
is a beggar's religion. "Foolish indeed is he who, living on the banks
of the Ganga, digs a little well for water. A fool indeed is the man
who, coming to a mine of diamonds, seeks for glass beads." This body
will die some time, so what is the use of praying for its health again
and again? What is there in health and wealth? The wealthiest man can
use and enjoy only a little portion of his wealth. We can never get all
the things of this world; and if not, who cares? This body will go, who
cares for these things? If good things come, welcome; if they go away,
let them go. Blessed are they when they come, and blessed are they when
they go. We are striving to come into the presence of the King of kings.
We cannot get there in a beggar's dress. Even if we wanted to enter the
presence of an emperor, should we be admitted? Certainly not. We should
be driven out. This is the Emperor of emperors, and in these beggar's
rags we cannot enter. Shopkeepers never have admission there; buying and
selling have no place there. As you read in the Bible, Jesus drove the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Do not pray for little things. If
you seek only bodily comforts, where is the difference between men and
animals? Think yourselves a little higher than that.

So it goes without saying that the first task in becoming a Bhakta is to
give up all desires of heaven and other things. The question is how to
get rid of these desires. What makes men miserable? Because they are
slaves, bound by laws, puppets in the hand of nature, tumbled about like
playthings. We are continually taking care of this body that anything
can knock down; and so we are living in a constant state of fear. I have
read that a deer has to run on the average sixty or seventy miles every
day, because it is frightened. We ought to know that we are in a worse
plight than the deer. The deer has some rest, but we have none. If the
deer gets grass enough it is satisfied, but we are always multiplying
our wants. It is a morbid desire with us to multiply our wants. We have
become so unhinged and unnatural that nothing natural will satisfy us.
We are always grasping after morbid things, must have unnatural
excitement — unnatural food, drink, surroundings, and life. As to fear,
what are our lives but bundles of fear? The deer has only one class of
fear, such as that from tigers, wolves, etc. Man has the whole universe
to fear.

How are we to free ourselves from this is the question. Utilitarians
say, "Don't talk of God and hereafter; we don't know anything of these
things, let us live happily in this world." I would be the first to do
so if we could, but the world will not allow us. As long as you are a
slave of nature, how can you? The more you struggle, the more enveloped
you become. You have been devising plans to make you happy, I do not
know for how many years, but each year things seem to grow worse. Two
hundred years ago in the old world people had few wants; but if their
knowledge increased in arithmetical progression, their wants increased
in geometrical progression. We think that in salvation at least our
desires will be fulfilled, so we desire to go to heaven. This eternal,
unquenchable thirst! Always wanting something! When a man is a beggar,
he wants money. When he has money, he wants other things, society; and
after that, something else. Never at rest. How are we to quench this? If
we get to heaven, it will only increase desire. If a poor man gets rich,
it does not quench his desires, it is only like throwing butter on the
fire, increasing its bright flames. Going to heaven means becoming
intensely richer, and then desire comes more and more. We read of many
human things in heaven in the different Bibles of the world; they are
not always very good there; and after all, this desire to go to heaven
is a desire after enjoyment. This has to be given up. It is too little,
too vulgar a thing for you to think of going to heaven. It is just the
same as thinking, I will become a millionaire and lord it over people.
There are many of these heavens, but through them you cannot gain the
right to enter the gates of religion and love.

</div>
