+++
title = "Indo-Iranica: epic ruminations"

+++
PDF version of
[article](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/rostam_-bhishma-2.pdf)

**Prologue**  
We first began our observations on the shared motifs in Indo-Iranian
traditions when we were around 8 years of age after our mother
introduced us to the Iranian epic, the Šahnāme. Over the years we built
up these correspondences even as we expanded our studies on our
ancestral Indo-European (IE) traditions. Several notable points have
also been uncovered in the work by occidental Indo-Europeanists such as
Dumezil, Watkins, and Puhvel. Yet our view of this is somewhat distinct
— given that we are insiders of one of the last surviving
Indo-European traditions, for us it is a reflection on our living
tradition. We have recently learnt a lot about the history of the early
Indo-Europeans due to archaeogenetics; this allows us to place certain
things in a more correct historical framework. Hence, we thought it
worthwhile to put down a few words on this matter. In particular, we
felt that such an exposition might be of use to the Hindu students of
their ancestral tradition — a kind of exploration of and introspection
on tradition that is unfortunately rather uncommon among our people.
Indeed, we would go as far as to state plainly that no amount of
traditional mastery can substitute for the insights that comparative IE
studies can provide for our tradition. Hence, ignoring it necessarily
means an incomplete understanding of tradition. Accordingly, we present
here a few comparative points on the IE epic traditions. Among the
motifs we uncovered was the Garuḍa motif which is common to the Iranian
Rostam and the Ikṣvāku heroes Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa on our side. We also
noticed the motifs shared by the great pitāmahā Bhīṣma of the Hindu
national epic and Rostam the hero of the Iranian national epic. In the
late 1990s we learnt of the Iranicist Skjaervo’s work in this direction
and found that several points coincided with our investigations.
Nevertheless, we feel it might be useful to put down some of our
thoughts in this this regard against the larger background of the I-Ir
epic tradition. However, right at the outset, we should mention that
this account is by no means aiming to be a comprehensive presentation of
our thoughts on the matter and merely scratches the surface.

**The Hindu epic traditions**  
The Hindu itihāsa tradition, which is a continuation of the ancient IE
epic tradition that emerged on the Pontic–Caspian steppe, comes down to
us in the form of the extensive Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki and the Mahābhārata
of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana. The first minutely captures the old “standard”
religion, i.e. the ancestral Aindra religion of the Indo-Europeans
\[Footnote 1\] as a humanized epic narrative focused on a historical
hero Rāmacandra and his brothers, who at some point after the ārya
conquest of Northern India occupied the dynastic seat of the ancient
Ikṣvāku monarchs. While it was secondarily reinterpreted by the
tradition which adopted the ancient IE deity Viṣṇu as its focus, it
still bears the emphatic stamp of the old Aindra religion (wherein
Lakṣmaṇa is the proper cognate of Viṣṇu) and also other ancient
para-Aindra traditions like that of the great god Vāyu and Yakṣa
Vaishravaṇa.

The Mahābhārata on the other hand might be termed the national epic
because whatever kernel of history it contains is intimately linked with
the emergence of a unified Indian state under the ārya-s in northern
India sometime around 1300 BCE. However, it should be understood that
the Mahābhārata is not history in the sense it is commonly understood
today. It is again a classic IE epic narrative which “pours” diverse
historical elements into the “bottle” of ancient mythic motifs
associated with the IE religion and its I-Ir reflex. This is made
explicit in the epic itself wherein its various characters are described
as incarnations of asura-s, deva-s and other divine beings — e.g. the
Bharadvāja hero Aśvatthāman is explicitly described as being the
combined incarnation of the mighty god Rudra along with the god of death
(Yama) and also the embodiment of lust and wrath (Mbh-“Pune” 1.61.66).
These older religious elements are combined with the newly emergent
strain of a Viṣṇu-focal system, the Sātvata tradition, emerging among
eponymous clans, and to an extant the the Rudra-focal system. In
historical terms, at least 4 distinct streams of “history” are melded in
an anachronistic fashion into the story frame of the Mahābharata,
despite the apparent chronological coherence in the epic: 1) The
historical elements of the old Kuru-Pāñcāla confederation; 2) the
emergence of Pāṇḍu power and their dynasty; 3) The Sātvata cycle with
their heroes like Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra, Balarāma, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and
Sātyaki (pañcavīra-s) among others; 4) The hero Bhīṣma.

**The Iranic epic traditions**  
Sadly, the Iranic epic traditions have not come down to us in the
pristine form of the Hindu epic traditions due the destruction of the
Iranian empire and the satellite Iranic states by Islam and the cult of
Jesus. There are two rather distinct streams of the Iranic epic
tradition that have come down to us: 1) The Caucasian stream that is
represented by the Nart epic material represents the traditions of the
Northern Saka-s, Sarmatians (Sairima) and the Alans (Airya). The word
Nart itself is a cognate of Sanskrit nṛ with a deep PIE etymology.
Unfortunately, the remnants of these peoples were steam-rolled by the
Christian Russians during their conquest of the region in the 1800s.
Starting with Shora Begmurzin Nogma down to Colarusso’s good compendium
the surviving material of these peoples has been collated and
translated. 2) The Iranian stream which has come down to us in the form
the Šah-nāme, the Garšasp-nāme, the Farāmarz-nāme and the Bānu
Gošasb-nāme among several others. Of these the Šah-nāme appears to
have been the model on which the other works were written. Importantly,
these are very late works coming from a time well after the Mohammedan
destruction of the Iranic religions. However, they appear to contain
material from a much earlier Sassanian collation of the epic material in
middle Persian the Khwadāy-nāmag. Of them, the Šah-nāme is well edited
and studied. But recently the work of Iranicists like Gazerani and
others has provide a lot of new material from the other epic cycles.
Much of our discussion will be on material that can be gleaned from the
Šah-nāme and the more recently presented texts. The Šah-nāme is an
anachronistic medley of old I-Ir mythology, main-line (i.e.
Zoroastrian-allied) Iranian epic tradition, the epic tradition of
Sakastana (the region encompassing Eastern Iran, Balochistan and
southern Afghanistan in modern parlance, where the Saka-s had
established a kingdom starting around 2100 years ago), and the later
history of the Achaemenids, Parthians and Sassanians.

**Some examples of anachronism in the Šah-nāme**  
The lateness of the Šah-nāme is useful in one way: it allows us to
understand how epic anachronism evolves because some of the details
pertain to historical events that have independent records of their
actual unfolding. The later Iranians had only a vague memory of certain
periods of their history — in particular the Achaemenid period. In
contrast, in non-Šah-nāme histories, including accounts of their rival,
the Greeks, this period is remembered as one of their most glorious
periods graced by great monarchs like Cyrus, Cambyses and Darius.
Strikingly, the Iranians remember the dramatic Achaemenid architecture
under names like Takht-i-Jamshid or Naqsh-i-Rostam, thus projecting
their constructions to the ancient past to associate them with epic
heroes like Yima Kshaeta (Jamshid) and Rostam. A parallel phenomenon is
seen among the Hindus where temples built by historical kings are
sometimes projected back to the time of the Pāṇḍava-s with complete loss
of memory of the real builder among the masses. This chronological
disconnect is most dramatically reproduced in the Šah-nāme in the
transition between the ancient period — a blend of main-line Iranian and
Sakastanian tradition — and the historical period beginning with
Alexander of Macedon’s invasion and destruction of the Iranian empire.

The way the historical period is introduced is via Bahman, the last of
the ancient kings, who puts an end to the lineage of Rostam. Bahman was
smitten by the beauty of his own daughter Homāya and engaged in
incestuous coitus with her. The result was the son named Dārāb (=Darius
the Great). He made Homāya succeed him but this displeased his other son
Sāsān through his original wife. This Sāsān is said to have hence left
for India where he married a Hindu woman to give rise to a long line of
Sāsān-s who eventually gave rise to the founder of the Sassanian dynasty
(see below for a parallel account in the clan of Rostam which might have
bearing on the origin of the Pallava-s of South India). Some other
accounts instead place this account of Sāsān in Nishapur. In Iran itself
Dārāb became the ruler and marching on the Greeks defeated them. He then
took Nāhīd the daughter of the Macedonian king Filakus as his wife. But
soon after impregnating her, Dārāb sent her back to Macedon repelled by
her bad smell from poor hygiene. There she gave birth to Sekander
(=Alexander of Macedon). In Iran his other wife gave him a son named
Dārā (=Darius-III).

Sekander with Arsṭālīs (=Aristotle) as his minister refused to pay
tribute to Dārā resulting in a war. After facing successive defeats Dārā
fled to Kerman with Sekander in hot pursuit. Dārā sent a message to
Porus (Paurava) the king of the Hindus to help. But before Porus could
send assistance Dārā was stabbed by his own ministers. As he lay dying
he gave his daughter Roxana in marriage to Sekander, asking him to
preserve Avesta and the uphold Zoroastrian religion. Alexander killed
Dārā’s assassins and made himself the emperor of Iran. Then Keyd
(=Āmbhi), a king of the Hindus, sent him a Brāhmaṇa philosopher, a
physician, a beautiful woman as a wife and an akṣaya-madirā-pātra.
Pleased with these gifts Sekander spared him, attacked Porus and
eventually defeated him.

It is immediately apparent that this tradition preserves a nucleus of
history, i.e. the account of the destruction of the Achaemenid empire by
Alexander followed by his going “native” by adopting Iranian customs to
the distaste of his Macedonian and Greek entourage. However, we can also
see a melding of mythic motifs and anachronistic conflation and
telescoping of various historical elements: 1) the incest of Bahman is
an old motif (c.f. the incest of Prajāpati from the Ṛgveda onwards). 2)
the great historical rulers like Cyrus, Darius the Great etc are either
forgotten conflated into the single character of Dārāb. 3) The Sassanian
dynasty’s foundation is ahistorically coupled with the Achaemenid
dynasty. Here, one may note that the supposed Hindu wife of Sāsān could
be a motif that was recycled from the story of Farāmarz, the son of
Rostam, who is said to have obtained his wife from an Indian island
after rescuing her from a demonic Triśiras Tvāṣṭra-like daeva. This
might also reflect a historical memory of a noted Sassanian emperor
marrying a Gupta princess. 4) Alexander and Darius-III are made
half-brothers — bringing in an old IE motif of the clash of clansman
(e.g. Kaurava-s and Pāṇḍava-s).

With regard to Alexander it may be noted that one stream of Iranian
tradition clearly remembers him as the “accursed, demonic one” who
destroyed the Zoroastrian scriptures during his assault on Persepolis.
In contrast, this tradition mentions Darius asking him to preserve the
Avesta. It is conceivable that the two accounts preserve different
aspects of the actual history — Alexander initially destroyed the
Iranian religious center of Persepolis and brutally killed Spitamenes,
the descendant of Zarathustra, who valiantly led the Iranian resistance
against the Macedonian invaders. Indeed, the Iranian tradition that
remembers the “accursed Alexander” specifically mentions his killing of
Zoroastrian ritualists, i.e., Dasturs and Mobeds. On the other hand,
Alexander adopting Iranian customs after the conquest of their empire
might reflect the fact that he did eventual allow the restoration of
Zoroastrian rituals in Iran. Likewise, in India too while certain Hindu
sources close to the time (e.g. Yuga-purāṇa) remember the yavana-s as
barbarous, we also know that they eventually extensively adopted and
supported Hindu traditions in the so-called Indo-Greek kingdoms.

Thus, for a moment if we imagine a scenario where all alternative
narratives of the period of history under consideration were lost and
only the Šah-nāme survived then we would be left with a coherent
narrative that despite its historical kernel does not capture the actual
unfolding of events or relationships between the characters in it.
Hence, this is something important to bear in mind while trying to read
history in related epic narratives like the Mahābhārata — there is
likely a historical pith to the narrative but it might not represent the
actuality. This situation starkly comes to the fore as we move further
back in time with respect to the Iranic and Hindu epic traditions.
However, in both cases we are not entirely lost because we have the
parallel records, often from the older scriptural texts like the Veda
and the Avesta. We shall consider this by taking up the case of the clan
of Rostam in the Iranian epic tradition.

**The clan of Rostam and the intertwining of the Sakastana and main-line
Iranian traditions**  
Reading the Šah-nāme one will be left with little doubt that Rostam was
the greatest Iranian hero and that his clan consistently produced a
whole line of such heroes (and heroines). This is quite like the
Pāṇḍava-s in the Hindu national epic. Yet there is something
striking about this family: except for its legendary founder it finds no
mention at all in the Avesta, despite that text mentioning several
Iranian heroes and ritualists who in the Šah-nāme are associated with
the clan of Rostam. This strange situation closely parallels the
conundrum we encounter in Hindu tradition where, the Veda mentions
several Kuru-s, Pāñcāla-s and Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra, who appear in the
Mahābhārata but almost completely fails to mention its main heroes, the
Pāṇḍava-s.

Turning to the Avesta we see the following hero/ritualist figures who
also figure in the Šah-nāme under their New Persian names given in a
certain order that apparently reflects history: 1) Gaya Maretan (=SN:
Keyumars) the primordial puruṣa of the Iranian world. 2) Haošyanha
Paradāta (=SN: Hushang) the great ruler. 3) Takshma Urupi (=SN:
Tahmuras) the great warrior. 4) Yima Vaivanant Kshaeta (=SN: Jamshid).
5) The interlude of the demon Azi Dahāka (=SN: Zohak). 6) Thraetaona
Athwya (=SN: Feridun), who smites the Azi with his vazra (=SN: Gurz). 6)
Keresāspa (=SN: Garšasp) the gadā-wielding warrior. 7) The kavi-s. These
include among others Kavi Usan= (SN: Kay Us), Kavi Kavāta, Kavi Aipivohu
and Kavi Haosrava (=SN: Kay Khosraw). 8) Zarathuštra. 9) Vīštāspa.

Now one can see that several of these early characters are shared in
some form with the Hindus and mostly appear right from the RV onward: 1)
Gaya Amartya. 2) Yama Vaivasvata Kṣatriya. 3) Ahi Dāsa. 4) Trita Āptya
who, in the battles with the demons, assists Indra who wields the vajra.
5) Kṛśāśva, the “father” of the weapons. 6) Uśanas Kāvya. 7) Perhaps
Iṣṭāśva. Some of these are gods while other are demons and yet
others legendary men. These features along with their early appearance
in both Indian and Iranian tradition suggests that they belong to the
common Indo-Iranian past on the steppes.

What is notable is that neither this early Iranian nor the Hindu
tradition remembers Rostam or most of his clan with the exception of
Keresāspa, who is regarded as its founder in the Šah-nāme. In the early
Iranian tradition of the Avesta he is remembered as an enormously strong
man with his great gadā. He has a nearly semi-divine status (much like
in Viśvāmitra’s mention of him in the Rāmāyaṇa) and his fravashi (
![\\sim](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csim&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sim") pitṛ) is called upon by the Zoroastrians to protect them from
rapacious attackers or thieves. He also slays a dreaded Ganderewa (Skt:
Gandharva) who attacks the “good principle” in the world and several
other adversaries. Notably, he is given the epithet naire-manah, i.e. of
manly mind. This epithet becomes the name of his son Nariman in the
Šah-nāme. In the surviving Pahlavi exegesis and the Dēnkard, he is
termed Sāmān Kersāsp. Now, the epithet Sāmān is the name of his grandson
as per Šah-nāme. Thus, it appears that the epithets of the ancient hero
Keresāspa were used as names to provide a genealogy that connects Rostam
to Keresāspa. Despite his heroic stature, he is also mentioned as
sinning: as per the Pahlavi exegesis he worshiped images like the
Hindus, while the Bundahišn describes this as worship of daeva-s by
Sāmān. We suspect that behind these allusions lies a faint memory of
Keresāspa belonging to the layer of the “un-divided” old daiva religion
prior to Zarathuštra’s counter-religious modifications.

Thus, the Šah-nāme gives the lineage of Rostam as in Figure 1:

![Rostam1.png](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/rostam1.png?w=640)Figure
1. The figures are scaled according to their “importance” in the Iranic
epic traditions. Some of the more “apocryphal” descendants of Rostam and
his brother Zavāra are left out.

From Zāl onward we see considerable detail in the accounts of the
heroes/heroines of the clan. However, many of these details are ancient
mythic motifs. These include:  
![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") The romance of Zāl and Rūdāba. This encompasses classic
motifs of the hero winning a beautiful wife from the enemy side found in
many traditions. Specifically, it connects Zāl the Airya hero to Rūdāba
who has Azi Dahāka as her ancestor, thereby bringing in the demonic
element in the ancestry of the mighty hero Rostam. Her Hindu affinities
are hinted by her father bearing the name Mahārāja in an Iranic
transmutation. From an Iranian stand point the daeva-worshiper would be
affiliated with the entities like Azi Dahāka. Such pairings between the
“daiva” and the “dāsa” or “dānava” figures are seen across the IE
world.

![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") Zāl was born albino (c.f. Pāṇḍu) and was nursed by the
Garuḍa-like divine bird meregha Saēna (=Skt śyena; SN: Simorgh), who
gave him 3 of his feathers asking him to burn them whenever he needed
the bird’s assistance. Rūdāba was about to die while giving birth to
Rostam due his gigantic size. It was then that Zāl called for Simorgh
who taught him the cesarean procedure to save his wife and son: The bird
first asked Zāl to anesthetize his wife by giving her wine. Then it
asked him to perform the cesarean section and take out Rostam.
Post-surgery it revealed the herbs to heal her wound and the final
healing was achieved by the stroking of Rūdāba with the feathers of
Simorgh (see below). This Simorgh is mentioned as bearing the medicines
on his tree in the incantation to the god Rashnu:  
ýatcit ahi rashnvô ashâum upa avãm vanãm ýãm saênahe ýâ hishtaite
maidhîm zrayanghô vourukashahe ýâ hubish eredhwô-bish ýâ vaoce
vîspô-bish nãma ýãm upairi urvaranãm vîspanãm taoxma nidhayat  
Whether you, O holy Rashnu\! are on the tree of the eagle, that stands
in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha, that is called the tree of good
remedies, the tree of powerful remedies, the tree of all remedies, and
on which rest the seeds of all plants; we invoke (Yašt to Rashnu-17).

This is consistent with the bird’s role as the teacher of the medical
procedure to his protege Zāl and matches that of his cognate Garuḍa
Tārkṣya Ariṣṭanemi who possesses cures. In the Rāmāyaṇa, he cures
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa when they were paralyzed by Meghanāda’s poison
missile (see below) and Hindu tradition remembers the bird deity as the
teacher of the medicine deity Dhanvantari:  
nārāyaṇāṃśo bhagavān svayaṃ dhanvantari mahān ।  
purā samudra-mathane samuttasthau mahodadheḥ॥  
sarva-vedeṣu niṣṇāto mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ ।  
śiśyo hi vainateyasya śaṃkarasyośiśyakaḥ॥  
The great Dhanvantari is a part of Nārāyaṇa himself. Formerly, he arose
during the churning of the ocean. Learned in all the Veda-s and an adept
in mantra-s and tantra-s he is the student of Vainateya and an adjunct
student of Śankara.

![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") The conflict of Sohrab and Rostam. This famous episode is
replete with various motifs shared with the Mahābhārata. Rostam going to
the foreign land to acquire a woman (Tahmina) is reminiscent of Arjuna
going to the distant land to acquire Citrāṅgadā and Ulūpī. Tahmina
approaching Rostam by herself for a son is again parallel to the
approach of these Mahābhārata characters, especially Ulūpī. The
consequence of their intercourse is a son who does not recognize the
father but possesses similar martial ardor. They finally fight in an
encounter that results in the death of one of them. In the case Rostam
the son, Sohrab, is slain while Babhruvāhana slew Arjuna. In both cases
there is the possibility of revival with a magical panacea. In the case
of Arjuna that is obtained but Rostam fails to obtain it for Sohrab.
Finally, one could also point out that the setting of the death of
Sohrab at Rostam’s hand is in a great war and parallels the killing of
Karṇa by Arjuna. In this regard, it may be observed that Rostam gives
Tahmina an ornament to tie on their child before leaving her. This might
be compared to the ornaments which Karṇa obtained at birth from Sūrya.
In the case of Rostam, a similar incident again plays out with his other
son Farāmarz and his Amazonian warrior daughter Bānu Gošasb who fight
Rostam and his brother Zavāra. However, in this case they recognize each
other before anyone is killed.

These are just a few examples of some ancient motifs being woven into
the history of the clan of Rostam. The most striking part is that they
play out during the reign of the Kavi-s as kings of Iran. While the
Kavi-s are repeatedly mentioned in the Avesta not once are these
Rostamian heroes mentioned alongside them. Thus, it almost appears as
though they were superimposed on to the older history of the Kavi-s who
are now reconfigured as kings of Iran. The end of the reign of Kavi
Haosrava in the Šah-nāme bears a motif which is paralleled in the
Mahābhārata. At the end of his long reign Kavi Haosrava renounced his
kingdom for an ascetic existence and left for the mountains with 8
pahlavān-s. There their people beseech them not to leave the kingdom. Of
the 8 pahlavān-s Zāl, Rostam and Gutarza (Gōdarz) \[Footnote 2\] return
to the state. The remaining **5 pahlavān-s**, Ṭus, Gēv, Faribarz, Bizhan
and Gostaham continued with the Kavi until they reached a spring, where
he took a bath, chanted the Avesta, bade farewell to his friends and
vanished. The 5 pahlavān-s died shortly thereafter in the mountains in a
snowstorm while searching for Kavi Haosrava. This motif to our knowledge
is uniquely shared by the Indo-Iranians and is not found among other
IEans. It parallels the last journey of the Pāṇḍava-s to the great
mountain in Central Asia. 5 of them also die in the snowy mountains in
the Mahābharata but the emperor Yudhiṣṭhira reaches the realm of the
gods. On the Iranian side, Kavi Haosrava too does not die and awaits the
coming of the Saošyant-s (Iranian Kalkin-like figures) at the end of
time and assists them in those final days.

So where does the cycle of the Rostamians appear to enter Iranian
tradition? Rostam is traditionally associated with Sakastana. In
contrast, the Kavi-s being present in the Avesta itself can be
associated with the mainline Zoroastrian tradition in Iran. Thus, it
appears that the Iranian epic tradition of the Šah-nāme was formed by
the amalgamation of this mainline tradition with the Rostamian cycle
brought in by the Saka-s during their invasion of outer Asia and the
conquest the region that came to be known as Sakastana.

**Rostam, heroes in Hindu epics, and Bhīṣma**  
At first sight there is no reason to connect Rostam and Bhīṣma who
superficially appear to play rather distinct roles in their respective
epics. Indeed, some of the more overt features of Rostam can be
identified with other heroes in the Hindu epics. For instance, above we
mentioned the father-son killing motif shared with Arjuna. His
inheritance of “divine weapons” like the the bow of Keresāspa and vazra
Thraetaona Athwya remind one of Rāmacandra, the hero of the Rāmāyaṇa,
who obtained the weapons of Kṛśāśva via Viśvāmitra. His proficiency with
the vazra of Thraetaona Athwya, which is portrayed more like a gadā, his
strength and frame which are explicitly compared to an elephant, and his
elephant-killing capacity remind one of Bhīmasena. Indeed, his title in
the Iranian epic would be rendered in old Iranian as Takhma-tanu: mighty
bodied. Consistent with this, in the Šah-nāme Rostam is repeatedly
presented as lifting giant rocks. Again Rostam’s battle with the
powerful king Kok-e Kuhzād, who is said to rule the land between
Sakastana and India from a powerful mountain stronghold, resembles the
famous showdown between Bhīma and Jarāsaṃdha at his stronghold of
Girivraja.

However, a closer look reveals many specific parallels between Rostam
and Bhīṣma: In generic terms both of them are great warriors in the old
IE mold who are basically unconquerable. Neither of them could be killed
in a straight battle and certain tricks had to be used to finally kill
them (see below). Both are also very long-lived: Rostam’s life
encompasses the reigns of nearly all the Kavi-s. Similarly, the
pitāmahā’s life spans the entire period from Śaṃtanu all the way to
the time after Yudhiṣṭhira becomes king. Most interestingly, the name of
Rostam’s mother Rūdāba means river water. Rostam’s own name in the old
Iranian would have been \*Rautas-takhma: river-strong. This is a rather
strong homology to Bhīṣma who is the son of the goddess of the river
Gaṅgā. Both of them are dynastic guardians who never attempt to become
kings themselves though they might act as viceroys. Notably, in being
dynastic guardians both side with the less-deserving or the
less-legitimate successor to the throne. On the Hindu side, Bhīṣma
despite professing his love for the successors of Pāṇḍu stands firmly by
Duryodhana. On the Iranian side, Rostam with his circle of pahlavān-s
favor Kavi Haosrava on the throne as opposed to the legitimate heir
Faribarz.

Then there is their death: both had to be killed by a stratagem: In
Bhīṣma’s case it involved the use of Śikaṇḍin as the front with
Arjuna striking from behind. In the case of Rostam, the king of Kabul
used his jealous half-brother Shaghād borne of a slave woman to Zāl to
lead the former to his death. Zāl had sent Shaghād to live with his
tributary the king of Kabul because his ritualists had foretold that he
would bring destruction to his house. They hatched a plan to kill Rostam
by feigning a fight in course of which he had also insulted Rostam. Then
Shaghād went over to Rostam and asked him to attack the king of Kabul.
When Rostam and his full brother Zavāra arrived to attack Kabul, the
king claimed that he had accidentally misbehaved under the influence of
alcohol. The king then agreed for peace and asked Rostam and Zavāra to
join him in a hunt. In course of that Shaghād led Rostam to a trap which
they had set up — a pit full of spears. Rostam and his long-lived horse
fell into the pit and they were impaled through and through by the
spears. Somehow Rostam climbed out due to his great strength and fooled
Shaghād by saying that his end was at hand. Then he asked Shaghād to
correct his ways and lead a proper life with Rostam’s powerful son
Farāmarz. Thus, appearing to let him go, Rostam asked for his bow and
two arrows in case a wild animal came to eat him as he lay dying.
Shaghād gave them to him but still fearing him ran away and hid behind
a tree. Rostam though dying from being pierced all over shot an arrow to
transfix Shaghād to the tree; then he died. In the mean time his brother
Zavāra had also also fallen in another spear-filled pit and died.
Thereafter, Rostam’s son Farāmarz filled with wrath did an “Aśvatthāman”
by slaying the king of Kabul with his entire family and wiping out the
city.

Both Bhīṣma and Rostam are impaled all over by arrows or spears. Despite
that they do not die immediately. Instead, they linger on only to die
after they have either completed their final wishes. Thus, in both their
birth and death these long-lived warriors of the Indian and Iranian
worlds are united.

**Rostam and Esfandiyār**  
Esfandiyār, old Iranic Spentdāta, is presented in the epic literature as
the son of Vīštāspa, the patron of Zarathuštra. He was a holy warrior
enforcing Zarathuštra’s counter-religion and his brother, the
idol-breaking Pešōtanū, is said to be an immortal who would lead
Zoroastrians against their enemies at the end of time \[Footnote 3\]. In
the epic tradition, his father asked Esfandiyār to get Rostam bound in
chains for his disregard towards the king. Moreover, Rostam was a
follower of the older (ancestral I-Ir) religion and did not want his
people to submit to the counter-religion Vīštāspa was pushing for. In
this regard a parallel is again seen with Keresāspa the legendary
ancestor of Rostam, who is presented as sinning by following the
demonized old religion as opposed to the creed of Zarathuštra.

Esfandiyār told his father that a respectable and aged warrior like
Rostam should not be disgraced thus, especially given that he had
faithfully served the the kings of Iran. But at his father’s insistence
Esfandiyār, Pešōtanū and the former’s sons went to arrest Rostam.
Esfandiyār sent his son Bahman to ask Rostam to submit. He agreed to
come and see the king but refused to be put in chains. He also offered
to apologize to the king if he felt offended but firmly refused the idea
of being bound. Pešōtanū suggested to his brother to accept this deal
but Esfandiyār refused and challenged Rostam to combat. While the two
were locked in an evenly poised combat, Rostam’s brother Zavāra and his
son Farāmarz launched a counter-attack on Esfandiyār’s positions and
killed two of his sons, one of whom was apparently an Athravan. After a
prolonged fight Rostam’s mighty weapons failed to slay Esfandiyār but
the latter’s special arrows breached Rostam’s armor and severely wounded
him and his horse forcing him to retreat. It was at this moment he asked
his father Zāl for a strategy. Zāl called the great bird Simorgh (Av:
meregha Saēna) by burning one of the feathers it had given him
\[Footnote 4\]. The bird removed the 8 arrow-heads embedded in Rostam’s
flesh and soothed his wounds by stroking them with its feathers. It then
instructed Rostam to bind the wounds and stroke them with its feather
dipped in medicinal milk for a week for a complete a cure of Rostam and
also his horse. The bird was also displeased with Esfandiyār for he had
killed another eagle who was Simorgh’s associate \[Footnote 5\]. He then
revealed to Rostam the secret of slaying Esfandiyār. It asked Rostam to
make a double-headed arrow from the wood of the tamarisk tree and shoot
at his eyes with it. The bird then took him to a distant land to obtain
a branch of the tree and fashion the arrow. The next morning as the
fight resumed with much fury; Rostam shot this arrow and struck down
Esfandiyār.

However, Esfandiyār had a Zarathuštrian curse protecting him that
whoever is responsible for this death would suffer in this world and the
next. But Rostam told him that he should not be responsible because it
was his father who sent Esfandiyār to fight him despite knowing that he
would be slain by Rostam. Pešōtanū agreed that the blame was on Vīštāspa
and Esfandiyār for not accepting Rostam’s deal. Rostam then took care of
the upbringing and education of Esfandiyār’s surviving son Bahman.
However, once Rostam had died, Bahman remembered how the Sakastanian
herores had killed his father and brothers. Wanting revenge for this he
suddenly attacked Rostam’s son Farāmarz and killed him (In some versions
Zavāra survived the pit-trap and was also killed in this attack of
Bahman). He also caged Zāl and devastated their realm.

This narrative is replete with several notable motifs:  
![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") We see ancient IE motif of the “Achilles heel” in the form
of Esfandiyār’s eyes. More specifically, the vulnerability of Esfandiyār
is similar to that of the Germanic god Baldr, who is killed by Loki’s
plot by making the blind deity Höðr throw a spear or shoot an arrow made
of mistletoe (to which he was vulnerable) at him. There is an apparent
record of this motif among the Algonquin first Americans in the tale of
their deity Glooskap and his rival Malsum (claimed by some to also bear
the name Lox). Here Glooskap and Malsum had vulnerabilities to certain
plants and owl feathers and eventually Glooskap slew Malsum with a fern
root. While there has been a proposal that this motif might have been
transmitted to the Northern Germanics during their contact with the New
World, its presence among the Iranics suggests to a more ancient origin
(Assuming the tale collected by Leland from the Algonquin is genuine).

![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") The journey to a distant land to obtain the tamarisk tree
missile can be compared in the Hindu epic to Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa going to
the abode of Rudra to obtain the Pāśupata missile by means of which
alone Jayadratha could be killed. The curse protecting Jayadratha from
Vṛddhakṣatra can again be compared to that protecting Esfandiyār,
which was likewise deflected on to his father Vīštāspa.

![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") The feather motif: Zāl’s special connection to the great
bird the Simorgh comes to aid Rostam on at least two occasions — once
during his birth (see above) and again in this incident of his battle
with Esfandiyār. Now the use of the feather is a clear connection with
an ancient Indo-Iranian apotropaic ritual. On the Hindu side it is
specified in the Yajurveda as part of the famous Sautrāmaṇi ritual in
which the yajamāna is purified by the adhvaryu who strokes him with a
śyena (hawk or falcon) feather twice above the navel and once below
it:  
yā vyāghram̐ viṣūcikā । iti śyena-pattreṇa yajamānaṃ pāvayati ॥
Mānava-śrauta-sūtra 5.2.11.20

The mantra used in the process from the Maitrāyaṇi-saṃhitā is:  
yā vyāghraṃ viṣūcikobhau vṛkaṃ ca rakṣati ।  
śyenaṃ patatriṇaṃ siṃhaṃ semaṃ pātv aṃhasaḥ ॥  
My she, Viṣūcikā, who guards these two, the tiger and the wolf,  
The lion and the winged hawk, may she guard this man (the yajamāna) from
distress.  
A comparable ritual is also found in the Taittirīya-brāhmaṇa 2.6.1.5.

On the Iranian side we have comparable ritual in the Verethraghna Yašt
(34-35):  
verethraghnem ahuradhâtem ýazamaide  
We offer sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

peresat zarathushtrô ahurem mazdãm:  
ahura mazda mainyô spênishta dâtare gaêthanãm  
astvaitinãm ashâum ýat bavâni aiwi-sastô aiwi-shmaretô  
pouru-narãm tbishyañtãm cish ainghe asti baêshazô.   
Zarathuštra asked Ahura Mazda:  
“O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent mind, creator of the material world,  
you O holy one\! If I have a curse upon me, a spell cast upon me  
by the many men who hate me, what is the medicine for it?”

âat mraot ahurô mazdå: merekhahe peshô-parenahe vâreñjinahe parenem
ayasaêsha spitama zarathushtra, ana parena tanûm aiwi-sifôish ana parena
hamerethem paiti-sanghaêsha.  
Ahura Mazda answered: “Take a feather of that bird with a wide wingspan,
the Varenjina bird, O Spitama Zarathuštra\! With that feather you should
stroke your own body; with that feather you should back-hurl the spell
to the enemies.”

![\\bullet](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cbullet&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\bullet") Finally, we have specific point regarding the eagle-feather
motif: the eagle helps Rostam in specie against the wounds of a
difficult to repulse missile and does so by removing the arrow-heads and
the stroking him with its feathers. This motif occurs in a rather
similar form in the Rāmāyaṇa. There, the fierce rakṣas hero Meghanāda
strikes the Ikṣvāku brothers with his nāga arrows. Riddled with
Meghanāda’s arrows the two fall unconscious on the field. They were
then healed by Garuḍa by stroking them with his wings and their power is
doubled as a consequence:

śara-jāla-ācitau vīrāv ubhau daśaratha ātmajau ।  
śara-talpe mahātmānau śayānāu rudhirokṣitau ॥ (R 6.50.3)  
The two mighty valiant sons of Daśaratha enmeshed in a web of arrows are
lying bleeding on a bed of arrows.

tato muhūrtad garuḍam vainateyam mahā balam ।  
vānarā dadṛśuḥ sarve jvalantam iva pāvakam ॥  
Then, all the monkeys saw in a moment Garuḍa, the son of Vinatā, of
great strenght like a blazing fire.

tam āgatam abhiprekṣya nāgās te vipra-dudruvuḥ ।  
yais tau sat puruṣau baddhau śara bhūtair mahā-balau ॥  
Beholding him \[the great eagle arrive\], the snakes, which having
become great arrows had bound those two strong men, fled.

tataḥ suparṇaḥ kākutsthau dṛṣṭvā pratyabhinandya ca ।  
vimamarśa ca pāṇibhyām mukhe candra-sama-prabhe ॥  
Thereupon, the eagle, having seen the two Kākutstha heroes offered them
his good wishes, and with his wings stroked their faces that were
radiant like the moon.

vainateyena saṃspṛṣṭās tayoh samruruhur vraṇāḥ ।  
suvarṇe ca tanū snigdhe tayor āśu babhūvatuḥ ॥ 6.50.36-39  
Their wounds, stroked by the son of Vinatā were healed. Their bodies
quickly regained color and became smooth again.

**Some concluding remarks**  
What is the significance of these mythic motifs for actual history of
the Indo-Europeans? Archaeogenetics has finally offered us a framework
for early IE history barring that of the Anatolian branch, which still
remain somewhat mysterious. This is not the place to recount that in any
great detail but briefly: It appears that the early phase of IE
tradition corresponds to the Mikhaylovka culture starting around 3600
BCE in the Pontic–Caspian steppes north of the Black and the Caspian
Seas. This culture had expanded considerably across the steppes by
around 3300 BCE as the famous Yamnaya culture which likely spoke PIE
(whether ancestor Anatolian was included remains unclear). Starting
around 3000 BCE, PIE was starting to breakup into diverging dialects and
the first to split was the eastern branch leading to the Afanasievo
culture. This is probably the precursor of the Tocharian branch of IE.
Subsequently, the Yamnaya culture spread westwards and acquired
differing degrees genetic contribution from the earlier European
residents who themselves were an admixture of western hunter-gatherers
and west Asian/Anatolian farmers. This westward spread probably marks
the split of the early western Kentum dialects that led to Germanic, and
Italo-Celtic.

A population with the above European admixture likely moved backwards to
give rise to the Satem branches which then split up into Indo-Iranian
and Balto-Slavic by at least 2700 BCE. These were represented by the
successor cultures of the Yamnaya like the Poltavka. Studies in the past
4 years have shown that a male individual dated from 2925-2536 BCE from
the Poltavka culture bore the same Y-chromosome haplogroup as the
Indo-Aryans of India (R1a-Z93). It is hence likely that the Poltvaka or
similar cultures in the general middle Volga zone represent the
ancestral populations from which the Indo-Iranians expanded. We hold
that the early layer in the Vedic texts contain material from this
period with clear memories of the even earlier PIE period (The exact
scenario involves some complexities and will not be elaborated here).
The proto-Greeks and probably the proto-Armenians (who were part of the
kentum radiations) were also likely in the vicinity of this and
interacted with these early Indo-Iranians. Subsequently, the
Indo-Iranians expanded in two major stages eventually reaching their
historical homelands. The earliest of these expansions is seen in the
archaeological record as the Sintashta culture. The detection of the
cognate word of Skt marya (a young man/warrior) in tablet from Tell
Leilān in Syria dating 1800-1700 BCE suggests that their thrust into
Outer Asia had begun by then. From the recently published genetic
evidence, it appears that a massive military force of Indo-Aryans
invaded the Indian subcontinent sometime around 1900-1700 BCE after
quickly outflanking the Central Asian Bactria-Margiana complex and
quickly conquered northern India to found the first Indo-Aryan states in
the region. The so called Kassite records of Indo-Aryan deities suggest
that smaller forces of Indo-Aryans were also active in West Asia where
they even formed the elite of the Mitanni kingdom between 1600-1400 BC.
The Iranian Aryans appear to have invaded Iran only later and are
attested in Elamite records via words like Ašbayauda (horse-warrior).

Given this background, we suspect that the motif an apocalyptic war,
which is common to several branches of Indo-European was something that
emerged in the PIE tradition. It goes without saying that the early
IEans were a warlike people. It is conceivable that their initial
expansions marking the breakup of PIE was accompanied by internal wars
among the early IE elite. Likewise, their expansions that followed
brought them into intense conflict with other alien groups — traces of
these are even seen in the archaeogenetic evidence. This probably gave
rise to 2 epic motifs, namely that of the fight “within the family” and
the battle with hostile aliens which might have involved abduction of
women. Now, one may see these motifs were at the heart of the
proto-itihāsa-s of the IE people. They were then reused in the
narrations of various historical battles that the different branches
fought far from their original homeland in their new homelands like
India or Greece or Western Europe.

The weight of the evidence suggests that there was a fairly protracted
period of an undivided Indo-Iranian period (probably
![\\sim](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csim&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sim") 500 years). In this period they probably continued to interact
to a degree with the sister śatam branches (Balto-Slavic) and also the
precursors of the Greco-Armenians resulting in some sharing of specific
traditions. It is conceivable that the motifs such as the “river-born”,
long-lived warrior emerged in this period and was woven into the later
epics of both the Iranian and Hindu traditions. While these motifs were
perhaps of early Indo-Iranian origin, we do see fainter echoes in the
Greek tradition. For instance, Achilles is “made strong” by the River
Styx, even as Rostam is “river-strong”. While motifs like the great
eagle deity are probably of PIE or even earlier vintage \[Footnote 6\],
it likely developed specific elements in this undivided Indo-Iranian
period.

Admittedly, the Iranian epics are late and hardly pristine in their
preservation. Yet, they illustrate an important process in
epic-building, namely the weaving of narratives from different periods
into a completely consistent yet anachronistic end-product. We posit
that a similar process has been at work in the Mahābhārata, albeit at a
much earlier time. This brought together the heroes of multiple
Indo-Aryan traditions into a single whole, with the Pāṇḍava-s being
superimposed onto the earlier Kuru-Pāñcāla epic. It is notable that even
on the Iranian side we have at least three distinct elements being
melded: the heroes of the undivided I-Ir period like Kṛśāśva, the heroes
of the Zoroastrian counter-religious movement and the Sakastanian
tradition around the clan of Rostam. It is notable that in some
narratives there is clear memory of the religious strife between the
Zoroastrian partisans and various adherents of the older religion, which
include the clan of Rostam. However, overtime the latter were brought
into the Zoroastrian fold and presented as champions of that
counter-religious tradition. For example, in the Farāmarz-nāme we have
Farāmarz debate with brāhmaṇa-s in India, convert them to Zoroastrianism
and make forsake the worship of images of daeva-s.

Similarly, we propose that in India the Pāṇḍava-s who originally
represented a secondary invasionary wave who overthrew the old Kuru-s,
were subsequently presented as legitimate successors of the Kuru-s at
Hastināpura. We also suspect that some of the heroic elements of the
Sakastanian epic cycle and the Mahābhārata draw from a common tradition
that simultaneously interacted with both the Iranian and Indo-Aryan
mainlines. In this regard we may bring attention to the Pārataraja-s who
founded a kingdom between
![\\sim](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csim&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sim") 125-300 CE in the region neighboring Sakastana in what’s today
Balochistan. The names of their rulers include among other wise
typically Iranic names (e.g. \*Yodamithra, \*Bagamithra,
\*Mithra-takhma) also names of the Pāṇḍava-s — Arjuna and Bhīmārjuna.
This points to a tradition of honoring the Pāṇḍava-s even among these
Iranic groups.

Finally, we may note that Iranicists like Gazerani and Pourshariati see
the mark of much later history from the time of the rise of the
Parthians in the epics of the Sakastanian heroes. They note that the
powerful family of Surena, which played a central role in the great
Parthian victory against the Romans led by Marcus Crassus, claimed
descent from the clan of Rostam. This is indeed conceivable for certain
narratives; however, we hold that the core narrative of the Sakastanian
heroes is still of a much older period which was brought by the Sakas
and Parthians (Pahlavān-s). Where we see this later narrative being
superimposed onto to the earlier epic is in the likely Iranic memory of
the foundation of the Pallava dynasty in southern India. We know from
the Andhra inscriptions that their kings referred to their Parthian
adversaries as Pallava-s. In the Iranic epic of Shahriyār we learn of
the account of Sohrāb’s descendants. In course of his wanderings Rostam
fought with Sohrāb’s son Barzu but learnt of his identity and brought
him back to his land. Barzu had a son named Shahriyār, who eventually
had a conflict with his cousins descending from Farāmarz. Furious over
this he decided to leave Sakastana for India. He first went to Kashmir
but the king of Kashmir was related to Farāmarz’s family by marriage and
was his ally. Hence, he proceeded further to southern India towards the
island of Sarandip (Shri Lanka) where he married the daughter of the
Hindu king Arjang. He aided Arjang in his many battles, killed a demon
called Sagsar, and later ascended the throne after his father-in-law.
Whether a recent descendant of Rostam came to India in “real” history
remains is hard to test. Nevertheless, it is entirely likely that that
Iranics who founded the Pallava dynasty in south India were from
Surena’s clan and thus claimed descent from Rostam. Hence, a memory of
their settling in Southern India was likely superimposed back into the
epic narratives of their old heroes.

-----

Footnote 1: When we say Aindra we do not mean that the deity under the
name Indra was present among the ancestral IEans. It merely means that
Indra represents the Hindu reflex of an ancestral IE deity who was his
cognate. In the rest of this account we shall use similar terms for
other deities with proto-IE cognates, like Viṣṇu.

Footnote 2: Gutarza (Gōdarz) is believed by some to be the Parthian king
Gutarza Gēvaputhra of history superimposed backwards into the age of the
Kavi-s. We are not certain of this hypothesis. It is notable that Gēv is
the husband of Rostam’s daughter Bānu Gošasb and the father of another
Rostamian hero Bizhan. His name appears as the father of that of the
historical Gōdarz and is at odds with the Šah-nāme.

Footnote 3: This is laid out in the Zoroastrian text known as the Zand i
Wahman Yasn where in a Kalkin-like showdown he would be assisted by the
deities Mithra, Rashnu, Sraosha and Verethraghna in an idol- and
temple-smashing spree against the daeva worshipers.

Footnote 4: From the Farāmarz-nāme we learn that this ritual involved
burning a piece of the feather with the agarwood, i.e. Skt Aguru, which
is also used a fragrant material burnt in the ritual to the
Ucchuṣma-Rudra-s specified in the Atharvaveda-pariśiṣṭha. It is also
widely used in Hindu medicine.

Footnote 5: This attack on the holy bird is also an indication of the
clash between the religion of Sakastanian heroes like Zāl, Rostam and
Farāmarz, who are repeatedly helped by the great Saēna and the partisans
of Zarathuštra.

Footnote 6: Probably, this developed from the observation of eagle
taking back pharmacologically active plants to their nests.
