+++
title = "Armies of Islam"

+++
There are some striking aspects of the different armies of Islam field
in course of the 14 centuries of Jihad against the Kaffrs and Dhimmis.
The first army of Islam, that of the Arabs, met with rapid somewhat
surprising success. It ran through the Sassanian empire in no time and
then expanded rapid in the East towards India, in the North East towards
Central Asia, the West towards the Christian Roman empire and south
towards Africa. The Sassanians fell completely and rather rapidly in
Iran to the Islamic Jihad. The campaigns of Abu Muslim and Qutaiba ibn
Muslim in central Asia were also widely successful. In the battle of
River Talas the Arabs met with a great success against the Chinese army.
In Palestine they were successful against the Christian Roman empire
(Byzantines). In North Africa they devasted the Christian and pagan
states and then invaded Spain and Portugal and conquered huge swaths of
Christian southern Europe. Against the Hindus in India they met with
considerable success in the Sindh province.

632: Pagans of Arabia destroyed and the Arabian peninsula is conquered.

637: The Moslems seized Syria from the Christian Byzantines and drove
them out of the Middle East.

638: Palestine is seized from the Christians.

641: Egypt is taken.

649: Arab navy defeats Christians to take Cyprus.

651: Iran is completely defeated and conquered after 15 years of
fighting.

714: Central Asia- Sogdhiana and Transoxiana is conquered by the Islamic
Jihad after 10 years of savage attacks.

711: Conquest of North Africa completed.

712: Arabs defeat the Hindu armies in Sindh and conquer parts of it.

715: Southern Europe- Spain and Portugal are taken after the Christian
Goths are defeated.

751: The Chinese Army is defeated in the battle of Talas

This period of 120 years can be considered the period of true success of
the Arabic Army of Islam. The Jihad of the Arabs was wildly successful
in this period regularly defeating armies of most of the major
civilizations of the old world. This string of successes against very
different adverseries is actually pretty surprising because after this
the Arabs more or less underwent a stagnation and faded out as a
military military power of note. After their intial string of
spectacular successes their attempts their thrusts were blunted in most
directions by several defeats. In Europe, the Franks stopped the Islamic
advance in the famed battle of Tours. Byzantium withstood all further
attacks despite the siege of the capital by Caliph Sulaiman. In India
the Karkotakas, Chahamanas, Pratiharas and Chalukyas repeatedly repulsed
many Arab attempts and prevented any further depredations on India. In
Central Asia the last remnants of the Gok Turks and later the Uighur
Khanate defeated the Arabs and prevented any further encroachment. These
defeats are as striking as the initial expansions, especially given that
after that the Arabs ceased to be a major military force.

We speculate that the initial Arab success was actually a remarkable
combination of chance events that resulted in many of the great
civilization of the Old World going through a simultaneous trough that
allowed the Arabs to explode unhindered in all directions. But soon
there after the Arabs had spread themselves thin and started facing
counter-pressure from all sides. As a result they slowly faded away but
the meme of Islam had infected a large number of native populations who
later feed the new rounds of the Jihads. One of the most important of
the people who were infected by the meme of Islam were the Altaic
peoples, who were later to out do the Arabs in disseminating Islam. The
other major set of people infected by the meme of Islam who have been
dominant in its rampages of recent time are the ex-Hindus of greater
India.

The lesson to be learnt from this for the modern situation is that the
power centers of Islam may be destroyed but the Islamic meme can
continue to infect and build up new armies for new Jihads, especially
coupled with the rapid reproduction. The Jihad in greater India is run
by locals infected by the meme. Europe will be an interesting situation
to watch out for the spread of the meme.
