+++
title = "Mythologists"

+++
So impressed was Jung by the mental patients that he believed the
origins of myth lay in mental disease. With this conclusion Jung set
rolling many a modern western critique of myth. The first sterile
offshoot was that of Freud, whose own ‘diseased mind’ produced certain
unfalsifiable constructs that he used to deconstruct myth. Freud’s many
successors live in a certain dark world where the light of scientific
practice has still not shone. There was Frazer who noticed the
omnipresence of several motifs in the mythosphere thus formulating the
raw material for studying the raw materials for the origins and
evolution of myth. Campbell who while furthering these motifs fell to
the falacies of Freud in attempting explanations- as in his eerie book:
the hero with a thousand faces. Dumezil saw the importance of the
evolutionary principle: Basically myths evolve through duplication,
divergence and recombination from ancestral motifs. Von Dechend and
Santillana saw the importance of the underlying cosmological models that
are contained within the language of myth. They defined a few great
seeds that inspired some of the most persistant motifs of the
mythosphere. Staal and his successors restored neo-Jungism (though
avoiding any direct association with the old Germanic- after all he was
too tainted in his associations and his modern imitators need to sound
modern). Mental disease was indeed the well-springs of the archetype of
myth.  
  
Once I mused in the midst of my despicable plebeian band:  
  
“The cytoskeletal kinase LimK1, which is downstream of the protein
neuregulin is mutated and you have Williams syndrome. These unlucky
souls see everything, even highly mundane objects, in a highly
anthropomorphic form and exhibit hypersocial behavior\!”

Neo-Jungians believe here in lies the impetus for the mythic archetype:
The primitive myth-making human as a borderline case of mental disease
(Then verily the Hindus were in this state of mental disease until
pretty recently they might slyly add).

Nevertheless, what the case of Williams syndrome illustrates is that
there is a mental template for the form myths may assume. For this we
discard certain recent pronouncements on the topic and seek the
following for the grand synthesis of the understanding of myth:  
  
1\) The evolutionary aspect: divergence and recombination from an
ancestor through replication.  
  
2\) Do convergent myths arise repeatedly due to constraints of neural
architecture.  
  
3\) What is the role in external inspiration on myth:1) was it a
repeated seed. 2) was it a repeated reinforcement of the ancestral myths
diverging away.  
  
4\) What is the role of internal inspiration: the neural architecture
(including the aspect of brain disease) was a mere reinforcement or a
repeated generator.  
  
We need to synthesize these points into an explanative model.
