+++
title = "The snake of viShNu"

+++
Upon the great snake shesha sleeps the great god viShNu, even as the the
kalpa wears out. He stirs only when the waters rise and threaten to sink
the world plane. This shesha is time and hence he is called ananta.
Thus, when viShNu sleeps on the coils of the great world snake he is
experiencing the cyclic passage of time.

Once the great god vAyu and the world snake ananta had a contest of
strength. shesha wound around the mount meru around which the world
revolves and vAyu was supposed to dislodge the snake from the great
mountain. The efforts of mAtarishvan to dislodge the great snake proved
futile for a long time eventhough the world shook with his terrible
gusts. Then in fury he uprooted the mount meru snake and all and hurled
the mountain with great ferocity. Under the impact of vAyu’s blow, meru
shattered and ananta lost his grip and surrendered. With meru shattered
the world shook and had no axis. The deva viShNu then stabilized the
shattered meru it with his foot.

Versions of this tale are persistantly narrated in the local puraNas
associated with viShNu shrines and also the garuDa purANa. This is
remarkable example of the fact of precession being preserved in the
language of myth. viShNu is a predominantly precessional deity. All his
five early incarnations contain the precessional motifs that were
uncovered by Santillana and von Dechend in The Hamlet’s Mill.

1\) matsya. The deluge represents the sinking of the old equinoctical
constellations below the equatorial plane- that is sinking of the world
plane below water. It is revived by the viShNu as the fish which
provides the new world axis in the form of its immense horn.

2\) kurma. The meru is used as a churning rod by the devas and the
asuras and the same snake ananta or vAsuki as the churning rope. The rod
meru, is the classic world axis of Hindu myth and the snake is the
cyclic time. The great rod slips, much to the consternation of the
devas, when viShNu assuming the form of a turtle stabilizes the meru
mountain and allows the cosmic churn to continue. This again represents
the slipping of the axis by precession.

3\) varAha. The world plane sinks again below water (that is the
equinoctical plane sinking due to precession) and is restored by viShNu
as varAha. The boar brings back a new equinoctical plane.

4\) nR^isiMha. The world axis is called the skambha, as praised in the
great hymn of the atharvans. nR^isiMha emerges from the shattered pillar
at the end of the kalpa. It occurs at the twilight zone (neither day nor
night) between the inner and outer zones of the palace of hiraNyakashipu
(neither in nor out). This again represents the loss of the world axis
(the pillar) and the transitional zone between two equinoctical
constellation during precession.

5\) vAmana. Here viShNu with the 3 steps secures the 3 scaffolds with
which the ancients concieved the world axis: 1) the zenith segment 2)
the nadir segment and 3) the zone formed by the tilt in the axis- the
celestial tropics.

Thus, the snake shesha coiled around meru represents the path of cyclic
time around the around the world axis, and the shaking of the axis by
vAyu the precessional shifts of the axis. Likewise the Hindu mythic
image of vAsuki supporting the earth is a symbolic representation of the
cyclic time around the world axis.

The language of myth has indeed preserved one of the most primal
astronomical discoveries of the ancient humans and Hindus verily retain
the most vivid memories of it. It is, hence, not surprising that the
Vedic astronomers were able to carry out successful calendrical reform
stretching from punarvasu in the hazy past to bharaNi-ashvayuja in the
late vedic period. In face of this it is certain that those Indologists
who doubt the antiquity of the Vedic texts are afflicted by an incurable
mental ailment.
