+++
title = "The bleak winter evening"

+++
I was standing alone in the railway station in the bleak winter air.
There was not a single sound and the air hung eerily as though weighed
down by the cold. Suddenly the air quivered with the fluttering of a
pigeon’s wings as it made its roostward retreat and then there was
silence again- the shakuna\! The sun sunk on the pashchima mayukha,
leaving behind the gloaming and the azure depths of dyaus turned inky
dark. There was a sharp cry of the wind, reminiscent of the howl of The
god (sa devaH). The shadows of the stones in the cemetery beyond grew
rapidly even as the the last beams of the dusk retreated. They seemed to
transform into the agents of the lord of the animals. “oM yo vai rudraH
sa bhagavAn yashcha mR^ityus tasmai vai namo namaH” 

The roar of a ratha broke my reverie. Hayastanika called out to me to
board the ratha. The irony that surrounds every encounter with the
rAShTrI suddenly struck me. “That flow of karma cannot be countered.
Even the fierce viShNu had to assume the dashAkR^itiH.” Hayastanika of
fervid energy and deed, declared that she needed to imbibe a chaShaka of
mAdvi pAna before doing anything further. I dreaded her driving the
ratha after the vAruNi got to her, but acquiesed silently and proceeded.
As ever she was unfazed by the pot of vAruNi and instead seemed as
though she drunk the soma that her very ancient ancestors may have once
imbibed on the steppes of Azerbaijan. Soon we were speeding to the
dwellings of R and Marc with the great bull and the mothers of skanda
rising beyond the pUrva mayUkha. There there was throng of people in
festive celebration. A lot of clatter of vessels and tongues filled the
air in contrast to the dim silence of the station. For a while we
returned to the favorite object of our chatter: each of our exploits in
chemistry lab. In this respect we seemed have had remarkable
coincidences at the same times in our lives- throwing that block of
sodium into water on the rainy day; making picric acid or silver
acetylides etc. With the kids engrossed in their play, and the more
prying adults captivated by the discussion on the vicissitudes of their
fiduciary games, we retreated to the basement.

Hayastanika suggested that we ply the planchette. So we were at it
shortly thereafter. I asked a particularly appropriate question. The
coin seemed to stop after spelling out l-o-m. The left eyelid throbbed.
I wonder what that means?
