+++
title = "Dravidianism"

+++
I believe that the Dravidian movement must be seen in a certain
contextual framework.

Firstly, we must note that the Indians faced something unprecedented
with the dawn of the British Raj. In areas where the British were
prominent before the war of 1857, the indoctrination of covert Christian
ideals and English superiority was underway for a while. After 1857 it
spread all over the country. The Indians faced with this indoctrination
reacted regionally in various ways. In Bengal we saw the internalization
of Christian thought in the Brahmo movement. In the Panjabi belt we saw
the rise of the Arya Samaj, a peculiar reaction to the British criticism
of Hindu practices. In Maharashtra the Prarthana Samaj arose, which in
some ways tried reformist practices parallel to Arya Samaj and Brahmo.
The British at the same time were watching these reactions. They tacitly
encouraged some like Brahmo that they saw as preparing the Indians for
Brown Sahibdom and ultimate conversion to Christianity. In Bengal we
have the tale of Mr Dutt who epitomizes the case of how a man softened
by Brahmo becomes a Christian and migrates to England to be a Pucca
Sahib (and the tragic tale of his remarkable daughter Toru Dutt who made
a Malhotran U-turn back to the Hindu fold in very adverse conditions in
her brief life is also of interest). The British also noted that the
natural leaders of Hindu society, the Brahmins were organizing a variety
of revivalist efforts and held tremendous influence over the native
population. Like the Moslem tyrants who preceded them, the Britons
realized that the key to controling India was storming the “fortress of
Brahminism”. Thus encouraged anti-Brahminical reactions by planting
missionary propagandists and by using the newly enforced ideas of
Maculayian education for the “unwashed natives”.

The result was a plethora of anti-Brahmin movements throughout
Hindustan. For example, in Maharashtra, we saw Jyotiba Phule’s
Christian-instigated anti-Brahmin movement, later leading to the largely
anti-national Ambedkar movement. The British also de-contextualized
brahminical law books and tried to deftly paint the image that the true
cause of the ills of the Hindu society was the Brahmin, and that the
Britons were the liberators. Many brahmins too internalized this message
and reacted in diverse ways. Some tried to rebutt the British charge
while retaining their conservative position- e.g. Tilak. Others tried to
go in for reform and downplay the role caste in a new Hindu social
system (E.g. the Brahminical supporters of the Arya Samaj). The British
also encouraged atheism to dilute the bonds of Hindu dharma amongst the
Indians. In Tamil Nad there was a special situation. The Tamil language
with a distinctive history of its own was a very dominant force. The
efforts of the Brahmin UV Svaminatha Iyer and some upper caste tamils
was reviving the lost history of Tamil’s ancient literary past. These
were generating something vague but still tangible as a Tamil identity.

The British saw an opportunity in it, and introduced the idea of the
Tamil as a culturally distinct Dravidian, who had been subjugated by the
Aryan Brahmin (remember in the Tamil country the Brahmins still retained
their old ethnonym derived from the Prakrit form of Arya). This became
the rallying point for the local anti-Brahmin movement. Ambedkar’s
flawed belief of the non-distinct origin of the Aryans ironically
prevented him from resorting to this line in his anti-Brahminical
movement further north. Telugu, Kanada and Malayalam’s direct and
persistant Sanskrit influence also prevented these linguistic regions
from buying into the British construct in its entirity. So the
Anti-Brahminism was somewhat limited. The anti-Brahmin movements of
Tamil Nad combined with the atheisitic movements also encouraged by the
British and we saw the birth of the Dravidian movement and its first
political incarnation the Justice party.

The nature of the Dravidian movement from inception was Anti-national in
addition to anti-brahminical. So it was extensively aided by the
British. Naicker had said that Aug 15th should be observed as a date of
mourning. Karuna and Anna brought it more in line with the mainstream
politics of the newly formed Indian nation, but continued to concentrate
on their pet projects of anti-Brahminism, anti-Sanskrit and anti-Hindi.
