+++
title = "The battle of Talas"

+++
Reviewing the battle of Talas one of the most defining moments in
Asiatic history is worthwhile because the same explosive mix continues
to dominate Central Asia. We have to learn many military lessons from
the battle of Talas for a scenario like that is still likely to be
useful to unravel Chinese war machine.

In the space of 740-750 CE a numbers of events of importance transpired
in Central Asia. The Moslems from Merv and Khorasan grouped under Abu
Muslim and marched on the Umayyad Kalif and having routed him placed the
Abbasid Kalif as the head of the Moslem world. Shortly after that, Abu
Muslim was commissioned to conduct Jihad in Central Asia to exterminate
the Kaffirs once and for all. It was a great low point for the Western
branch of the Blue Turks. Their great Khan Su-lu who was a bulwark
against the Moslems and the Chinese in the wars of 720 and 723, was
killed in an internecine conflict. The pagan Turkic rulers of Samarqand
and Bokhara came under a heavy assault from the ghazis after the fall of
Su-lu when the Arabs with 300 giant trebuchets stormed the cities and
forcibly imposed Islam with the destruction of the pagan places of
worship. Archaeological evidence shows that these Turkic cities were
cosmopolitan with Buddhism, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism and the Tengri
cults of the Altaics being practiced. The Chinese in the meantime
eliminated a major rival of the Moslems, the Tibetans in a combined
operation with the Hindu led by lalitAdiya by smashing them in a 749 CE
and reducing them to vassalage. The pagan Turkic ruler of Tashkent,
known as the Tudun, was repeatedly pressured by the Chinese to pay
tributes to the T’ang emperor of China. The Uighurs in the mean time
became the most powerful Turko-Mongol group in the east and pushed the
Qarluq turks westwards. The Qarluqs remained the masters of the
territory just west of the Balkash lake.

The Chinese appointed the Korean general Kao Sien-chih to enforce the
Chinese rule in central Asia and if possible seize Baltistan, Gilgit and
Wakhan from the emperors of Kashmir. Kao marched right across the Pamirs
and capture the Baroghil pass. This allowed him to led a direct assault
on Gilgit, take its chief hostage, and reduce it to Chinese vassalage.
shrI ma\~Ngala, the king of Kunduz was battling a Tibetan invading
force, when Kao promised him aid but betrayed him once the former had
beaten the Tibetans. Kao arrested him after pretending to come to sign a
treaty with his large Chinese army. Kao to show his might as the Chinese
viceroy of Central Asia, marched suddenly on Tashkent and seized the
city in 750 AD. He beheaded the Tudun and appropriated the treasury of
Tashkent, marking the pinnacle of Chinese imperialist hegemony. The
Turkic Tudun’s son shaken by the Chinese advance, fled to his cousins,
the Qarluqs, and sought their aid against the imperial T’ang army. The
Qarluq Yagbhu having built his cavalry over the winter of 750 CE started
moving his horde towards the Talas River from the northern bank. The
Arabs under Abu Muslim, who later claimed to be prophet in a similar
vein as the founder of the Ahamadiya cult, savagely crushed, the last
attempt made by the populations of Samarqand and Bokhara to rid
themselves of the murderous Ghazis. Abu Muslim sent his victorious
commander of these wars, Ziyad ibn Salih, with a band of 40000 ghazis,
to wage a Jihad on the Chinese. The Arab army marched from the south
towards Talas. Kao, itching to prove his might took the cue and marched
towards Aulie-Ata on the Talas with 100,000 Chinese troops in cavalry
and infantry divisions. He totally underestimated the strength of the
Qarluq horde closing in from the north.

On July 10th 751 AD the Qarluq, Arab and Chinese armies took to the
field in Aulie-Ata. The Chinese cavalry seemed to initially overwhelm
the Arab cavalry, but the Qarluqs forded the river and encircled a part
of the Chinese infantry butchering it to man. The Qarluq archers then
shot down Kao, shaking the Chinese center, which was rapidly assaulted
by the Arab heavy cavalry and destroyed. The infallible Chinese war
machine gave way under combined assault and they faced a heavy rout. The
Qarluqs fell upon their animals, baggage trains and supplies carrying
away all they could and receded back into the steppe. The Arabs rounded
up tens of thousands of Chinese and took them to Samarqand from where
Abu Muslim sent them to Baghdad and Damascus to be sold as slaves, each
worth a dirham. One Chinese survivor mentions being kept as cattle in
the Arab prison camps. Abu Muslim and ibn Ziyad made huge financial
gains out of this slave trade and used it to pay their armies. More
importantly the Arabs forced the Chinese prisoners to teach them paper
making this allowed them the spread the Q’uran, with even greater
effectiveness. The same year the Southern division of the T’ang Army
faced a disastrous defeat at the hands of the Thais, opening the once
mighty empire for invasion by the Uighur Kha’Khans of Mongolia.
