+++
title = "Rules for ritual eligibility"

+++
There is considerable debate about who is eligible for vedic rites. The
shrauta sUtras, which are the authorities on the topic are quite clear
about the matter, barring a few debatable points. kAtyAyana expounds
these matters most clearly:  
  
1.1.1 athAto.adhikAraH  
  
Now we shall explain the eligibility for performing vedic rites.  
  
1.1.2 falyuktAni karmANi  
  
The rites are connected with specific results.  
  
1.1.3 sarveShAMvisheShAt  
  
Prima facie everyone is entitled vedic rites as no specification has
been made in this regard.  
  
1.1.4 manuShyANAM vA .arambhasAmarthyAt  
  
By this it is meant that only humans who are capable of such actions are
eligible.  
  
1.1.5 a\~NgahInA .ashrotriya-ShaNDa-shudra-varjaM  
  
Individuals with defective bodies, untrained in the vedas,
hermaphrodites and shudras are excluded. \[For shudra exceptions see
below\]  
  
1.1.6 brAhmaNa-rAjanya-vaishyAnAM shruteH  
  
The brahmins, kShatriyas and vaishyas are known to be eligible.  
  
1.1.7 strI chA .avisheShAt  
  
As there is no specification otherwise women are also eligible.  
  
1.1.8 darshanAchcha  
  
The above is true as it is seen in actual practice. The commentator
cites TS 6.1.3 as the authority for this clause: “mekhalayA yajamAnaM
dIkShayati yoktreNa patnIM”  
  
1.1.9 rathakArasyA .adhAne  
  
A person of the chariot maker class may set up the sacrificial fires for
rituals \[agneyadhAna\]  
  
1.1.10 niyataM cha  
  
His \[rathakAra’s\] eligibility also extends to obligatory vedic rites  
  
1.1.11 nA .abhAvAditi vAtsyaH  
  
The \[shukla yajurvedic authority\] vAtsya is of the opinion that his
eligibility does not extend to other vedic rites.  
  
1.1.12 niShAdasthapatir-gAvedhuke .adhikR^itaH  
  
The niShada chieftain is eligible to a vedic ritual with the offerings
of gAvedhuka \[Coix barbata\] (usually to the deity rudra).  
  
1.1.13 vAv.akIrNino gardabhejyA  
  
The optional ass sacrifice may be offered by the fallen student who has
had sex.  
  
1.1.14 laukike  
  
The niShada sthapati and the fallen student set up their sacrificial
fires in an ordinary way (that is non-cermonial)  
  
The other sacrificers use 3 cermonially set up shrauta fires and the
aupAsana fire for domestic worship.

Two shrauta sutras proscribe anyone other than a brahmin from being the
R^itvik at a sacrifice:  
  
kAtyAyana 1.2.8: brAhmaNA R^itvijo bhakShapratiShedhAditarayoH /  
  
\[Of the 3 allowed varNas only\] the brahmins can act as officiating
priests as the other two are forbidden from eating the sacrificial
\[remnants\]. The commentators cite the authority of the shatapatha
brAhmaNa of the shukla yajurveda to support this point.  
  
SB 2.3.1.39: tad vai na abrAhmaNaH pibet (non brahmins do not drink
\[the remnants of sacrificial beverages\])  
  
Apastamba 24.1.21: brAhmaNAnAM ArtvijyaM  
  
The R^itviks duty is that of the brahmins.

However other sutras do not have any prohibitory rules.
