---
title: I

---
<div>

[←](../volume_9/newspaper_reports/part_iii_indian_newspaper_reports/20_the_indian_social_reformer_jun_16_1901.htm)
[Home](../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) / [→](ii_your_highness.htm)

  

[«](../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/011_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../volume_6/epistles_second_series/038_doctor.htm)  
Addressee [»](ii_your_highness.htm)

## I

MADRAS  
*the 15th February* \[1893\]

YOUR HIGHNESS,

Two things I am telling your Highness. One — a very wonderful phenomenon
I have seen in a village called Kumbakonam, and another about myself.

In the said village lives a man of the Chetty caste, generally passing
for an astrologer. I, with two other young men, went to see him. He was
said to tell about anything a man thinks of. So, I wanted to put him to
the test. Two months ago, I dreamt that my mother was dead and I was
very anxious to know about her. My second was whether what my Guru had
told me was right. The third was a test-question — a part of the
Buddhistic mantra, in Tibetan tongue. These questions I determined upon,
two days before going to this Govinda Chetty. Another young man had one
of his sisters-in-law given poison to, by some unknown hand, from which
she recovered. But he wanted to know the author of that delivery.

When we first saw him, the fellow was almost ferocious. He said that
some Europeans came to see \[him\] with the Dewan of Mysore and that
since then through their 'Dristee Dosham' he had got fever and that he
could not give us a seance then and only if we paid him 10 Rs., he would
consent to tell us our 'prasnas'. The young men with me of course were
ready to pay down his fees. But he goes to his private room and
immediately comes back and says to me that if I gave him some ashes to
cure him of his fever he would consent to give us a seance. Of course I
told him that I do not boast of any power of curing diseases but he
said, 'That does not matter, only I want \[the ash\]'. So, I consented
and he took us to the private room and, taking a sheet of paper, wrote
something upon it and gave it over to one of us and made me sign it and
keep it into the pocket of one of my companions. Then he told me point
blank, 'Why you, a Sannyasi, are thinking upon your mother?' I answered
that even the great Shankaracharya would take care of his mother; and he
said 'She is all right and I have written her name in that paper in the
possession of your friend' and then went on saying, 'Your Guru is dead.
Whatever he has told you, you must believe, for he was a very very great
man,' and went on giving me a description of my Guru which was most
wonderful and then he said 'What more you want to know about your Guru?'
I told him 'If you can give me his name I would be satisfied', and he
said, 'Which name? A Sannyasi gets different sorts of names'. I
answered, 'The name by which he was known to the public', and says, 'The
wonderful name, I have already written that. And you wanted to know
about a mantra in Tibetan, that is also written in that paper.' And, he
then told me to think of anything in any language and tell him, I told
him 'Om Namo BhagavateVasudevaya', and he said, 'That is also written in
the paper in possession of your friend. Now take it out and see'. And
Lo! Wonder! They were all there as he said and even my mother's name was
there!! It began thus — your mother of such and such name is all right.
She is very holy and good, but she is feeling your separation like death
and within two years she shall die; so if you want to see her, it must
be within two years.

Next it was written — your Guru Ramakrishna Paramahamsa is dead but he
lives in Sukshma, i.e., ethereal body, and is watching over you, etc.
and then it was written 'Lamala capsechua', in Tibetan, and then at last
was written 'In conformation to what I have written, I give you also
this mantra which you would give me after one hour after my writing; 'Om
Namo Bhagavate etc.'; and so he was equally successful with my friends.
Then I saw people coming from distant villages and as soon as he sees
them he says — 'Your name is such and such and you come from such and
such village for this purpose'. By the time he was reading me, he toned
down very much and said — 'I won't take money from you. On the other
hand, you must take some "seva" from me'. And I took some milk at his
house and he brought over his whole family to bow down to me and I
touched some 'vibhutee' brought by him and then I asked him the source
of his wonderful powers. First he would not say, but after a while he
came to me \[and\] said — 'Maharaj, it is "siddhi of mantras" through
the "sahaya" of "Devi".' Verily, there are more things on heaven and
earth Horatio than your philosophy ever dreamt of — Shakespeare.

The second is regarding me. Here is a zamindar of Ramnath, now staying
in Madras. He is going to send me over to Europe and, as you are already
aware of, I have a great mind to see those places. So I have determined
to take this opportunity of making a tour in Europe and America. But I
can't do anything without asking your Highness, the only friend on Earth
I have.

So kindly give your opinion about it. I only want to make a short tour
in those places. One thing I am certain of, that I am \[an\] instrument
in the hands \[of\] a holy and superior power. Myself, I have no peace,
am burning literally day and night, but somehow or other, wherever I go
hundreds and, in some \[places\] as in Madras, thousands would come to
me day and night and would be cured of their skepticism and unbelief but
I —! I am always unhappy!! Thy will be done!! Therefore, I don't know
what this power requires of me, to be done in Europe. I cannot but obey.
'Thy will be done'!! There is no escape.

I congratulate your Highness on the birth of a son and heir. May the
infant prince be quiet like his most noble father and may the Lord
shower his blessings always on him and his parents.

So I am going over in two or three weeks to Europe. I can't say anything
as to the future of the body. Only I pray to your Highness if it be
proper to take some care of my mother that she does not starve.

I would be highly obliged to get a reply soon, and pray your Highness to
keep the latter part of this letter, i.e., my going over to England
etc., confidential.

May you be blessed all your life, you and yours, is the prayer that is
day and night offered up by,

VIVEKANANDA  
C/o. M. Bhattacharya Esq.  
Assistant Accountant General  
Mt. St. Thome, Madras

</div>
