---
title: II

---
<div>

[←](i_your_highness.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) / [→](nyt_may_2_1894.htm)

  

[«](../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/014_diwanji_saheb.htm) Chronology
[»](../volume_4/writings_prose/a_message_of_sympathy_to_a_friend.htm)  
[«](i_your_highness.htm) Addressee
[»](../volume_6/epistles_second_series/040_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

## II

BOMBAY  

*The 22nd May* \[18\]93

YOUR HIGHNESS,

Leaving Khetri there happened nothing particular to relate except that I
had every comfort on the way, broke journey at Kharari and then \[went\]
to Nariad \[Nadiad\]. Haridas Bhai was as usual very kind to me and we
had many and many a talk about your Highness, so much so that he was
really very anxious to see you and intends paying his respects to your
Highness in his coming winter tour to the north. And I dare say your
Highness would also be very much pleased to see this old man of great
experience who was for twenty-five years the mentor of Kathiawad. Withal
he is the only remnant of the old school of very conservative
politicians. He is a man who is thoroughly able to organize and put to
perfect order an existing machinery; but he would be the last man to
move a step further.

At Bombay I went to see my friend Ramdas, Barrister-at-Law. He is rather
a sentimental gentleman and was so much impressed with your Highness'
character that he told me that had it not been midsummer he would rather
fly to see such a prince.

His father intends going to Chicago on the 31st; if so, we would go
together for company. Today I go to buy some steel trunks etc., and am
only waiting for the Madras money to come in. Although I wired to them
from Jeypore, they were rather suspicious and waited for my further
communications and I have again wired them and written too.

On our way we had the company of Mr. Ramnath, the charan headmaster of
the Jeypore noble's school. He and I had a bout on my first coming out
of Khetri years ago, about vegetarianism. He had in the meantime got
hold of some American writers and pounced upon me with his arguments
from them. His author, he said, has proved to his satisfaction that the
human digestive organs including the teeth are exactly like those of the
cow. Therefore, man is designed by nature to be a vegetarian animal. He
is a very good and nice gentleman and I did not want to disturb his
confidence in the American hobbyist but one thing was on the tip of my
tongue — If our digestive apparatus is exactly like that of a cow — we
ought and must be able to eat and digest grass. In that case poor
Indians are fools to die of starvation in famine times while their
natural food, grass, is so abundant, and your Highness' servants are
fools to serve you while they have only to get up the nearest hillock
and get a bellyful of grass instead of undergoing all the trouble of
serving others!!! Grand American discovery indeed!!! Only I hope the
holy dungs of such human cows may become of great use to the wonderful
American author and his Indian disciple. Amen. So much for the cow-human
theory.

Do not find anything more to advertise to your Highness, so, beg leave
to stop here.

May the giver of all good bestow his choicest blessings on you and
yours, I remain,

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

</div>
