---
title: HAD NO MEATS AT THE DINNER

---
<div>

[←](ii_your_highness.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) /
[→](arizonarepublican_08301893.htm)

  

## HAD NO MEATS AT THE DINNER

### (*New York Times* May 2, 1894)  Members of V Club Hear About the Vegetarian Diet of the Far East

The second vegetarian dinner of the V Club was held at the St. Denis
Hotel, Broadway and Eleventh Street, last night. About fifty members
were present.

Only vegetables and fruits appeared on the menu, and sterilized water,
chocolate, coffee, and tea made up the drinkables.

Between the toasts several original songs were rendered by J. Williams
Macy.

S. C. T. Dodd replied to the toast "Vanity," and Mary T. Burt, in the
absence of Mrs. Ella Dietz Clymer, to that of "Virtue".

Swami Vivekananda, a Hindu of high caste, said that vegetarianism had
its beginning in India. "It is often stated," he said, "that because
Hindus believe in transmigration of souls they would not kill and eat
animals because they feared that they would eat some of their ancestors.
There is not a word of truth in this statement. Some of the greatest
propagandists of vegetarianism do not believe in God nor in a soul.
Therefore, the fear of eating one of their ancestors could not affect
them.

"Nearly three-quarters of the people of India are vegetarians. They are
so because they are too kind to kill animals for food.

"In this country, when animals are injured, it is the custom to kill
them. In India it is the rule to send them to a hospital. In approaching
Bombay, the first thing the traveler comes across is a very large
hospital for animals. This has been the practice for 4,000 years.

Mrs. J. De La M. Lozier, Vice President of Sorosis, told about the
little vices of men. The first one was drunkenness. Men came home and
hid themselves behind a newspaper. They never had anything pleasant to
say. A woman who had been married forty years said to her husband: "I
wish you would tell me that you love me. It is so long since you said it
that I would like to hear how it sounds." Another vice was
loquaciousness or scolding. Perhaps this was not a common vice. But some
husbands were very nice when they were away from home and very
disagreeable when by the fireside. One woman called her husband "a
street angel." When he died she refused to wear mourning. Other little
vices were smoking, the use of slang, and insincerity, or the trying to
appear to be what they were not.

St. Clair McKerway replied to the arguments of some of the other
speakers in a humorous vein.

</div>
