---
title: IN MANY TONGUES

---
<div>

[←](nyt_09101893.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) /
[→](iowastateregister12031893.htm)

  

## IN MANY TONGUES

### (*Freeborn County Reporter* September 20, 1893)  God’s Praises Are Housed at the Parliament of All Religions – Inspiring Scenes at Its Opening in Chicago

CHICAGO: Sept. 13 – A processional in which the religious of the world
were represented marked the opening of the world’s parliament of
religions at the Art Institute. It was a processional that had a world
of meaning in it; one that would have been impossible not many years
ago. Jew marched with Gentile and Catholic marched with Protestant. The
religious beliefs of India, of China and Japan were represented, as well
as those of the English-speaking nations. All, attired in their priestly
robes and wearing the insignia of their office, marched in peace and
fellowship to the platform, while the audience rose and cheered to the
sight. First came cardinal Gibbons, escorted by President Bonney. Then
came Mrs. Potter Palmer and Mrs. Charles Henrotin, representing the
board of lady managers, and then the following with their suites:

Archbishop Redwood of New Zealand; Archbishop Dionysius Latas of Zante,
Greece; Rev John henry Barrows, of Chicago, Archbishop Feehan; Count A.
Bernstorff, of Berlin; Dr. Carl von Bergen, of Sweden; Prof C. N.
Chaharar, H. Dharmapala and P. C. Mozoomdar, of India; Rev. Alexander D
Mackenzie; Pung Quang Yu, of China; Dr. E G Hirsch of Chicago; Miss
Jeane Serahjt and Kjersedji Laugraua, of Bombay; Bishop B.W. Arnett, and
Mrs. Laura Ormiston Chant.

Even more inspiring was the scene when the whole vast audience arose and
joined in singing “Praise God from Whom All Blessings Blow,” and later
when cardinal Gibbons led those of all nations and all religions in
recruiting the Lord’s Prayer.

There was not a vacant seat in the hall and the walls were fringed with
people standing up when Clarence Eddy took his seat at the organ and
played a couple of selections preliminary to the processional with which
the proceedings were opened.

President Bonney made the address of welcome. He said they should all
give thanks for being able to take part in so grand a congress, one that
so fully exemplified peace and progress and which would have so great an
influence on the world. He said they all met with the greatest respect
for the religions of each other. While all met as men on an equal plane,
there was a desire to treat everyone with that formality and courtsey to
which his rank in his own church entitiled him. After reviewing the
programme of the congress Mr. Bonney welcomed all in the name of the
brotherhood of religion.

Rev. John Henry Barrows, chairman of the committee on organization, then
addressed the congress. He said that this meeting had become a grand new
factor in the history of human race that would never be obliterated.
Never before had such a congress been undertaken, and not long ago it
would have been deemed impossible to carry it to successful completion.
The man who would advance his own faith must first discover the truths
in other faiths. He hoped the congress would prove more spiritual and
ethical than theological.

After an address of welcome by Archbisop Feehan of Chicago, Cardinal
Gibbons spoke. He said that though all did did not agree in matters of
faith, there was one platform on which all were united, that was
charity, humanity and benevolence. He said he could not impress too
strongly on every one that each was his brother’s keeper. That was the
whole theory of humanity. If Christ had cried with Cain: “Am I my
brother’s keeper?” we would still be walking in darkness.

</div>
