---
title: AN ORIENTAL GOD IN NEW YORK

---
<div>

[←](nyt_12131895.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) / [→](nyt_03201896.htm)

  

## AN ORIENTAL GOD IN NEW YORK

### (*Davenport Daily Republican* January 30, 1896)

In an “off” evening -- mentally off -- we were lured to the feet of the
Hindu monk, Swami Vivekananda, who is the present fad in New York. He
overflows a vast hall Sunday afternoons, and all day and evening he sits
in an uptown drawing room with his worshippers at his feet, and
discourses on the special unknowableness of Buddhism, the Yoga, the
Kosmos, and kindred light themes. It long ago passed into an axiom that
there is no disputing about tastes. It is one of the few that can be
uttered in every known tongue, so universal is its truth accepted. So
when I heard a lady, whose name is familiar from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, and beyond, say that she had never seen another who filled her
ideal of God as Swami did. It was not my turn to speak, and I bravely
kept still. It is the mystery of the Himalayas that he brings that
fasinates and neither him nor his thought. His diction is simple and
clear, with scarcely any accent, and his range surprisingly wide but the
trend of his thought is toward the fatalism of the orient which would be
pessimism to the Anglo-Saxon, who will never bow his head in the blind
obedience of philosophy. But in picturesqueness the occasion was
surpassing. Sitting on a low seat in oriental fashion in the center of
the room, his dark, richly, colored face, absolutely modile (?), save
for the flashing light of the great brown eyes, his head surmounted by a
lemon-colored silk scarf turban, his well formed, rather stout body
enveloped in a deep orange-hued, silken robe held around the waist by a
scarlet sash -- such was the god of the far east who enchained th
einterest of all, and loosened the tongues of women in rapturous praise.
But he seemed a well-fed, well-groomed god, and one who may not be
entirely free from human leanings. He talks in a monotone, which, when
he breaks out in his own tongue, as he frequently does, descends into a
chanting rhythm of tone that is rich and musical. Crowds throng about
him day and evening, two-thirds women, and for the moment Swami
Vivikananda reigns. But I am sure he does not look like -- not even like
an oriental god.

</div>
