---
title: THE REAL NATURE OF MAN

---
<div>

[←](the_necessity_of_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](maya_and_illusion.htm)

  

CHAPTER II

## THE REAL NATURE OF MAN

(*Delivered in London*)

Great is the tenacity with which man clings to the senses. Yet, however
substantial he may think the external world in which he lives and moves,
there comes a time in the lives of individuals and of races when,
involuntarily, they ask, "Is this real?" To the person who never finds a
moment to question the credentials of his senses, whose every moment is
occupied with some sort of sense-enjoyment — even to him death comes,
and he also is compelled to ask, "Is this real?" Religion begins with
this question and ends with its answer. Even in the remote past, where
recorded history cannot help us, in the mysterious light of mythology,
back in the dim twilight of civilisation, we find the same question was
asked, "What becomes of this? What is real?"

One of the most poetical of the Upanishads, the Katha Upanishad, begins
with the inquiry: "When a man dies, there is a dispute. One party
declares that he has gone for ever, the other insists that he is still
living. Which is true?" Various answers have been given. The whole
sphere of metaphysics, philosophy, and religion is really filled with
various answers to this question. At the same time, attempts have been
made to suppress it, to put a stop to the unrest of mind which asks,
"What is beyond? What is real?" But so long as death remains, all these
attempts at suppression will always prove to be unsuccessful. We may
talk about seeing nothing beyond and keeping all our hopes and
aspirations confined to the present moment, and struggle hard not to
think of anything beyond the world of senses; and, perhaps, everything
outside helps to keep us limited within its narrow bounds. The whole
world may combine to prevent us from broadening out beyond the present.
Yet, so long as there is death, the question must come again and again,
"Is death the end of all these things to which we are clinging, as if
they were the most real of all realities, the most substantial of all
substances?" The world vanishes in a moment and is gone. Standing on the
brink of a precipice beyond which is the infinite yawning chasm, every
mind, however hardened, is bound to recoil and ask, "Is this real?" The
hopes of a lifetime, built up little by little with all the energies of
a great mind, vanish in a second. Are they real? This question must be
answered. Time never lessens its power; on the other hand, it adds
strength to it.

Then there is the desire to be happy. We run after everything to make
ourselves happy; we pursue our mad career in the external world of
senses. If you ask the young man with whom life is successful, he will
declare that it is real; and he really thinks so. Perhaps, when the same
man grows old and finds fortune ever eluding him, he will then declare
that it is fate. He finds at last that his desires cannot be fulfilled.
Wherever he goes, there is an adamantine wall beyond which he cannot
pass. Every sense-activity results in a reaction. Everything is
evanescent. Enjoyment, misery, luxury, wealth, power, and poverty, even
life itself, are all evanescent.

Two positions remain to mankind. One is to believe with the nihilists
that all is nothing, that we know nothing, that we can never know
anything either about the future, the past, or even the present. For we
must remember that he who denies the past and the future and wants to
stick to the present is simply a madman. One may as well deny the father
and mother and assert the child. It would be equally logical. To deny
the past and future, the present must inevitably be denied also. This is
one position, that of the nihilists. I have never seen a man who could
really become a nihilist for one minute. It is very easy to talk.

Then there is the other position — to seek for an explanation, to seek
for the real, to discover in the midst of this eternally changing and
evanescent world whatever is real. In this body which is an aggregate of
molecules of matter, is there anything which is real? This has been the
search throughout the history of the, human mind. In the very oldest
times, we often find glimpses of light coming into men's minds. We find
man, even then, going a step beyond this body, finding something which
is not this external body, although very much like it, much more
complete, much more perfect, and which remains even when this body is
dissolved. We read in the hymns of the Rig-Veda, addressed to the God of
Fire who is burning a dead body, "Carry him, O Fire, in your arms
gently, give him a perfect body, a bright body, carry him where the
fathers live, where there is no more sorrow, where there is no more
death." The same idea you will find present in every religion. And we
get another idea with it. It is a significant fact that all religions,
without one exception, hold that man is a degeneration of what he was,
whether they clothe this in mythological words, or in the clear language
of philosophy, or in the beautiful expressions of poetry. This is the
one fact that comes out of every scripture and of every mythology that
the man that is, is a degeneration of what he was. This is the kernel of
truth within the story of Adam's fall in the Jewish scripture. This is
again and again repeated in the scriptures of the Hindus; the dream of a
period which they call the Age of Truth, when no man died unless he
wished to die, when he could keep his body as long as he liked, and his
mind was pure and strong. There was no evil and no misery; and the
present age is a corruption of that state of perfection. Side by side
with this, we find the story of the deluge everywhere. That story itself
is a proof that this present age is held to be a corruption of a former
age by every religion. It went on becoming more and more corrupt until
the deluge swept away a large portion of mankind, and again the
ascending series began. It is going up slowly again to reach once more
that early state of purity. You are all aware of the story of the deluge
in the Old Testament. The same story was current among the ancient
Babylonians, the Egyptians, the Chinese, and the Hindus. Manu, a great
ancient sage, was praying on the bank of the Gangâ, when a little minnow
came to him for protection, and he put it into a pot of water he had
before him. "What do you want?" asked Manu. The little minnow declared
he was pursued by a bigger fish and wanted protection. Manu carried the
little fish to his home, and in the morning he had become as big as the
pot and said, "I cannot live in this pot any longer". Manu put him in a
tank, and the next day he was as big as the tank and declared he could
not live there any more. So Manu had to take him to a river, and in the
morning the fish filled the river. Then Manu put him in the ocean, and
he declared, "Manu, I am the Creator of the universe. I have taken this
form to come and warn you that I will deluge the world. You build an ark
and in it put a pair of every kind of animal, and let your family enter
the ark, and there will project out of the water my horn. Fasten the ark
to it; and when the deluge subsides, come out and people the earth." So
the world was deluged, and Manu saved his own family and two of every
kind of animal and seeds of every plant. When the deluge subsided, he
came and peopled the world; and we are all called "man", because we are
the progeny of Manu.

Now, human language is the attempt to express the truth that is within.
I am fully persuaded that a baby whose language consists of
unintelligible sounds is attempting to express the highest philosophy,
only the baby has not the organs to express it nor the means. The
difference between the language of the highest philosophers and the
utterances of babies is one of degree and not of kind. What you call the
most correct, systematic, mathematical language of the present time, and
the hazy, mystical, mythological languages of the ancients, differ only
in degree. All of them have a grand idea behind, which is, as it were,
struggling to express itself; and often behind these ancient mythologies
are nuggets of truth; and often, I am sorry to say, behind the fine,
polished phrases of the moderns is arrant trash. So, we need not throw a
thing overboard because it is clothed in mythology, because it does not
fit in with the notions of Mr. So-and-so or Mrs. So-and-so of modern
times. If people should laugh at religion because most religions declare
that men must believe in mythologies taught by such and such a prophet,
they ought to laugh more at these moderns. In modern times, if a man
quotes a Moses or a Buddha or a Christ, he is laughed at; but let him
give the name of a Huxley, a Tyndall, or a Darwin, and it is swallowed
without salt. "Huxley has said it", that is enough for many. We are free
from superstitions indeed! That was a religious superstition, and this a
scientific superstition; only, in and through that superstition came
life-giving ideas of spirituality; in and through this modern
superstition come lust and greed. That superstition was worship of God,
and this superstition is worship of filthy lucre, of fame or power. That
is the difference.

To return to mythology. Behind all these stories we find one idea
standing supreme — that man is a degeneration of what he was. Coming to
the present times, modern research seems to repudiate this position
absolutely. Evolutionists seem to contradict entirely this assertion.
According to them, man is the evolution of the mollusc; and, therefore,
what mythology states cannot be true. There is in India, however, a
mythology which is able to reconcile both these positions. The Indian
mythology has a theory of cycles, that all progression is in the form of
waves. Every wave is attended by a fall, and that by a rise the next
moment, that by a fall in the next, and again another rise. The motion
is in cycles. Certainly it is true, even on the grounds of modern
research, that man cannot be simply an evolution. Every evolution
presupposes an involution. The modern scientific man will tell you that
you can only get the amount of energy out of a machine which you have
previously put into it. Something cannot be produced out of nothing. If
a man is an evolution of the mollusc, then the perfect man — the
Buddha-man, the Christ-man — was involved in the mollusc. If it is not
so, whence come these gigantic personalities? Something cannot come out
of nothing. Thus we are in the position of reconciling the scriptures
with modern light. That energy which manifests itself slowly through
various stages until it becomes the perfect man, cannot come out of
nothing. It existed somewhere; and if the mollusc or the protoplasm is
the first point to which you can trace it, that protoplasm, somehow or
other, must have contained the energy.

There is a great discussion going on as to whether the aggregate of
materials we call the body is the cause of manifestation of the force we
call the soul, thought, etc., or whether it is the thought that
manifests this body. The religions of the world of course hold that the
force called thought manifests the body, and not the reverse. There are
schools of modern thought which hold that what we call thought is simply
the outcome of the adjustment of the parts of the machine which we call
body. Taking the second position that the soul or the mass of thought,
or however you may call it, is the outcome of this machine, the outcome
of the chemical and physical combinations of matter making up the body
and brain, leaves the question unanswered. What makes the body? What
force combines the molecules into the body form? What force is there
which takes up material from the mass of matter around and forms my body
one way, another body another way, and so on? What makes these infinite
distinctions? To say that the force called soul is the outcome of the
combinations of the molecules of the body is putting the cart before the
horse. How did the combinations come; where was the force to make them?
If you say that some other force was the cause of these combinations,
and soul was the outcome of that matter, and that soul — which combined
a certain mass of matter — was itself the result of the combinations, it
is no answer. That theory ought to be taken which explains most of the
facts, if not all, and that without contradicting other existing
theories. It is more logical to say that the force which takes up the
matter and forms the body is the same which manifests through that body.
To say, therefore, that the thought forces manifested by the body are
the outcome of the arrangement of molecules and have no independent
existence has no meaning; neither can force evolve out of matter. Rather
it is possible to demonstrate that what we call matter does not exist at
all. It is only a certain state of force. Solidity, hardness, or any
other state of matter can be proved to be the result of motion. Increase
of vortex motion imparted to fluids gives them the force of solids. A
mass of air in vortex motion, as in a tornado, becomes solid-like and by
its impact breaks or cuts through solids. A thread of a spider's web, if
it could be moved at almost infinite velocity, would be as strong as an
iron chain and would cut through an oak tree. Looking at it in this way,
it would be easier to prove that what we call matter does not exist. But
the other way cannot be proved.

What is the force which manifests itself through the body? It is obvious
to all of us, whatever that force be, that it is taking particles up, as
it were, and manipulating forms out of them — the human body. None else
comes here to manipulate bodies for you and me. I never saw anybody eat
food for me. I have to assimilate it, manufacture blood and bones and
everything out of that food. What is this mysterious force? Ideas about
the future and about the past seem to be terrifying to many. To many
they seem to be mere speculation.

We will take the present theme. What is this force which is now working
through us? We know how in old times, in all the ancient scriptures,
this power, this manifestation of power, was thought to be a bright
substance having the form of this body, and which remained even after
this body fell. Later on, however, we find a higher idea coming — that
this bright body did not represent the force. Whatsoever has form must
be the result of combinations of particles and requires something else
behind it to move it. If this body requires something which is not the
body to manipulate it, the bright body, by the same necessity, will also
require something other than itself to manipulate it. So, that something
was called the soul, the Atman in Sanskrit. It was the Atman which
through the bright body, as it were, worked on the gross body outside.
The bright body is considered as the receptacle of the mind, and the
Atman is beyond that. It is not the mind even; it works the mind, and
through the mind the body. You have an Atman, I have another each one of
us has a separate Atman and a separate fine body, and through that we
work on the gross external body. Questions were then asked about this
Atman about its nature. What is this Atman, this soul of man which is
neither the body nor the mind? Great discussions followed. Speculations
were made, various shades of philosophic inquiry came into existence;
and I shall try to place before you some of the conclusions that have
been reached about this Atman.

The different philosophies seem to agree that this Atman, whatever it
be, has neither form nor shape, and that which has neither form nor
shape must be omnipresent. Time begins with mind, space also is in the
mind. Causation cannot stand without time. Without the idea of
succession there cannot be any idea of causation. Time, space and
causation, therefore, are in the mind, and as this Atman is beyond the
mind and formless, it must be beyond time, beyond space, and beyond
causation. Now, if it is beyond time, space, and causation, it must be
infinite. Then comes the highest speculation in our philosophy. The
infinite cannot be two. If the soul be infinite, there can be only one
Soul, and all ideas of various souls — you having one soul, and I having
another, and so forth — are not real. The Real Man, therefore, is one
and infinite, the omnipresent Spirit. And the apparent man is only a
limitation of that Real Man. In that sense the mythologies are true that
the apparent man, however great he may be, is only a dim reflection of
the Real Man who is beyond. The Real Man, the Spirit, being beyond cause
and effect, not bound by time and space, must, therefore, be free. He
was never bound, and could not be bound. The apparent man, the
reflection, is limited by time, space, and causation, and is, therefore,
bound. Or in the language of some of our philosophers, he appears to be
bound, but really is not. This is the reality in our souls, this
omnipresence, this spiritual nature, this infinity. Every soul is
infinite, therefore there is no question of birth and death. Some
children were being examined. The examiner put them rather hard
questions, and among them was this one: "Why does not the earth fall?"
He wanted to evoke answers about gravitation. Most of the children could
not answer at all; a few answered that it was gravitation or something.
One bright little girl answered it by putting another question: "Where
should it fall?" The question is nonsense. Where should the earth fall?
There is no falling or rising for the earth. In infinite space there is
no up or down; that is only in the relative. Where is the going or
coming for the infinite? Whence should it come and whither should it go?

Thus, when people cease to think of the past or future, when they give
up the idea of body, because the body comes and goes and is limited,
then they have risen to a higher ideal. The body is not the Real Man,
neither is the mind, for the mind waxes and wanes. It is the Spirit
beyond, which alone can live for ever. The body and mind are continually
changing, and are, in fact, only names of series of changeful phenomena,
like rivers whose waters are in a constant state of flux, yet presenting
the appearance of unbroken streams. Every particle in this body is
continually changing; no one has the same body for many minutes
together, and yet we think of it as the same body. So with the mind; one
moment it is happy, another moment unhappy; one moment strong, another
weak; an ever-changing whirlpool. That cannot be the Spirit which is
infinite. Change can only be in the limited. To say that the infinite
changes in any way is absurd; it cannot be. You can move and I can move,
as limited bodies; every particle in this universe is in a constant
state of flux, but taking the universe as a unit, as one whole, it
cannot move, it cannot change. Motion is always a relative thing. I move
in relation to something else. Any particle in this universe can change
in relation to any other particle; but take the whole universe as one,
and in relation to what can it move? There is nothing besides it. So
this infinite Unit is unchangeable, immovable, absolute, and this is the
Real Man. Our reality, therefore, consists in the Universal and not in
the limited. These are old delusions, however comfortable they are, to
think that we are little limited beings, constantly changing. People are
frightened when they are told that they are Universal Being, everywhere
present. Through everything you work, through every foot you move,
through every lip you talk, through every heart you feel.

People are frightened when they are told this. They will again and again
ask you if they are not going to keep their individuality. What is
individuality? I should like to see it. A baby has no moustache; when he
grows to be a man, perhaps he has a moustache and beard. His
individuality would be lost, if it were in the body. If I lose one eye,
or if I lose one of my hands, my individuality would be lost if it were
in the body. Then, a drunkard should not give up drinking because he
would lose his individuality. A thief should not be a good man because
he would thereby lose his individuality. No man ought to change his
habits for fear of this. There is no individuality except in the
Infinite. That is the only condition which does not change. Everything
else is in a constant state of flux. Neither can individuality be in
memory. Suppose, on account of a blow on the head I forget all about my
past; then, I have lost all individuality; I am gone. I do not remember
two or three years of my childhood, and if memory and existence are one,
then whatever I forget is gone. That part of my life which I do not
remember, I did not live. That is a very narrow idea of individuality.

We are not individuals yet. We are struggling towards individuality, and
that is the Infinite, that is the real nature of man. He alone lives
whose life is in the whole universe, and the more we concentrate our
lives on limited things, the faster we go towards death. Those moments
alone we live when our lives are in the universe, in others; and living
this little life is death, simply death, and that is why the fear of
death comes. The fear of death can only be conquered when man realises
that so long as there is one life in this universe, he is living. When
he can say, "I am in everything, in everybody, I am in all lives, I am
the universe," then alone comes the state of fearlessness. To talk of
immortality in constantly changing things is absurd. Says an old
Sanskrit philosopher: It is only the Spirit that is the individual,
because it is infinite. No infinity can be divided; infinity cannot be
broken into pieces. It is the same one, undivided unit for ever, and
this is the individual man, the Real Man. The apparent man is merely a
struggle to express, to manifest this individuality which is beyond; and
evolution is not in the Spirit. These changes which are going on — the
wicked becoming good, the animal becoming man, take them in whatever way
you like — are not in the Spirit. They are evolution of nature and
manifestation of Spirit. Suppose there is a screen hiding you from me,
in which there is a small hole through which I can see some of the faces
before me, just a few faces. Now suppose the hole begins to grow larger
and larger, and as it does so, more and more of the scene before me
reveals itself and when at last the whole screen has disappeared, I
stand face to face with you all. You did not change at all in this case;
it was the hole that was evolving, and you were gradually manifesting
yourselves. So it is with the Spirit. No perfection is going to be
attained. You are already free and perfect. What are these ideas of
religion and God and searching for the hereafter? Why does man look for
a God? Why does man, in every nation, in every state of society, want a
perfect ideal somewhere, either in man, in God, or elsewhere? Because
that idea is within you. It was your own heart beating and you did not
know; you were mistaking it for something external. It is the God within
your own self that is propelling you to seek for Him, to realise Him.
After long searches here and there, in temples and in churches, in
earths and in heavens, at last you come back, completing the circle from
where you started, to your own soul and find that He for whom you have
been seeking all over the world, for whom you have been weeping and
praying in churches and temples, on whom you were looking as the mystery
of all mysteries shrouded in the clouds, is nearest of the near, is your
own Self, the reality of your life, body, and soul. That is your own
nature. Assert it, manifest it. Not to become pure, you are pure
already. You are not to be perfect, you are that already. Nature is like
that screen which is hiding the reality beyond. Every good thought that
you think or act upon is simply tearing the veil, as it were; and the
purity, the Infinity, the God behind, manifests Itself more and more.

This is the whole history of man. Finer and finer becomes the veil, more
and more of the light behind shines forth, for it is its nature to
shine. It cannot be known; in vain we try to know it. Were it knowable,
it would not be what it is, for it is the eternal subject. Knowledge is
a limitation, knowledge is objectifying. He is the eternal subject of
everything, the eternal witness in this universe, your own Self.
Knowledge is, as it were, a lower step, a degeneration. We are that
eternal subject already; how can we know it? It is the real nature of
every man, and he is struggling to express it in various ways;
otherwise, why are there so many ethical codes? Where is the explanation
of all ethics? One idea stands out as the centre of all ethical systems,
expressed in various forms, namely, doing good to others. The guiding
motive of mankind should be charity towards men, charity towards all
animals. But these are all various expressions of that eternal truth
that, "I am the universe; this universe is one." Or else, where is the
reason? Why should I do good to my fellowmen? Why should I do good to
others? What compels me? It is sympathy, the feeling of sameness
everywhere. The hardest hearts feel sympathy for other beings sometimes.
Even the man who gets frightened if he is told that this assumed
individuality is really a delusion, that it is ignoble to try to cling
to this apparent individuality, that very man will tell you that extreme
self-abnegation is the centre of all morality. And what is perfect
self-abnegation? It means the abnegation of this apparent self, the
abnegation of all selfishness. This idea of "me and mine" — Ahamkâra and
Mamatâ — is the result of past Superstition, and the more this present
self passes away, the more the real Self becomes manifest. This is true
self-abnegation, the centre, the basis, the gist of all moral teaching;
and whether man knows it or not the whole world is slowly going towards
it, practicing it more or less. Only, the vast majority of mankind are
doing it unconsciously. Let them do it consciously. Let then make the
sacrifice, knowing that this "me and mine" is not the real Self, but
only a limitation. But one glimpse of that infinite reality which is
behind — but one spark of that infinite fire that is the All —
represents the present man; the Infinite is his true nature.

What is the utility, the effect, the result, of this knowledge? In these
days, we have to measure everything by utility — by how many pounds
shillings, and pence it represents. What right has a person to ask that
truth should be judged by the standard of utility or money? Suppose
there is no utility, will it be less true? Utility is not the test of
truth. Nevertheless, there is the highest utility in this. Happiness, we
see is what everyone is seeking for, but the majority seek it in things
which are evanescent and not real. No happiness was ever found in the
senses. There never was a person who found happiness in the senses or in
enjoyment of the senses. Happiness is only found in the Spirit.
Therefore the highest utility for mankind is to find this happiness in
the Spirit. The next point is that ignorance is the great mother of all
misery, and the fundamental ignorance is to think that the Infinite
weeps and cries, that He is finite. This is the basis of all ignorance
that we, the immortal, the ever pure, the perfect Spirit, think that we
are little minds, that we are little bodies; it is the mother of all
selfishness. As soon as I think that I am a little body, I want to
preserve it, to protect it, to keep it nice, at the expense of other
bodies; then you and I become separate. As soon as this idea of
separation comes, it opens the door to all mischief and leads to all
misery. This is the utility that if a very small fractional part of
human beings living today can put aside the idea of selfishness,
narrowness, and littleness, this earth will become a paradise tomorrow;
but with machines and improvements of material knowledge only, it will
never be. These only increase misery, as oil poured on fire increases
the flame all the more. Without the knowledge of the Spirit, all
material knowledge is only adding fuel to fire, only giving into the
hands of selfish man one more instrument to take what belongs to others,
to live upon the life of others, instead of giving up his life for them.

Is it practical ? — is another question. Can it be practised in modern
society? *Truth does not pay homage to any society, ancient or modern.
Society has to pay homage to Truth or die*. Societies should be moulded
upon truth, and truth has not to adjust itself to society. If such a
noble truth as unselfishness cannot be practiced in society, it is
better for man to give up society and go into the forest. That is the
daring man. There are two sorts of courage. One is the courage of facing
the cannon. And the other is the courage of spiritual conviction. An
Emperor who invaded India was told by his teacher to go and see some of
the sages there. After a long search for one, he found a very old man
sitting on a block of stone. The Emperor talked with him a little and
became very much impressed by his wisdom. He asked the sage to go to his
country with him. "No," said the sage, "I am quite satisfied with my
forest here." Said the Emperor, "I will give you money, position,
wealth. I am the Emperor of the world." "No," replied the man, "I don't
care for those things." The Emperor replied, "If you do not go, I will
kill you." The man smiled serenely and said, "That is the most foolish
thing you ever said, Emperor. You cannot kill me. Me the sun cannot dry,
fire cannot burn, sword cannot kill, for I am the birthless, the
deathless, the ever-living omnipotent, omnipresent Spirit." This is
spiritual boldness, while the other is the courage of a lion or a tiger.
In the Mutiny of 1857 there was a Swami, a very great soul, whom a
Mohammedan mutineer stabbed severely. The Hindu mutineers caught and
brought the man to the Swami, offering to kill him. But the Swami looked
up calmly and said, "My brother, thou art He, thou art He!" and expired.
This is another instance. What good is it to talk of the strength of
your muscles, of the superiority of your Western institutions, if you
cannot make Truth square with your society, if you cannot build up a
society into which the highest Truth will fit? What is the good of this
boastful talk about your grandeur and greatness, if you stand up and
say, "This courage is not practical." Is nothing practical but pounds,
shillings, and pence? If so, why boast of your society? *That society is
the greatest, where the highest truths become practical*. That is my
opinion; and if society is; not fit for the highest truths, make it so;
and the sooner, the better. Stand up, men and women, in this spirit,
dare to believe in the Truth, dare to practice the Truth! The world
requires a few hundred bold men and women. Practise that boldness which
dares know the Truth, which dares show the Truth in life, which does not
quake before death, nay, welcomes death, makes a man know that he, is
the Spirit, that, in the whole universe, nothing can kill him. Then you
will be free. Then you will know your real Soul. "This Atman is first to
be heard, then thoughts about and then meditated upon."

There is a great tendency in modern times to talk too much of work and
decry thought. Doing is very good, but that comes from thinking. Little
manifestations of energy through the muscles are called work. But where
there is no thought, there will be no work. Fill the brain, therefore,
with high thoughts, highest ideals, place them day and night before you,
and out of that will come great work. Talk not about impurity, but say
that we are pure. We have hypnotised ourselves into this thought that we
are little, that we are born, and that we are going to die, and into a
constant state of fear.

There is a story about a lioness, who was big with young, going about in
search of prey; and seeing a flock of sheep, she jumped upon them. She
died in the effort; and a little baby lion was born, motherless. It was
taken care of by the sheep and the sheep brought it up, and it grew up
with them, ate grass, and bleated like the sheep. And although in time
it became a big, full-grown lion, it thought it was a sheep. One day
another lion came in search of prey and was astonished to find that in
the midst of this flock of sheep was a lion, fleeing like the sheep at
the approach of danger. He tried to get near the sheep-lion, to tell it
that it was not a sheep but a lion; but the poor animal fled at his
approach. However, he watched his opportunity and one day found the
sheep-lion sleeping. He approached it and said, "You are a lion." "I am
a sheep," cried the other lion and could not believe the contrary but
bleated. The lion dragged him towards a lake and said, "Look here, here
is my reflection and yours." Then came the comparison. It looked at the
lion and then at its own reflection, and in a moment came the idea that
it was a lion. The lion roared, the bleating was gone. You are lions,
you are souls, pure, infinite, and perfect. The might of the universe is
within you. "Why weepest thou, my friend? There is neither birth nor
death for thee. Why weepest thou? There is no disease nor misery for
thee, but thou art like the infinite sky; clouds of various colours come
over it, play for a moment, then vanish. But the sky is ever the same
eternal blue." Why do we see wickedness? There was a stump of a tree,
and in the dark, a thief came that way and said, "That is a policeman."
A young man waiting for his beloved saw it and thought that it was his
sweetheart. A child who had been told ghost stories took it for a ghost
and began to shriek. But all the time it was the stump of a tree. We see
the world as we are. Suppose there is a baby in a room with a bag of
gold on the table and a thief comes and steals the gold. Would the baby
know it was stolen? That which we have inside, we see outside. The baby
has no thief inside and sees no thief outside. So with all knowledge. Do
not talk of the wickedness of the world and all its sins. Weep that you
are bound to see wickedness yet. Weep that you are bound to see sin
everywhere, and if you want to help the world, do not condemn it. Do not
weaken it more. For what is sin and what is misery, and what are all
these, but the results of weakness? The world is made weaker and weaker
every day by such teachings. Men are taught from childhood that they are
weak and sinners. Teach them that they are all glorious children of
immortality, even those who are the weakest in manifestation. Let
positive, strong, helpful thought enter into their brains from very
childhood. Lay yourselves open to these thoughts, and not to weakening
and paralysing ones. Say to your own minds, "I am He, I am He." Let it
ring day and night in your minds like a song, and at the point of death
declare "I am He." That is the Truth; the infinite strength of the world
is yours. Drive out the superstition that has covered your minds. Let us
be brave. Know the Truth and practice the Truth. The goal may be
distant, but awake, arise, and stop not till the goal is reached.

</div>
