---
title: MAYA AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPTION OF GOD

---
<div>

[←](maya_and_illusion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](maya_and_freedom.htm)

  

CHAPTER IV

## MAYA AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPTION OF GOD

(*Delivered in London, 20th October 1896*)

We have seen how the idea of Mâyâ, which forms, as it were, one of the
basic doctrines of the Advaita Vedanta, is, in its germs, found even in
the Samhitâs, and that in reality all the ideas which are developed in
the Upanishads are to be found already in the Samhitas in some form or
other. Most of you are by this time familiar with the idea of Maya, and
know that it is sometimes erroneously explained as illusion, so that
when the universe is said to be Maya, that also has to be explained as
being illusion. The translation of the word is neither happy nor
correct. Maya is not a theory; it is simply a statement of facts about
the universe as it exists, and to understand Maya we must go back to the
Samhitas and begin with the conception in the germ.

We have seen how the idea of the Devas came. At the same time we know
that these Devas were at first only powerful beings, nothing more. Most
of you are horrified when reading the old scriptures, whether of the
Greeks, the Hebrews, the Persians, or others, to find that the ancient
gods sometimes did things which, to us, are very repugnant. But when we
read these books, we entirely forget that we are persons of the
nineteenth century, and these gods were beings existing thousands of
years ago. We also forget that the people who worshipped these gods
found nothing incongruous in their characters, found nothing to frighten
them, because they were very much like themselves. I may also remark
that that is the one great lesson we have to learn throughout our lives.
In judging others we always judge them by our own ideals. That is not as
it should be. Everyone must be judged according to his own ideal, and
not by that of anyone else. In our dealings with our fellow-beings we
constantly labour under this mistake, and I am of opinion that the vast
majority of our quarrels with one another arise simply from this one
cause that we are always trying to judge others' gods by our own,
others' ideals by our ideals, and others' motives by our motives. Under
certain circumstances I might do a certain thing, and when I see another
person taking the same course I think he has also the same motive
actuating him, little dreaming that although the effect may be the same,
yet many other causes may produce the same thing. He may have performed
the action with quite a different motive from that which impelled me to
do it. So in judging of those ancient religions we must not take the
standpoint to which we incline, but must put ourselves into the position
of thought and life of those early times.

The idea of the cruel and ruthless Jehovah in the Old Testament has
frightened many — but why? What right have they to assume that the
Jehovah of the ancient Jews must represent the conventional idea of the
God of the present day? And at the same time, we must not forget that
there will come men after us who will laugh at our ideas of religion and
God in the same way that we laugh at those of the ancients. Yet, through
all these various conceptions runs the golden thread of unity, and it is
the purpose of the Vedanta to discover this thread. "I am the thread
that runs through all these various ideas, each one of which is; like a
pearl," says the Lord Krishna; and it is the duty of Vedanta to
establish this connecting thread, how ever incongruous or disgusting may
seem these ideas when judged according to the conceptions of today.
These ideas, in the setting of past times, were harmonious and not more
hideous than our present ideas. It is only when we try to take them out
of their settings and apply to our own present circumstances that the
hideousness becomes obvious. For the old surroundings are dead and gone.
Just as the ancient Jew has developed into the keen, modern, sharp Jew,
and the ancient Aryan into the intellectual Hindu similarly Jehovah has
grown, and Devas have grown.

The great mistake is in recognising the evolution of the worshippers,
while we do not acknowledge the evolution of the Worshipped. He is not
credited with the advance that his devotees have made. That is to say,
you and I, representing ideas, have grown; these gods also, as
representing ideas, have grown. This may seem somewhat curious to you —
that God can grow. He cannot. He is unchangeable. In the same sense the
real man never grows. But man's ideas of God are constantly changing and
expanding. We shall see later on how the real man behind each one of
these human manifestations is immovable, unchangeable, pure, and always
perfect; and in the same way the idea that we form of God is a mere
manifestation, our own creation. Behind that is the real God who never
changes, the ever pure, the immutable. But the manifestation is always
changing revealing the reality behind more and more. When it reveals
more of the fact behind, it is called progression, when it hides more of
the fact behind, it is called retrogression. Thus, as we grow, so the
gods grow. From the ordinary point of view, just as we reveal ourselves
as we evolve, so the gods reveal themselves.

We shall now be in a position to understand the theory of Maya. In all
the regions of the world the one question they propose to discuss is
this: Why is there disharmony in the universe? Why is there this evil in
the universe? We do not find this question in the very inception of
primitive religious ideas, because the world did not appear incongruous
to the primitive man. Circumstances were not inharmonious for him; there
was no dash of opinions; to him there was no antagonism of good and
evil. There was merely a feeling in his own heart of something which
said yea, and something which said nay. The primitive man was a man of
impulse. He did what occurred to him, and tried to bring out through his
muscles whatever thought came into his mind, and he never stopped to
judge, and seldom tried to check his impulses. So with the gods, they
were also creatures of impulse. Indra comes and shatters the forces of
the demons. Jehovah is pleased with one person and displeased with
another, for what reason no one knows or asks. The habit of inquiry had
not then arisen, and whatever he did was regarded as right. There was no
idea of good or evil. The Devas did many wicked things in our sense of
the word; again and again Indra and other gods committed very wicked
deeds, but to the worshippers of Indra the ideas of wickedness and evil
did not occur, so they did not question them.

With the advance of ethical ideas came the fight. There arose a certain
sense in man, called in different languages and nations by different
names. Call it the voice of God, or the result of past education, or
whatever else you like, but the effect was this that it had a checking
power upon the natural impulses of man. There is one impulse in our
minds which says, do. Behind it rises another voice which says, do not.
There is one set of ideas in our mind which is always struggling to get
outside through the channels of the senses, and behind that, although it
may be thin and weak, there is an infinitely small voice which says, do
not go outside. The two beautiful Sanskrit words for these phenomena are
Pravritti and Nivritti, "circling forward" and "circling inward". It is
the circling forward which usually governs our actions. Religion begins
with this circling inward. Religion begins with this "do not".
Spirituality begins with this "do not". When the "do not" is not there,
religion has not begun. And this "do not" came, causing men's ideas to
grow, despite the fighting gods which they had worshipped.

A little love awoke in the hearts of mankind. It was very small indeed,
and even now it is not much greater. It was at first confined to a tribe
embracing perhaps members of the same tribe; these gods loved their
tribes and each god was a tribal god, the protector of that tribe. And
sometimes the members of a tribe would think of themselves as the
descendants of their god, just as the clans in different nations think
that they are the common descendants of the man who was the founder of
the clan. There were in ancient times, and are even now, some people who
claim to be descendants not only of these tribal gods, but also of the
Sun and the Moon. You read in the ancient Sanskrit books of the great
heroic emperors of the solar and the lunar dynasties. They were first
worshippers of the Sun and the Moon, and gradually came to think of
themselves as descendants of the god of the Sun of the Moon, and so
forth. So when these tribal ideas began to grow there came a little
love, some slight idea of duty towards each other, a little social
organisation. Then, naturally, the idea came: How can we live together
without bearing and forbearing? How can one man live with another
without having some time or other to check his impulses, to restrain
himself, to forbear from doing things which his mind would prompt him to
do? It is impossible. Thus comes the idea of restraint. The whole social
fabric is based upon that idea of restraint, and we all know that the
man or woman who has not learnt the great lesson of bearing and
forbearing leads a most miserable life.

Now, when these ideas of religion came, a glimpse of something higher,
more ethical, dawned upon the intellect of mankind. The old gods were
found to be incongruous — these boisterous, fighting, drinking,
beef-eating gods of the ancients — whose delight was in the smell of
burning flesh and libations of strong liquor. Sometimes Indra drank so
much that he fell upon the ground and talked unintelligibly. These gods
could no longer be tolerated. The notion had arisen of inquiring into
motives, and the gods had to come in for their share of inquiry. Reason
for such-and-such actions was demanded and the reason was wanting.
Therefore man gave up these gods, or rather they developed higher ideas
concerning them. They took a survey, as it were, of all the actions and
qualities of the gods and discarded those which they could not
harmonise, and kept those which they could understand, and combined
them, labelling them with one name, Deva-deva, the God of gods. The god
to be worshipped was no more a simple symbol of power; something more
was required than that. He was an ethical god; he loved mankind, and did
good to mankind. But the idea of god still remained. They increased his
ethical significance, and increased also his power. He became the most
ethical being in the universe, as well as almost almighty.

But all this patchwork would not do. As the explanation assumed greater
proportions, the difficulty which it sought to solve did the same. If
the qualities of the god increased in arithmetical progression, the
difficulty and doubt increased in geometrical progression. The
difficulty of Jehovah was very little beside the difficulty of the God
of the universe, and this question remains to the present day. Why under
the reign of an almighty and all-loving God of the universe should
diabolical things be allowed to remain? Why so much more misery than
happiness, and so much more wickedness than good? We may shut our eyes
to all these things, but the fact still remains that this world is a
hideous world. At best, it is the hell of Tantalus. Here we are with
strong impulses and stronger cravings for sense-enjoyments, but cannot
satisfy them. There rises a wave which impels us forward in spite of our
own will, and as soon as we move one step, comes a blow. We are all
doomed to live here like Tantalus. Ideals come into our head far beyond
the limit of our sense-ideals, but when we seek to express them, we
cannot do so. On the other hand, we are crushed by the surging mass
around us. Yet if I give up all ideality and merely struggle through
this world, my existence is that of a brute, and I degenerate and
degrade myself. Neither way is happiness. Unhappiness is the fate of
those who are content to live in this world, born as they are. A
thousand times greater misery is the fate of those who dare to stand
forth for truth and for higher things and who dare to ask for something
higher than mere brute existence here. These are facts; but there is no
explanation — there cannot be any explanation. But the Vedanta shows the
way out. You must bear in mind that I have to tell you facts that will
frighten you sometimes, but if you remember what I say, think of it, and
digest it, it will be yours, it will raise you higher, and make you
capable of understanding and living in truth.

Now, it is a statement of fact that this world is a Tantalus's hell,
that we do not know anything about this universe, yet at the same time
we cannot say that we do not know. I cannot say that this chain exists,
when I think that I do not know it. It may be an entire delusion of my
brain. I may be dreaming all the time. I am dreaming that I am talking
to you, and that you are listening to me. No one can prove that it is
not a dream. My brain itself may be a dream, and as to that no one has
ever seen his own brain. We all take it for granted. So it is with
everything. My own body I take for granted. At the same time I cannot
say, I do not know. This standing between knowledge and ignorance, this
mystic twilight, the mingling of truth and falsehood — and where they
meet — no one knows. We are walking in the midst of a dream, half
sleeping, half waking, passing all our lives in a haze; this is the fate
of everyone of us. This is the fate of all sense-knowledge. This is the
fate of all philosophy, of all boasted science, of all boasted human
knowledge. This is the universe.

What you call matter, or spirit, or mind, or anything else you may like
to call them, the fact remains the same: we cannot say that they are, we
cannot say that they are not. We cannot say they are one, we cannot say
they are many. This eternal play of light and darkness — indiscriminate,
indistinguishable, inseparable — is always there. A fact, yet at the
same time not a fact; awake and at the same time asleep. This is a
statement of facts, and this is what is called Maya. We are born in this
Maya, we live in it, we think in it, we dream in it. We are philosophers
in it, we are spiritual men in it, nay, we are devils in this Maya, and
we are gods in this Maya. Stretch your ideas as far as you can make them
higher and higher, call them infinite or by any other name you please,
even these ideas are within this Maya. It cannot be otherwise, and the
whole of human knowledge is a generalization of this Maya trying to know
it as it appears to be. This is the work of Nâma-Rupa — name and form.
Everything that has form, everything that calls up an idea in your mind,
is within Maya; for everything that is bound by the laws of time, space,
and causation is within Maya.

Let us go back a little to those early ideas of God and see what became
of them. We perceive at once that the idea of some Being who is
eternally loving us — eternally unselfish and almighty, ruling this
universe — could not satisfy. "Where is the just, merciful God?" asked
the philosopher. Does He not see millions and millions of His children
perish, in the form of men and animals; for who can live one moment here
without killing others? Can you draw a breath without destroying
thousands of lives? You live, because, millions die. Every moment of
your life, every breath that you breathe, is death to thousands; every
movement that you make is death to millions. Every morsel that you eat
is death to millions. Why should they die? There is an old sophism that
they are very low existences. Supposing they are — which is
questionable, for who knows whether the ant is greater than the man, or
the man than the ant — who can prove one way or the other? Apart from
that question, even taking it for granted that these are very low
beings, still why should they die? If they are low, they have more
reason to live. Why not? Because they live more in the senses, they feel
pleasure and pain a thousandfold more than you or I can do. Which of us
eats a dinner with the same gusto as a dog or wolf? None, because our
energies are not in the senses; they are in the intellect, in the
spirit. But in animals, their whole soul is in the senses, and they
become mad and enjoy things which we human beings never dream of, and
the pain is commensurate with the pleasure. Pleasure and pain are meted
out in equal measure. If the pleasure felt by animals is so much keener
than that felt by man, it follows that the animals' sense of pain is as
keen, if not keener than man's. So the fact is, the pain and misery men
feel in dying is intensified a thousandfold in animals, and yet we kill
them without troubling ourselves about their misery. This is Maya. And
if we suppose there is a Personal God like a human being, who made
everything, these so-called explanations and theories which try to prove
that out of evil comes good are not sufficient. Let twenty thousand good
things come, but why should they come from evil? On that principle, I
might cut the throats of others because I want the full pleasure of my
five senses. That is no reason. Why should good come through evil? The
question remains to be answered, and it cannot be answered. The
philosophy of India was compelled to admit this.

The Vedanta was (and is) the boldest system of religion. It stopped
nowhere, and it had one advantage. There was no body of priests who
sought to suppress every man who tried to tell the truth. There was
always absolute religious freedom. In India the bondage of superstition
is a social one; here in the West society is very free. Social matters
in India are very strict, but religious opinion is free. In England a
man may dress any way he likes, or eat what he likes — no one objects;
but if he misses attending church, then Mrs. Grundy is down on him. He
has to conform first to what society says on religion, and then he may
think of the truth. In India, on the other hand, if a man dines with one
who does not belong to his own caste, down comes society with all its
terrible powers and crushes him then and there. If he wants to dress a
little differently from the way in which his ancestor dressed ages ago,
he is done for. I have heard of a man who was cast out by society
because he went several miles to see the first railway train. Well, we
shall presume that was not true! But in religion, we find atheists,
materialists, and Buddhists, creeds, opinions, and speculations of every
phase and variety, some of a most startling character, living side by
side. Preachers of all sects go about reaching and getting adherents,
and at the very gates of the temples of gods, the Brâhmins — to their
credit be it said — allow even the materialists to stand and give forth
their opinions.

Buddha died at a ripe old age. I remember a friend of mine, a great
American scientist, who was fond of reading his life. He did not like
the death of Buddha, because he was not crucified. What a false idea!
For a man to be great he must be murdered! Such ideas never prevailed in
India. This great Buddha travelled all over India, denouncing her gods
and even the God of the universe, and yet he lived to a good old age.
For eighty years he lived, and had converted half the country.

Then, there were the Chârvâkas, who preached horrible things, the most
rank, undisguised materialism, such as in the nineteenth century they
dare not openly preach. These Charvakas were allowed to preach from
temple to temple, and city to city, that religion was all nonsense, that
it was priestcraft, that the Vedas were the words and writings of fools,
rogues, and demons, and that there was neither God nor an eternal soul.
If there was a soul, why did it not come back after death drawn by the
love of wife and child. Their idea was that if there was a soul it must
still love after death, and want good things to eat and nice dress. Yet
no one hurt these Charvakas.

Thus India has always had this magnificent idea of religious freedom,
and you must remember that freedom is the first condition of growth.
What you do not make free, will never grow. The idea that you can make
others grow and help their growth, that you can direct and guide them,
always retaining for yourself the freedom of the teacher, is nonsense, a
dangerous lie which has retarded the growth of millions and millions of
human beings in this world. Let men have the light of liberty. That is
the only condition of growth.

We, in India, allowed liberty in spiritual matters, and we have a
tremendous spiritual power in religious thought even today. You grant
the same liberty in social matters, and so have a splendid social
organisation. We have not given any freedom to the expansion of social
matters, and ours is a cramped society. You have never given any freedom
in religious matters but with fire and sword have enforced your beliefs,
and the result is that religion is a stunted, degenerated growth in the
European mind. In India, we have to take off the shackles from society;
in Europe, the chains must be taken from the feet of spiritual progress.
Then will come a wonderful growth and development of man. If we discover
that there is one unity running through all these developments,
spiritual, moral, and social, we shall find that religion, in the
fullest sense of the word, must come into society, and into our everyday
life. In the light of Vedanta you will Understand that all sciences are
but manifestations of religion, and so is everything that exists in this
world.

We see, then, that through freedom the sciences were built; and in them
we have two sets of opinions, the one the materialistic and denouncing,
and the other the positive and constructive. It is a most curious fact
that in every society you find them. Supposing there is an evil in
society, you will find immediately one group rise up and denounce it in
vindictive fashion, which sometimes degenerates into fanaticism. There
are fanatics in every society, and women frequently join in these
outcries, because of their impulsive nature. Every fanatic who gets up
and denounces something can secure a following. It is very easy to break
down; a maniac can break anything he likes, but it would be hard for him
to build up anything. These fanatics may do some good, according to
their light, but much more harm. Because social institutions are not
made in a day, and to change them means removing the cause. Suppose
there is an evil; denouncing it will not remove it, but you must go to
work at the root. First find out the cause, then remove it, and the
effect will be removed also. Mere outcry not produce any effect, unless
indeed it produces misfortune.

There are others who had sympathy in their hearts and who understood the
idea that we must go deep into the cause, these were the great saints.
One fact you must remember, that all the great teachers of the world
have declared that they came not to destroy but to fulfil. Many times
his has not been understood, and their forbearance has been thought to
be an unworthy compromise with existing popular opinions. Even now, you
occasionally hear that these prophets and great teachers were rather
cowardly, and dared not say and do what they thought was right; but that
was not so. Fanatics little understand the infinite power of love in the
hearts of these great sages who looked upon the inhabitants of this
world as their children. They were the real fathers, the real gods,
filled with infinite sympathy and patience for everyone; they were ready
to bear and forbear. They knew how human society should grow, and
patiently slowly, surely, went on applying their remedies, not by
denouncing and frightening people, but by gently and kindly leading them
upwards step by step. Such were the writers of the Upanishads. They knew
full well how the old ideas of God were not reconcilable with the
advanced ethical ideas of the time; they knew full well that what the
atheists were preaching contained a good deal of truth, nay, great
nuggets of truth; but at the same time, they understood that those who
wished to sever the thread that bound the beads, who wanted to build a
new society in the air, would entirely fail.

We never build anew, we simply change places; we cannot have anything
new, we only change the position of things. The seed grows into the
tree, patiently and gently; we must direct our energies towards the
truth and fulfil the truth that exists, not try to make new truths.
Thus, instead of denouncing these old ideas of God as unfit for modern
times, the ancient sages began to seek out the reality that was in them.
The result was the Vedanta philosophy, and out of the old deities, out
of the monotheistic God, the Ruler of the universe, they found yet
higher and higher ideas in what is called the Impersonal Absolute; they
found oneness throughout the universe.

He who sees in this world of manifoldness that One running through all,
in this world of death he who finds that One Infinite Life, and in this
world of insentience and ignorance he who finds that One Light and
Knowledge, unto him belongs eternal peace. Unto none else, unto none
else.

</div>
