---
title: MAYA AND FREEDOM

---
<div>

[←](maya_and_the_evolution_of_the_conception_of_god.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 2](../volume_2_contents.htm)
/ [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_absolute_and_manifestation.htm)

  

CHAPTER V

## MAYA AND FREEDOM

(*Delivered in London, 22nd October 1896*)

"Trailing clouds of glory we come," says the poet. Not all of us come as
trailing clouds of glory however; some of us come as trailing black
fogs; there can be no question about that. But every one of us comes
into this world to fight, as on a battlefield. We come here weeping to
fight our way, as well as we can, and to make a path for ourselves
through this infinite ocean of life; forward we go, having long ages
behind us and an immense expanse beyond. So on we go, till death comes
and takes us off the field — victorious or defeated, we do not know. And
this is Mâyâ.

Hope is dominant in the heart of childhood. The whole world is a golden
vision to the opening eyes of the child; he thinks his will is supreme.
As he moves onward, at every step nature stands as an adamantine wall,
barring his future progress. He may hurl himself against it again and
again, striving to break through. The further he goes, the further
recedes the ideal, till death comes, and there is release, perhaps. And
this is Maya.

A man of science rises, he is thirsting after knowledge. No sacrifice is
too great, no struggle too hopeless for him. He moves onward discovering
secret after secret of nature, searching out the secrets from her
innermost heart, and what for? What is it all for? Why should we give
him glory? Why should he acquire fame? Does not nature do infinitely
more than any human being can do? — and nature is dull, insentient. Why
should it be glory to imitate the dull, the insentient? Nature can hurl
a thunderbolt of any magnitude to any distance. If a man can do one
small part as much, we praise him and laud him to the skies. Why? Why
should we praise him for imitating nature, imitating death, imitating
dullness imitating insentience? The force of gravitation can pull to
pieces the biggest mass that ever existed; yet it is insentient. What
glory is there in imitating the insentient? Yet we are all struggling
after that. And this is maya.

The senses drag the human soul out. Man is seeking for pleasure and for
happiness where it can never be found. For countless ages we are all
taught that this is futile and vain, there is no happiness here. But we
cannot learn; it is impossible for us to do so, except through our own
experiences. We try them, and a blow comes. Do we learn then? Not even
then. Like moths hurling themselves against the flame, we are hurling
ourselves again and again into sense-pleasures, hoping to find
satisfaction there. We return again and again with freshened energy;
thus we go on, till crippled and cheated we die. And this is Maya.

So with our intellect. In our desire to solve the mysteries of the
universe, we cannot stop our questioning, we feel we must know and
cannot believe that no knowledge is to be gained. A few steps, and there
arises the wall of beginningless and endless time which we cannot
surmount. A few steps, and there appears a wall of boundless space which
cannot be surmounted, and the whole is irrevocably bound in by the walls
of cause and effect. We cannot go beyond them. Yet we struggle, and
still have to struggle. And this is Maya.

With every breath, with every pulsation of the heart with every one of
our movements, we think we are free, and the very same moment we are
shown that we are not. Bound slaves, nature's bond-slaves, in body, in
mind, in all our thoughts, in all our feelings. And this is Maya.

There was never a mother who did not think her child was a born genius,
the most extraordinary child that was ever born; she dotes upon her
child. Her whole soul is in the child. The child grows up, perhaps
becomes a drunkard, a brute, ill-treats the mother, and the more he
ill-treats her, the more her love increases. The world lauds it as the
unselfish love of the mother, little dreaming that the mother is a born
slave, she cannot help it. She would a thousand times rather throw off
the burden, but she cannot. So she covers it with a mass of flowers,
which she calls wonderful love. And this is Maya.

We are all like this in the world. A legend tells how once Nârada said
to Krishna, "Lord, show me Maya." A few days passed away, and Krishna
asked Narada to make a trip with him towards a desert, and after walking
for several miles, Krishna said, "Narada, I am thirsty; can you fetch
some water for me?" "I will go at once, sir, and get you water." So
Narada went. At a little distance there was a village; he entered the
village in search of water and knocked at a door, which was opened by a
most beautiful young girl. At the sight of her he immediately forgot
that his Master was waiting for water, perhaps dying for the want of it.
He forgot everything and began to talk with the girl. All that day he
did not return to his Master. The next day, he was again at the house,
talking to the girl. That talk ripened into love; he asked the father
for the daughter, and they were married and lived there and had
children. Thus twelve years passed. His father-in-law died, he inherited
his property. He lived, as he seemed to think, a very happy life with
his wife and children, his fields and his cattle and so forth. Then came
a flood. One night the river rose until it overflowed its banks and
flooded the whole village. Houses fell, men and animals were swept away
and drowned, and everything was floating in the rush of the stream.
Narada had to escape. With one hand be held his wife, and with the other
two of his children; another child was on his shoulders, and he was
trying to ford this tremendous flood. After a few steps he found the
current was too strong, and the child on his shoulders fell and was
borne away. A cry of despair came from Narada. In trying to save that
child, he lost his grasp upon one of the others, and it also was lost.
At last his wife, whom he clasped with all his might, was torn away by
the current, and he was thrown on the bank, weeping and wailing in
bitter lamentation. Behind him there came a gentle voice, "My child,
where is the water? You went to fetch a pitcher of water, and I am
waiting for you; you have been gone for quite half an hour." "Half an
hour! " Narada exclaimed. Twelve whole years had passed through his
mind, and all these scenes had happened in half an hour! And this is
Maya.

In one form or another, we are all in it. It is a most difficult and
intricate state of things to understand. It has been preached in every
country, taught everywhere, but only believed in by a few, because until
we get the experiences ourselves we cannot believe in it. What does it
show? Something very terrible. For it is all futile. Time, the avenger
of everything, comes, and nothing is left. He swallows up the saint and
the sinner, the king and the peasant, the beautiful and the ugly; he
leaves nothing. Everything is rushing towards that one goal,
destruction. Our knowledge, our arts, our sciences, everything is
rushing towards it. None can stem the tide, none can hold it back for a
minute. We may try to forget it, in the same way that persons in a
plague-striker city try to create oblivion by drinking, dancing, and
other vain attempts, and so becoming paralysed. So we are trying to
forget, trying to create oblivion by all sorts of sense-pleasures. And
this is Maya.

Two ways have been proposed. One method, which everyone knows, is very
common, and that is: "It may be very true, but do not think of it. 'Make
hay while the sun shines,' as the proverb says. It is all true, it is a
fact, but do not mind it. Seize the few pleasures you can, do what
little you can, do not look at the dark side of the picture, but always
towards the hopeful, the positive side." There is some truth in this,
but there is also a danger. The truth is that it is a good motive power.
Hope and a positive ideal are very good motive powers for our lives, but
there is a certain danger in them. The danger lies in our giving up the
struggle in despair. Such is the case with those who preach, "Take the
world as it is, sit down as calmly and comfortably as you can and be
contented with all these miseries. When you receive blows, say they are
not blows but flowers; and when you are driven about like slaves, say
that you are free. Day and night tell lies to others and to your own
souls, because that is the only way to live happily." This is what is
called practical wisdom, and never was it more prevalent in the world
than in this nineteenth century; because never were harder blows hit
than at the present time, never was competition keener, never were men
so cruel to their fellow-men as now; and, therefore, must this
consolation be offered. It is put forward in the strongest way at the
present time; but it fails, as it always must fail. We cannot hide a
carrion with roses; it is impossible. It would not avail long; for soon
the roses would fade, and the carrion would be worse than ever before.
So with our lives. We may try to cover our old and festering sores with
cloth of gold, but there comes a day when the cloth of gold is removed,
and the sore in all its ugliness is revealed.

Is there no hope then? True it is that we are all slaves of Maya, born
in Maya, and live in Maya. Is there then no way out, no hope? That we
are all miserable, that this world is really a prison, that even our
so-called trailing beauty is but a prison-house, and that even our
intellects and minds are prison-houses, have been known for ages upon
ages. There has never been a man, there has never been a human soul, who
has not felt this sometime or other, however he may talk. And the old
people feel it most, because in them is the accumulated experience of a
whole life, because they cannot be easily cheated by the lies of nature.
Is there no way out?  We find that with all this, with this terrible
fact before us, in the midst of sorrow and suffering, even in this world
where life and death are synonymous, even here, there is a still small
voice that is ringing through all ages, through every country, and in
every heart: "This My Maya is divine, made up of qualities, and very
difficult to cross. Yet those that come unto Me, cross the river of
life." "Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I will
give you rest." This is the voice that is leading us forward. Man has
heard it, and is hearing it all through the ages. This voice comes to
men when everything seems to be lost and hope has fled, when man's
dependence on his own strength has been crushed down and everything
seems to melt away between his fingers, and life is a hopeless ruin.
Then he hears it. This is called religion.

On the one side, therefore, is the bold assertion that this is all
nonsense, that this is Maya, but along with it there is the most hopeful
assertion that beyond Maya, there is a way out. On the other hand,
practical men tell us, "Don't bother your heads about such nonsense as
religion and metaphysics. Live here; this is a very bad world indeed,
but make the best of it." Which put in plain language means, live a
hypocritical, lying life, a life of continuous fraud, covering all sores
in the best way you can. Go on putting patch after patch, until
everything is lost, and you are a mass of patchwork. This is what is
called practical life. Those that are satisfied with this patchwork will
never come to religion. Religion begins with a tremendous
dissatisfaction with the present state of things, with our lives, and a
hatred, an intense hatred, for this patching up of life, an unbounded
disgust for fraud and lies. He alone can be religious who dares say, as
the mighty Buddha once said under the Bo-tree, when this idea of
practicality appeared before him and he saw that it was nonsense, and
yet could not find a way out. When the temptation came to him to give up
his search after truth, to go back to the world and live the old life of
fraud, calling things by wrong names, telling lies to oneself and to
everybody, he, the giant, conquered it and said, "Death is better than a
vegetating ignorant life; it is better to die on the battle-field than
to live a life of defeat." This is the basis of religion. When a man
takes this stand, he is on the way to find the truth, he is on the way
to God. That determination must be the first impulse towards becoming
religious. I will hew out a way for myself. I will know the truth or
give up my life in the attempt. For on this side it is nothing, it is
gone, it is vanishing every day. The beautiful, hopeful, young person of
today is the veteran of tomorrow. Hopes and joys and pleasures will die
like blossoms with tomorrow's frost. That is one side; on the other,
there are the great charms of conquest, victories over all the ills of
life, victory over life itself, the conquest of the universe. On that
side men can stand. Those who dare, therefore, to struggle for victory,
for truth, for religion, are in the right way; and that is what the
Vedas preach: Be not in despair, the way is very difficult, like walking
on the edge of a razor; yet despair not, arise, awake, and find the
ideal, the goal.

Now all these various manifestations of religion, in whatever shape and
form they have come to mankind, have this one common central basis. It
is the preaching of freedom, the way out of this world. They never came
to reconcile the world and religion, but to cut the Gordian knot, to
establish religion in its own ideal, and not to compromise with the
world. That is what every religion preaches, and the duty of the Vedanta
is to harmonise all these aspirations, to make manifest the common
ground between all the religions of the world, the highest as well as
the lowest. What we call the most arrant superstition and the highest
philosophy really have a common aim in that they both try to show the
way out of the same difficulty, and in most cases this way is through
the help of someone who is not himself bound by the laws of nature in
one word, someone who is free. In spite of all the difficulties and
differences of opinion about the nature of the one free agent, whether
he is a Personal God, or a sentient being like man, whether masculine,
feminine, or neuter — and the discussions have been endless — the
fundamental idea is the same. In spite of the almost hopeless
contradictions of the different systems, we find the golden thread of
unity running through them all, and in this philosophy, this golden
thread has been traced revealed little by little to our view, and the
first step to this revelation is the common ground that all are
advancing towards freedom.

One curious fact present in the midst of all our joys and sorrows,
difficulties and struggles, is that we are surely journeying towards
freedom. The question was practically this: "What is this universe? From
what does it arise? Into what does it go?" And the answer was: "In
freedom it rises, in freedom it rests, and into freedom it melts away."
This idea of freedom you cannot relinquish. Your actions, your very
lives will be lost without it. Every moment nature is proving us to be
slaves and not free. Yet, simultaneously rises the other idea, that
still we are free. At every step we are knocked down, as it were, by
Maya, and shown that we are bound; and yet at the same moment, together
with this blow, together with this feeling that we are bound, comes the
other feeling that we are free. Some inner voice tells us that we are
free. But if we attempt to realise that freedom, to make it manifest, we
find the difficulties almost insuperable. Yet, in spite of that it
insists on asserting itself inwardly, "I am free, I am free." And if you
study all the various religions of the world you will find this idea
expressed. Not only religion — you must not take this word in its narrow
sense — but the whole life of society is the assertion of that one
principle of freedom. All movements are the assertion of that one
freedom. That voice has been heard by everyone, whether he knows it or
not, that voice which declares, "Come unto Me all ye that labour and are
heavy laden." It may not be in the same language or the same form of
speech, but in some form or other, that voice calling for freedom has
been with us. Yes, we are born here on account of that voice; every one
of our movements is for that. We are all rushing towards freedom, we are
all following that voice, whether we know it or not; as the children of
the village were attracted by the music of the flute-player, so we are
all following the music of the voice without knowing it.

We are ethical when we follow that voice. Not only the human soul, but
all creatures, from the lowest to the highest have heard the voice and
are rushing towards it; and in the struggle are either combining with
each other or pushing each other out of the way. Thus come competition,
joys, struggles, life, pleasure, and death, and the whole universe is
nothing but the result of this mad struggle to reach the voice. This is
the manifestation of nature.

What happens then? The scene begins to shift. As soon as you know the
voice and understand what it is, the whole scene changes. The same world
which was the ghastly battle-field of Maya is now changed into something
good and beautiful. We no longer curse nature, nor say that the world is
horrible and that it is all vain; we need no longer weep and wail. As
soon as we understand the voice, we see the reassert why this struggle
should be here, this fight, this competition, this difficulty, this
cruelty, these little pleasures and joys; we see that they are in the
nature of things, because without them there would be no going towards
the voice, to attain which we are destined, whether we know it or not.
All human life, all nature, therefore, is struggling to attain to
freedom. The sun is moving towards the goal, so is the earth in circling
round the sun, so is the moon in circling round the earth. To that goal
the planet is moving, and the air is blowing. Everything is struggling
towards that. The saint is going towards that voice — he cannot help it,
it is no glory to him. So is the sinner. The charitable man is going
straight towards that voice, and cannot be hindered; the miser is also
going towards the same destination: the greatest worker of good hears
the same voice within, and he cannot resist it, he must go towards the
voice; so with the most arrant idler. One stumbles more than another,
and him who stumbles more we call bad, him who stumbles less we call
good. Good and bad are never two different things, they are one and the
same; the difference is not one of kind, but of degree.

Now, if the manifestation of this power of freedom is really governing
the whole universe — applying that to religion, our special study — we
find this idea has been the one assertion throughout. Take the lowest
form of religion where there is the worship of departed ancestors or
certain powerful and cruel gods; what is the prominent idea about the
gods or departed ancestors? That they are superior to nature, not bound
by its restrictions. The worshipper has, no doubt, very limited ideas of
nature. He himself cannot pass through a wall, nor fly up into the
skies, but the gods whom he worships can do these things. What is meant
by that, philosophically? That the assertion of freedom is there, that
the gods whom he worships are superior to nature as he knows it. So with
those who worship still higher beings. As the idea of nature expands,
the idea of the soul which is superior to nature also expands, until we
come to what we call monotheism, which holds that there is Maya
(nature), and that there is some Being who is the Ruler of this Maya.

Here Vedanta begins, where these monotheistic ideas first appear. But
the Vedanta philosophy wants further explanation. This explanation —
that there is a Being beyond all these manifestations of Maya, who is
superior to and independent of Maya, and who is attracting us towards
Himself, and that we are all going towards Him — is very good, says the
Vedanta, but yet the perception is not clear, the vision is dim and
hazy, although it does not directly contradict reason. Just as in your
hymn it is said, "Nearer my God to Thee," the same hymn would be very
good to the Vedantin, only he would change a word, and make it, "Nearer
my God to me." The idea that the goal is far off, far beyond nature,
attracting us all towards it, has to be brought nearer and nearer,
without degrading or degenerating it. The God of heaven becomes the God
in nature, and the God in nature becomes the God who is nature, and the
God who is nature becomes the God within this temple of the body, and
the God dwelling in the temple of the body at last becomes the temple
itself, becomes the soul and man — and there it reaches the last words
it can teach. He whom the sages have been seeking in all these places is
in our own hearts; the voice that you heard was right, says the Vedanta,
but the direction you gave to the voice was wrong. That ideal of freedom
that you perceived was correct, but you projected it outside yourself,
and that was your mistake. Bring it nearer and nearer, until you find
that it was all the time within you, it was the Self of your own self.
That freedom was your own nature, and this Maya never bound you. Nature
never has power over you. Like a frightened child you were dreaming that
it was throttling you, and the release from this fear is the goal: not
only to see it intellectually, but to perceive it, actualise it, much
more definitely than we perceive this world. Then we shall know that we
are free. Then, and then alone, will all difficulties vanish, then will
all the perplexities of heart be smoothed away, all crookedness made
straight, then will vanish the delusion of manifoldness and nature; and
Maya instead of being a horrible, hopeless dream, as it is now will
become beautiful, and this earth, instead of being a prison-house, will
become our playground, and even dangers and difficulties, even all
sufferings, will become deified and show us their real nature, will show
us that behind everything, as the substance of everything, He is
standing, and that He is the one real Self.

</div>
