---
title: THE ABSOLUTE AND MANIFESTATION

---
<div>

[←](maya_and_freedom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](god_in_everything.htm)

  

CHAPTER VI

## THE ABSOLUTE AND MANIFESTATION

(*Delivered in London, 1896*)

The one question that is most difficult to grasp in understanding the
Advaita philosophy, and the one question that will be asked again and
again and that will always remain is: How has the Infinite, the
Absolute, become the finite? I will now take up this question, and, in
order to illustrate it, I will use a figure. Here is the Absolute (*a*),
and this is the universe (*b*). The Absolute has  ![](chart.jpg)become
the universe. By this is not only meant the material world, but the
mental world, the spiritual world — heavens and earths, and in fact,
everything that exists. Mind is the name of a change, and body the name
of another change, and so on, and all these changes compose our
universe. This Absolute (*a*) has become the universe (*b*) by coming
through time, space, and causation (*c*). This is the central idea of
Advaita. Time, space, and causation are like the glass through which the
Absolute is seen, and when It is seen on the lower side, It appears as
the universe. Now we at once gather from this that in the Absolute there
is neither time, space, nor causation. The idea of time cannot be there,
seeing that there is no mind, no thought. The idea of space cannot be
there, seeing that there is no external change. What you call motion and
causation cannot exist where there is only One. We have to understand
this, and impress it on our minds, that what we call causation begins
after, if we may be permitted to say so, the degeneration of the
Absolute into the phenomenal, and not before; that our will, our desire
and all these things always come *after* that. I think Schopenhauer's
philosophy makes a mistake in its interpretation of Vedanta, for it
seeks to make the will everything. Schopenhauer makes the will stand in
the place of the Absolute. But the absolute cannot be presented as will,
for will is something changeable and phenomenal, and over the line,
drawn above time, space, and causation, there is no change, no motion;
it is only below the line that external motion and internal motion,
called thought begin. There can be no will on the other side, and will
therefore, cannot be the cause of this universe. Coming nearer, we see
in our own bodies that will is not the cause of every movement. I move
this chair; my will is the cause of this movement, and this will becomes
manifested as muscular motion at the other end. But the same power that
moves the chair is moving the heart, the lungs, and so on, but not
through will. Given that the power is the same, it only becomes will
when it rises to the plane of consciousness, and to call it will before
it has risen to this plane is a misnomer. This makes a good deal of
confusion in Schopenhauer's philosophy.

A stone falls and we ask, why? This question is possible only on the
supposition that nothing happens without a cause. I request you to make
this very clear in your minds, for whenever we ask why anything happens,
we are taking for granted that everything that happens must have a why,
that is to say, it must have been preceded by something else which acted
as the cause. This precedence and succession are what we call the law of
causation. It means that everything in the universe is by turn a cause
and an effect. It is the cause of certain things which come after it,
and is itself the effect of something else which has preceded it. This
is called the law of causation and is a necessary condition of all our
thinking. We believe that every particle in the universe, whatever it
be, is in relation to every other particle. There has been much
discussion as to how this idea arose. In Europe, there have been
intuitive philosophers who believed that it was constitutional in
humanity, others have believed it came from experience, but the question
has never been settled. We shall see later on what the Vedanta has to
say about it. But first we have to understand this that the very asking
of the question "why" presupposes that everything round us has been
preceded by certain things and will be succeeded by certain other
things. The other belief involved in this question is that nothing in
the universe is independent, that everything is acted upon by something
outside itself. Interdependence is the law of the whole universe. In
asking what caused the Absolute, what an error we are making! To ask
this question we have to suppose that the Absolute also is bound by
something, that It is dependent on something; and in making this
supposition, we drag the Absolute down to the level of the universe. For
in the Absolute there is neither time, space, nor causation; It is all
one. That which exists by itself alone cannot have any cause. That which
is free cannot have any cause; else it would not be free, but bound.
That which has relativity cannot be free. Thus we see the very question,
why the Infinite became the finite, is an impossible one, for it is
self-contradictory. Coming from subtleties to the logic of our common
plane, to common sense, we can see this from another side, when we seek
to know how the Absolute has become the relative. Supposing we knew the
answer, would the Absolute remain the Absolute? It would have become
relative. What is meant by knowledge in our common-sense idea? It is
only something that has become limited by our mind, that we know, and
when it is beyond our mind, it is not knowledge. Now if the Absolute
becomes limited by the mind, It is no more Absolute; It has become
finite. Everything limited by the mind becomes finite. Therefore to know
the Absolute is again a contradiction in terms. That is why this
question has never been answered, because if it were answered, there
would no more be an Absolute. A God known is no more God; He has become
finite like one of us. He cannot be known He is always the Unknowable
One.

But what Advaita says is that God is more than knowable. This is a great
fact to learn. You must not go home with the idea that God is unknowable
in the sense in which agnostics put it. For instance, here is a chair,
it is known to us. But what is beyond ether or whether people exist
there or not is possibly unknowable. But God is neither known nor
unknowable in this sense. He is something still higher than known; that
is what is meant by God being unknown and unknowable. The expression is
not used in the sense in which it may be said that some questions are
unknown and unknowable. God is more than known. This chair is known, but
God is intensely more than that because in and through Him we have to
know this chair itself. He is the Witness, the eternal Witness of all
knowledge. Whatever we know we have to know in and through Him. He is
the Essence of our own Self. He is the Essence of this ego, this I and
we cannot know anything excepting in and through that I. Therefore you
have to know everything in and through the Brahman. To know the chair
you have to know it in and through God. Thus God is infinitely nearer to
us than the chair, but yet He is infinitely higher. Neither known, nor
unknown, but something infinitely higher than either. He is your Self.
"Who would live a second, who would breathe a second in this universe,
if that Blessed One were not filling it?" Because in and through Him we
breathe, in and through Him we exist. Not the He is standing somewhere
and making my blood circulate. What is meant is that He is the Essence
of all this, the Soul of my soul. You cannot by any possibility say you
know Him; it would be degrading Him. You cannot get out of yourself, so
you cannot know Him. Knowledge is objectification. For instance, in
memory you are objectifying many things, projecting them out of
yourself. All memory, all the things which I have seen and which I know
are in my mind. The pictures, the impressions of all these things, are
in my mind, and when I would try to think of them, to know them, the
first act of knowledge would be to project them outside. This cannot be
done with God, because He is the Essence of our souls, we cannot project
Him outside ourselves. Here is one of the profoundest passages in
Vedanta: "He that is the Essence of your soul, He is the Truth, He is
the Self, thou art That, O Shvetaketu." This is what is meant by "Thou
art God." You cannot describe Him by any other language. All attempts of
language, calling Him father, or brother, or our dearest friend, are
attempts to objectify God, which cannot be done. He is the Eternal
Subject of everything. I am the subject of this chair; I see the chair;
so God is the Eternal Subject of my soul. How can you objectify Him, the
Essence of your souls, the Reality of everything? Thus, I would repeat
to you once more, God is neither knowable nor unknowable, but something
infinitely higher than either. He is one with us, and that which is one
with us is neither knowable nor unknowable, as our own self. You cannot
know your own self; you cannot move it out and make it an object to look
at, because you *are* that and cannot separate yourself from it. Neither
is it unknowable, for what is better known than yourself? It is really
the centre of our knowledge. In exactly the same sense, God is neither
unknowable nor known, but infinitely higher than both; for He is our
real Self.

First, we see then that the question, "What caused the Absolute?" is a
contradiction in terms; and secondly, we find that the idea of God in
the Advaita is this Oneness; and, therefore, we cannot objectify Him,
for we are always living and moving in Him, whether we know it or not.
Whatever we do is always through Him. Now the question is: What are
time, space, and causation? Advaita means non-duality; there are no two,
but one. Yet we see that here is a proposition that the Absolute is
manifesting Itself as many, through the veil of time, space, and
causation. Therefore it seems that here are two, the Absolute and Mâyâ
(the sum total of time, space, and causation). It seems apparently very
convincing that there are two. To this the Advaitist replies that it
cannot be called two. To have two, we must have two absolute independent
existences which cannot be caused. In the first place time, space, and
causation cannot be said to be independent existences. Time is entirely
a dependent existence; it changes with every change of our mind.
Sometimes in dream one imagines that one has lived several years, at
other times several months were passed as one second. So, time is
entirely dependent on our state of mind. Secondly, the idea of time
vanishes altogether, sometimes. So with space. We cannot know what space
is. Yet it is there, indefinable, and cannot exist separate from
anything else. So with causation.

The one peculiar attribute we find in time, space, and causation is that
they cannot exist separate from other things. Try to think of space
without colour, or limits, or any connection with the things around —
just abstract space. You cannot; you have to think of it as the space
between two limits or between three objects. It has to be connected with
some object to have any existence. So with time; you cannot have any
idea of abstract time, but you have to take two events, one preceding
and the other succeeding, and join the two events by the idea of
succession. Time depends on two events, just as space has to be related
to outside objects. And the idea of causation is inseparable from time
and space. This is the peculiar thing about them that they have no
independent existence. They have not even the existence which the chair
or the wall has. They are as shadows around everything which you cannot
catch. They have no real existence; yet they are not non-existent,
seeing that through them all things are manifesting as this universe.
Thus we see, first, that the combination of time, space, and causation
has neither existence nor non-existence. Secondly, it sometimes
vanishes. To give an illustration, there is a wave on the ocean. The
wave is the same as the ocean certainly, and yet we know it is a wave,
and as such different from the ocean. What makes this difference? The
name and the form, that is, the idea in the mind and the form. Now, can
we think of a wave-form as something separate from the ocean? Certainly
not. It is always associated with the ocean idea. If the wave subsides,
the form vanishes in a moment, and yet the form was not a delusion. So
long as the wave existed the form was there, and you were bound to see
the form. This is Maya.

The whole of this universe, therefore, is, as it were, a peculiar form;
the Absolute is that ocean while you and I, and suns and stars, and
everything else are various waves of that ocean. And what makes the
waves different? Only the form, and that form is time, space, and
causation, all entirely dependent on the wave. As soon as the wave goes,
they vanish. As soon as the individual gives up this Maya, it vanishes
for him and he becomes free. The whole struggle is to get rid of this
clinging on to time, space, and causation, which are always obstacles in
our way. What is the theory of evolution? What are the two factors? A
tremendous potential power which is trying to express itself, and
circumstances which are holding it down, the environments not allowing
it to express itself. So, in order to fight with these environments, the
power is taking new bodies again and again. An amoeba, in the struggle,
gets another body and conquers some obstacles, then gets another body
and so on, until it becomes man. Now, if you carry this idea to its
logical conclusion, there must come a time when that power that was in
the amoeba and which evolved as man will have conquered all the
obstructions that nature can bring before it and will thus escape from
all its environments. This idea expressed in metaphysics will take this
form; there are two components in every action, the one the subject, the
other the object and the one aim of life is to make the subject master
of the object. For instance, I feel unhappy because a man scolds me. My
struggle will be to make myself strong enough to conquer the
environment, so that he may scold and I shall not feel. That is how we
are all trying to conquer. What is meant by morality? Making the subject
strong by attuning it to the Absolute, so that finite nature ceases to
have control over us. It is a logical conclusion of our philosophy that
there must come a time when we shall have conquered all the
environments, because nature is finite.

Here is another thing to learn. How do you know that nature is finite?
You can only know this through metaphysics. Nature is that Infinite
under limitations. Therefore it is finite. So, there must come a time
when we shall have conquered all environments. And how are we to conquer
them? We cannot possibly conquer *all* the objective environments. We
cannot. The little fish wants to fly from its enemies in the water. How
does it do so? By evolving wings and becoming a bird. The fish did not
change the water or the air; the change was in itself. Change is always
subjective. All through evolution you find that the conquest of nature
comes by change in the subject. Apply this to religion and morality, and
you will find that the conquest of evil comes by the change in the
subjective alone. That is how the Advaita system gets its whole force,
on the subjective side of man. To talk of evil and misery is nonsense,
because they do not exist outside. If I am immune against all anger, I
never feel angry. If I am proof against all hatred, I never feel hatred.

This is, therefore, the process by which to achieve that conquest —
through the subjective, by perfecting the subjective. I may make bold to
say that the only religion which agrees with, and even goes a little
further than modern researches, both on physical and moral lines is the
Advaita, and that is why it appeals to modern scientists so much. They
find that the old dualistic theories are not enough for them, do not
satisfy their necessities. A man must have not only faith, but
intellectual faith too. Now, in this later part of the nineteenth
century, such an idea as that religion coming from any other source than
one's own hereditary religion must be false shows that there is still
weakness left, and such ideas must be given up. I do not mean that such
is the case in this country alone, it is in every country, and nowhere
more than in my own. This Advaita was never allowed to come to the
people. At first some monks got hold of it and took it to the forests,
and so it came to be called the "Forest Philosophy". By the mercy of the
Lord, the Buddha came and preached it to the masses, and the whole
nation became Buddhists. Long after that, when atheists and agnostics
had destroyed the nation again, it was found out that Advaita was the
only way to save India from materialism.

Thus has Advaita twice saved India from materialism Before the Buddha
came, materialism had spread to a fearful extent, and it was of a most
hideous kind, not like that of the present day, but of a far worse
nature. I am a materialist in a certain sense, because I believe that
there is only One. That is what the materialist wants you to believe;
only he calls it matter and I call it God. The materialists admit that
out of this matter all hope, and religion, and everything have come. I
say, all these have come out of Brahman. But the materialism that
prevailed before Buddha was that crude sort of materialism which taught,
"Eat, drink, and be merry; there is no God, soul or heaven; religion is
a concoction of wicked priests." It taught the morality that so long as
you live, you must try to live happily; eat, though you have to borrow
money for the food, and never mind about repaying it. That was the old
materialism, and that kind of philosophy spread so much that even today
it has got the name of "popular philosophy". Buddha brought the Vedanta
to light, gave it to the people, and saved India. A thousand years after
his death a similar state of things again prevailed. The mobs, the
masses, and various races, had been converted to Buddhism; naturally the
teachings of the Buddha became in time degenerated, because most of the
people were very ignorant. Buddhism taught no God, no Ruler of the
universe, so gradually the masses brought their gods, and devils, and
hobgoblins out again, and a tremendous hotchpotch was made of Buddhism
in India. Again materialism came to the fore, taking the form of licence
with the higher classes and superstition with the lower. Then
Shankaracharya arose and once more revivified the Vedanta philosophy. He
made it a rationalistic philosophy. In the Upanishads the arguments are
often very obscure. By Buddha the moral side of the philosophy was laid
stress upon, and by Shankaracharya, the intellectual side. He worked
out, rationalised, and placed before men the wonderful coherent system
of Advaita.

Materialism prevails in Europe today. You may pray for the salvation of
the modern sceptics, but they do not yield, they want reason. The
salvation of Europe depends on a rationalistic religion, and Advaita —
the non-duality, the Oneness, the idea of the Impersonal God — is the
only religion that can have any hold on any intellectual people. It
comes whenever religion seems to disappear and irreligion seems to
prevail, and that is why it has taken ground in Europe and America.

I would say one thing more in connection with this philosophy. In the
old Upanishads we find sublime poetry; their authors were poets. Plato
says, inspiration comes to people through poetry, and it seems as if
these ancient Rishis, seers of Truth, were raised above humanity to show
these truths through poetry. They never preached, nor philosophised, nor
wrote. Music came out of their hearts. In Buddha we had the great,
universal heart and infinite patience, making religion practical and
bringing it to everyone's door. In Shankaracharya we saw tremendous
intellectual power, throwing the scorching light of reason upon
everything. We want today that bright sun of intellectuality joined with
the heart of Buddha, the wonderful infinite heart of love and mercy.
This union will give us the highest philosophy. Science and religion
will meet and shake hands. Poetry and philosophy will become friends.
This will be the religion of the future, and if we can work it out, we
may be sure that it will be for all times and peoples. This is the one
way that will prove acceptable to modern science, for it has almost come
to it. When the scientific teacher asserts that all things are the
manifestation of one force, does it not remind you of the God of whom
you hear in the Upanishads: "As the one fire entering into the universe
expresses itself in various forms, even so that One Soul is expressing
Itself in every soul and yet is infinitely more besides?" Do you not see
whither science is tending? The Hindu nation proceeded through the study
of the mind, through metaphysics and logic. The European nations start
from external nature, and now they too are coming to the same results.
We find that searching through the mind we at last come to that Oneness,
that Universal One, the Internal Soul of everything, the Essence and
Reality of everything, the Ever-Free, the Ever-blissful, the
Ever-Existing. Through material science we come to the same Oneness.
Science today is telling us that all things are but the manifestation of
one energy which is the sum total of everything which exists, and the
trend of humanity is towards freedom and not towards bondage. Why should
men be moral? Because through morality is the path towards freedom, and
immorality leads to bondage.

Another peculiarity of the Advaita system is that from its very start it
is non-destructive. This is another glory, the boldness to preach, "Do
not disturb the faith of any, even of those who through ignorance have
attached themselves to lower forms of worship." That is what it says, do
not disturb, but help everyone to get higher and higher; include all
humanity. This philosophy preaches a God who is a sum total. If you seek
a universal religion which can apply to everyone, that religion must not
be composed of only the parts, but it must always be their sum total and
include all degrees of religious development.

This idea is not clearly found in any other religious system. They are
all parts equally struggling to attain to the whole. The existence of
the part is only for this. So, from the very first, Advaita had no
antagonism with the various sects existing in India. There are dualists
existing today, and their number is by far the largest in India, because
dualism naturally appeals to less educated minds. It is a very
convenient, natural, common-sense explanation of the universe. But with
these dualists, Advaita has no quarrel. The one thinks that God is
outside the universe, somewhere in heaven, and the other, that He is his
own Soul, and that it will be a blasphemy to call Him anything more
distant. Any idea of separation would be terrible. He is the nearest of
the near. There is no word in any language to express this nearness
except the word Oneness. With any other idea the Advaitist is not
satisfied just as the dualist is shocked with the concept of the
Advaita, and thinks it blasphemous. At the same time the Advaitist knows
that these other ideas must be, and so has no quarrel with the dualist
who is on the right road. From his standpoint, the dualist will have to
see many. It is a constitutional necessity of his standpoint. Let him
have it. The Advaitist knows that whatever may be his theories, he is
going to the same goal as he himself. There he differs entirely from
dualist who is forced by his point of view to believe that all differing
views are wrong. The dualists all the world over naturally believe in a
Personal God who is purely anthropomorphic, who like a great potentate
in this world is pleased with some and displeased with others. He is
arbitrarily pleased with some people or races and showers blessing upon
them. Naturally the dualist comes to the conclusion that God has
favourites, and he hopes to be one of them. You will find that in almost
every religion is the idea: "We are the favourites of our God, and only
by believing as we do, can you be taken into favour with Him." Some
dualists are so narrow as to insist that only the few that have been
predestined to the favour of God can be saved; the rest may try ever so
hard, but they cannot be accepted. I challenge you to show me one
dualistic religion which has not more or less of this exclusiveness.
And, therefore, in the nature of things, dualistic religions are bound
to fight and quarrel with each other, and this they have ever been
doing. Again, these dualists win the popular favour by appealing to the
vanity of the uneducated. They like to feel that they enjoy exclusive
privileges. The dualist thinks you cannot be moral until you have a God
with a rod in His hand, ready to punish you. The unthinking masses are
generally dualists, and they, poor fellows, have been persecuted for
thousands of years in every country; and their idea of salvation is,
therefore, freedom from the fear of punishment. I was asked by a
clergyman in America, "What! you have no Devil in your religion? How can
that be?" But we find that the best and the greatest men that have been
born in the world have worked with that high impersonal idea. It is the
Man who said, "I and my Father are One", whose power has descended unto
millions. For thousands of years it has worked for good. And we know
that the same Man, because he was a nondualist, was merciful to others.
To the masses who could not conceive of anything higher than a Personal
God, he said, "Pray to your Father in heaven." To others who could grasp
a higher idea, he said, "I am the vine, ye are the branches," but to his
disciples to whom he revealed himself more fully, he proclaimed the
highest truth, "I and my Father are One."

It was the great Buddha, who never cared for the dualist gods, and who
has been called an atheist and materialist, who yet was ready to give up
his body for a poor goat. That Man set in motion the highest moral ideas
any nation can have. Whenever there is a moral code, it is ray of light
from that Man. We cannot force the great hearts of the world into narrow
limits, and keep them there, especially at this time in the history of
humanity when there is a degree of intellectual development such as was
never dreamed of even a hundred years ago, when a wave of scientific
knowledge has arisen which nobody, even fifty years ago, would have
dreamed of. By trying to force people into narrow limits you degrade
them into animals and unthinking masses. You kill their moral life. What
is now wanted is a combination of the greatest heart with the highest
intellectuality, of infinite love with infinite knowledge. The Vedantist
gives no other attributes to God except these three — that He is
Infinite Existence, Infinite Knowledge, and Infinite Bliss, and he
regards these three as One. Existence without knowledge and love cannot
be; knowledge without love and love without knowledge cannot be. What we
want is the harmony of Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Infinite. For
that is our goal. We want harmony, not one-sided development. And it is
possible to have the intellect of a Shankara with the heart of a Buddha.
I hope we shall all struggle to attain to that blessed combination.

</div>
