---
title: GOD IN EVERYTHING

---
<div>

[←](the_absolute_and_manifestation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](realisation.htm)

  

CHAPTER VII

## GOD IN EVERYTHING

(*Delivered in London, 27th October 1896*)

We have seen how the greater portion of our life must of necessity be
filled with evils, however we may resist, and that this mass of evil is
practically almost infinite for us. We have been struggling to remedy
this since the beginning of time, yet everything remains very much the
same. The more we discover remedies, the more we find ourselves beset by
subtler evils. We have also seen that all religions propose a God, as
the one way of escaping these difficulties. All religions tell us that
if you take the world as it is, as most practical people would advise us
to do in this age, then nothing would be left to us but evil. They
further assert that there is something beyond this world. This life in
the five senses, life in the material world, is not all; it is only a
small portion, and merely superficial. Behind and beyond is the Infinite
in which there is no more evil. Some people call It God, some Allah,
some Jehovah, Jove, and so on. The Vedantin calls It Brahman.

The first impression we get of the advice given by religions is that we
had better terminate our existence. To the question how to cure the
evils of life, the answer apparently is, give up life. It reminds one of
the old story. A mosquito settled on the head of a man, and a friend,
wishing to kill the mosquito, gave it such a blow that he killed both
man and mosquito. The remedy of evil seems to suggest a similar course
of action. Life is full of ills, the world is full of evils; that is a
fact no one who is old enough to know the world can deny.

But what is remedy proposed by all the religions? That this world is
nothing. Beyond this world is something which is very real. Here comes
the difficulty. The remedy seems to destroy everything. How can that be
a remedy? Is there no way out then? The Vedanta says that what all the
religions advance is perfectly true, but it should be properly
understood. Often it is misunderstood, because the religions are not
very clear in their meaning. What we really want is head and heart
combined. The heart is great indeed; it is through the heart that come
the great inspirations of life. I would a hundred times rather have a
little heart and no brain, than be all brains and no heart. Life is
possible, progress is possible for him who has heart, but he who has no
heart and only brains dies of dryness.

At the same time we know that he who is carried along by his heart alone
has to undergo many ills, for now and then he is liable to tumble into
pitfalls. The combination of heart and head is what we want. I do not
mean that a man should compromise his heart for his brain or vice versa,
but let everyone have an infinite amount of heart and feeling, and at
the same time an infinite amount of reason. Is there any limit to what
we want in this world? Is not the world infinite? There is room for an
infinite amount of feeling, and so also for an infinite amount of
culture and reason. Let them come together without limit, let them be
running together, as it were, in parallel lines each with the other.

Most of the religions understand the fact, but the error into which they
all seem to fall is the same; they are carried away by the heart, the
feelings. There is evil in the world, give up the world; that is the
great teaching, and the only teaching, no doubt. Give up the world.
There cannot be two opinions that to understand the truth everyone of us
has to give up error. There cannot be two opinions that everyone of us
in order to have good must give up evil; there cannot be two opinions
that everyone of us to have life must give up what is death.

And yet, what remains to us, if this theory involves giving up the life
of the senses, the life as we know it? And what else do we mean by life?
If we give this up, what remains?

We shall understand this better, when, later on, we come to the more
philosophical portions of the Vedanta. But for the present I beg to
state that in Vedanta alone we find a rational solution of the problem.
Here I can only lay before you what the Vedanta seeks to teach, and that
is the deification of the world. The Vedanta does not in reality
denounce the world. The ideal of renunciation nowhere attains such a
height as in the teachings of the Vedanta. But, at the same time, dry
suicidal advice is not intended; it really means deification of the
world — giving up the world as we think of it, as we know it, as it
appears to us — and to know what it really is. Deify it; it is God
alone. We read at the commencement of one of the oldest of the
Upanishads, "Whatever exists in this universe is to be covered with the
Lord."

We have to cover everything with the Lord Himself, not by a false sort
of optimism, not by blinding our eyes to the evil, but by really seeing
God in everything. Thus we have to give up the world, and when the world
is given up, what remains? God. What is meant? You can have your wife;
it does not mean that you are to abandon her, but that you are to see
God in the wife. Give up your children; what does that mean? To turn
them out of doors, as some human brutes do in every country? Certainly
not. That is diabolism; it is not religion. But see God in your
children. So, in everything. In life and in death, in happiness and in
misery, the Lord is equally present. The whole world is full of the
Lord. Open your eyes and see Him. This is what Vedanta teaches. Give up
the world which you have conjectured, because your conjecture was based
upon a very partial experience, upon very poor reasoning, and upon your
own weakness. Give it up; the world we have been thinking of so long,
the world to which we have been clinging so long, is a false world of
our own creation. Give that up; open your eyes and see that as such it
never existed; it was a dream, Maya. What existed was the Lord Himself.
It is He who is in the child, in the wife, and in the husband; it is He
who is in the good and in the bad; He is in the sin and in the sinner;
He is in life and in death.

A tremendous assertion indeed! Yet that is the theme which the Vedanta
wants to demonstrate, to teach, and to preach. This is just the opening
theme.

Thus we avoid the dangers of life and its evils. Do not desire anything.
What makes us miserable? The cause of all miseries from which we suffer
is desire. You desire something, and the desire is not fulfilled; the
result is distress. If there is no desire, there is no suffering. But
here, too, there is the danger of my being misunderstood. So it is
necessary to explain what I mean by giving up desire and becoming free
from all misery. The walls have no desire and they never suffer. True,
but they never evolve. This chair has no desires, it never suffers; but
it is always a chair. There is a glory in happiness, there is a glory in
suffering. If I may dare to say so, there is a utility in evil too. The
great lesson in misery we all know. There are hundreds of things we have
done in our lives which we wish we had never done, but which, at the
same time, have been great teachers. As for me, I am glad I have done
something good and many things bad; glad I have done something right,
and glad I have committed many errors, because every one of them has
been a great lesson. I, as I am now, am the resultant of all I have
done, all I have thought. Every action and thought have had their
effect, and these effects are the sum total of my progress.

We all understand that desires are wrong, but what is meant by giving up
desires? How could life go on? It would be the same suicidal advice,
killing the desire and the man too. The solution is this. Not that you
should not have property, not that you should not have things which are
necessary and things which are even luxuries. Have all that you want,
and more, only know the truth and realise it. Wealth does not belong to
anybody. Have no idea of proprietorship, possessorship. You are nobody,
nor am I, nor anyone else. All belongs to the Lord, because the opening
verse told us to put the Lord in everything. God is in the wealth that
you enjoy. He is in the desire that rises in your mind. He is in the
things you buy to satisfy your desire; He is in your beautiful attire,
in your beautiful ornaments. This is the line of thought. All will be
metamorphosed as soon as you begin to see things in that light. If you
put God in your every movement, in your conversation, in your form, in
everything, the whole scene changes, and the world, instead of appearing
as one of woe and misery, will become a heaven.

"The kingdom of heaven is within you," says Jesus; so says the Vedanta,
and every great teacher. "He that hath eyes to see, let him see, and he
that hath ears to hear, let him hear." The Vedanta proves that the truth
for which we have been searching all this time is present, and was all
the time with us. In our ignorance, we thought we had lost it, and went
about the world crying and weeping, struggling to find the truth, while
all along it was dwelling in our own hearts. There alone can we find it.

If we understand the giving up of the world in its old, crude sense,
then it would come to this: that we must not work, that we must be idle,
sitting like lumps of earth, neither thinking nor doing anything, but
must become fatalists, driven about by every circumstance, ordered about
by the laws of nature, drifting from place to place. That would be the
result. But that is not what is meant. We must work. Ordinary mankind,
driven everywhere by false desire, what do they know of work? The man
propelled by his own feelings and his own senses, what does he know
about work? He works, who is not propelled by his own desires, by any
selfishness whatsoever. He works, who has no ulterior motive in view. He
works, who has nothing to gain from work.

Who enjoys the picture, the seller or the seer? The seller is busy with
his accounts, computing what his gain will be, how much profit he will
realise on the picture. His brain is full of that. He is looking at the
hammer, and watching the bids. He is intent on hearing how fast the bids
are rising. That man is enjoying the picture who has gone there without
any intention of buying or selling. He looks at the picture and enjoys
it. So this whole universe is a picture, and when these desires have
vanished, men will enjoy the world, and then this buying and selling and
these foolish ideas of possession will be ended. The money-lender gone,
the buyer gone, the seller gone, this world remains the picture, a
beautiful painting. I never read of any more beautiful conception of God
than the following: "He is the Great Poet, the Ancient Poet; the whole
universe is His poem, coming in verses and rhymes and rhythms, written
in infinite bliss." When we have given up desires, then alone shall we
be able to read and enjoy this universe of God. Then everything will
become deified. Nooks and corners, by-ways and shady places, which we
thought dark and unholy, will be all deified. They will all reveal their
true nature, and we shall smile at ourselves and think that all this
weeping and crying has been but child's play, and we were only standing
by, watching.

So, do your work, says the Vedanta. It first advises us how to work — by
giving up — giving up the apparent, illusive world. What is meant by
that? Seeing God everywhere. Thus do you work. Desire to live a hundred
years, have all earthly desires, if you wish, only deify them, convert
them into heaven. Have the desire to live a long life of helpfulness, of
blissfulness and activity on this earth. Thus working, you will find the
way out. There is no other way. If a man plunges headlong into foolish
luxuries of the world without knowing the truth, he has missed his
footing, he cannot reach the goal. And if a man curses the world, goes
into a forest, mortifies his flesh, and kills himself little by little
by starvation, makes his heart a barren waste, kills out all feelings,
and becomes harsh, stern, and dried-up, that man also has missed the
way. These are the two extremes, the two mistakes at either end. Both
have lost the way, both have missed the goal.

So work, says the Vedanta, putting God in everything, and knowing Him to
be in everything. Work incessantly, holding life as something deified,
as God Himself, and knowing that this is all we have to do, this is all
we should ask for. God is in everything, where else shall we go to find
Him? He is already in every work, in every thought, in every feeling.
Thus knowing, we must work — this is the only way, there is no other.
Thus the effects of work will not bind us. We have seen how false
desires are the cause of all the misery and evil we suffer, but when
they are thus deified, purified, through God, they bring no evil, they
bring no misery. Those who have not learnt this secret will have to live
in a demoniacal world until they discover it. Many do not know what an
infinite mine of bliss is in them, around them, everywhere; they have
not yet discovered it. What is a demoniacal world? The Vedanta says,
ignorance.

We are dying of thirst sitting on the banks of the mightiest river. We
are dying of hunger sitting near heaps of food. Here is the blissful
universe, yet we do not find it. We are in it all the time, and we are
always mistaking it. Religion proposes to find this out for us. The
longing for this blissful universe is in all hearts. It has been the
search of all nations, it is the one goal of religion, and this ideal is
expressed in various languages in different religions. It is only the
difference of language that makes all these apparent divergences. One
expresses a thought in one way, another a little differently, yet
perhaps each is meaning exactly what the other is expressing in a
different language.

More questions arise in connection with this. It is very easy to talk.
From my childhood I have heard of seeing God everywhere and in
everything, and then I can really enjoy the world, but as soon as I mix
with the world, and get a few blows from it, the idea vanishes. I am
walking in the street thinking that God is in every man, and a strong
man comes along and gives me a push and I fall flat on the footpath.
Then I rise up quickly with clenched fist, the blood has rushed to my
head, and the reflection goes. Immediately I have become mad. Everything
is forgotten; instead of encountering God I see the devil. Ever since we
were born we have been told to see God in all. Every religion teaches
that — see God in everything and everywhere. Do you not remember in the
New Testament how Christ says so? We have all been taught that; but it
is when we come to the practical side, that the difficulty begins. You
all remember how in *Æesop's Fables* a fine stag is looking at his form
reflected in a lake and is saying to his young one, "How powerful I am,
look at my splendid head, look at my limbs, how strong and muscular they
are; and how swiftly I can run." In the meantime he hears the barking of
dogs in the distance, and immediately takes to his heels, and after he
has run several miles, he comes back panting. The young one says, "You
just told me how strong you were, how was it that when the dog barked,
you ran away?" "Yes, my son; but when the dogs bark all my confidence
vanishes." Such is the case with us. We think highly of humanity, we
feel ourselves strong and valiant, we make grand resolves; but when the
"dogs" of trial and temptation bark, we are like the stag in the fable.
Then, if such is the case, what is the use of teaching all these things?
There is the greatest use. The use is this, that perseverance will
finally conquer. Nothing can be done in a day.

"This Self is first to be heard, then to be thought upon, and then
meditated upon." Everyone can see the sky, even the very worm crawling
upon the earth sees the blue sky, but how very far away it is! So it is
with our ideal. It is far away, no doubt, but at the same time, we know
that we must have it. We must even have the highest ideal. Unfortunately
in this life, the vast majority of persons are groping through this dark
life without any ideal at all. If a man with an ideal makes a thousand
mistakes, I am sure that the man without an ideal makes fifty thousand.
Therefore, it is better to have an ideal. And this ideal we must hear
about as much as we can, till it enters into our hearts, into our
brains, into our very veins, until it tingles in every drop of our blood
and permeates every pore in our body. We must meditate upon it. "Out of
the fullness of the heart the mouth speaketh," and out of the fullness
of the heart the hand works too.

It is thought which is the propelling force in us. Fill the mind with
the highest thoughts, hear them day after day, think them month after
month. Never mind failures; they are quite natural, they are the beauty
of life, these failures. What would life be without them? It would not
be worth having if it were not for struggles. Where would be the poetry
of life? Never mind the struggles, the mistakes. I never heard a cow
tell a lie, but it is only a cow — never a man. So never mind these
failures, these little backslidings; hold the ideal a thousand times,
and if you fail a thousand times, make the attempt once more. The ideal
of man is to see God in everything. But if you cannot see Him in
everything, see Him in one thing, in that thing which you like best, and
then see Him in another. So on you can go. There is infinite life before
the soul. Take your time and you will achieve your end.

"He, the One, who vibrates more quickly than mind, who attains to more
speed than mind can ever do, whom even the gods reach not, nor thought
grasps, He moving, everything moves. In Him all exists. He is moving. He
is also immovable. He is near and He is far. He is inside everything. He
is outside everything, interpenetrating everything. Whoever sees in
every being that same Atman, and whoever sees everything in that Atman,
he never goes far from that Atman. When all life and the whole universe
are seen in this Atman, then alone man has attained the secret. There is
no more delusion for him. Where is any more misery for him who sees this
Oneness in the universe?"

This is another great theme of the Vedanta, this Oneness of life, this
Oneness of everything. We shall see how it demonstrates that all our
misery comes through ignorance, and this ignorance is the idea of
manifoldness, this separation between man and man, between nation and
nation, between earth and moon, between moon and sun. Out of this idea
of separation between atom and atom comes all misery. But the Vedanta
says this separation does not exist, it is not real. It is merely
apparent, on the surface. In the heart of things there is Unity still.
If you go below the surface, you find that Unity between man and man,
between races and races, high and low, rich and poor, gods and men, and
men and animals. If you go deep enough, all will be seen as only
variations of the One, and he who has attained to this conception of
Oneness has no more delusion. What can delude him? He knows the reality
of everything, the secret of everything. Where is there any more misery
for him? What does he desire? He has traced the reality of everything to
the Lord, the Centre, the Unity of everything, and that is Eternal
Existence, Eternal Knowledge, Eternal Bliss. Neither death nor disease,
nor sorrow, nor misery, nor discontent is there. All is Perfect Union
and Perfect Bliss. For whom should he mourn then? In the Reality, there
is no death, there is no misery; in the Reality, there is no one to
mourn for, no one to be sorry for. He has penetrated everything, the
Pure One, the Formless, the Bodiless, the Stainless. He the Knower, He
the Great Poet, the Self-Existent, He who is giving to everyone what he
deserves. They grope in darkness who worship this ignorant world, the
world that is produced out of ignorance, thinking of it as Existence,
and those who live their whole lives in this world, and never find
anything better or higher, are groping in still greater darkness. But he
who knows the secret of nature, seeing That which is beyond nature
through the help of nature, he crosses death, and through the help of
That which is beyond nature, he enjoys Eternal Bliss. "Thou sun, who
hast covered the Truth with thy golden disc, do thou remove the veil, so
that I may see the Truth that is within thee. I have known the Truth
that is within thee, I have known what is the real meaning of thy rays
and thy glory and have seen That which shines in thee; the Truth in thee
I see, and That which is within thee is within me, and I am That."

</div>
