---
title: REALISATION

---
<div>

[←](god_in_everything.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](unity_in_diversity.htm)

  

CHAPTER VIII

## REALISATION

(*Delivered in London, 29th October 1896*)

I will read to you from one of the Upanishads. It is called the Katha
Upanishad. Some of you, perhaps, have read the translation by Sir Edwin
Arnold, called the Secret of Death. In our last \[i.e. a previous\]
lecture we saw how the inquiry which started with the origin of the
world, and the creation of the universe, failed to obtain a satisfactory
answer from without, and how it then turned inwards. This book
psychologically takes up that suggestion, questioning into the internal
nature of man. It was first asked who created the external world, and
how it came into being. Now the question is: What is that in man; which
makes him live and move, and what becomes of that when he dies? The
first philosophers studied the material substance, and tried to reach
the ultimate through that. At the best, they found a personal governor
of the universe, a human being immensely magnified, but yet to all
intents and purposes a human being. But that could not be the whole of
truth; at best, it could be only partial truth. We see this universe as
human beings, and our God is our human explanation of the universe.

Suppose a cow were philosophical and had religion it would have a cow
universe, and a cow solution of the problem, and it would not be
possible that it should see our God. Suppose cats became philosophers,
they would see a cat universe and have a cat solution of the problem of
the universe, and a cat ruling it. So we see from this that our
explanation of the universe is not the whole of the solution. Neither
does our conception cover the whole of the universe. It would be a great
mistake to accept that tremendously selfish position which man is apt to
take. Such a solution of the universal problem as we can get from the
outside labours under this difficulty that in the first place the
universe we see is our own particular universe, our own view of the
Reality. That Reality we cannot see through the senses; we cannot
comprehend It. We only know the universe from the point of view of
beings with five senses. Suppose we obtain another sense, the whole
universe must change for us. Suppose we had a magnetic sense, it is
quite possible that we might then find millions and millions of forces
in existence which we do not now know, and for which we have no present
sense or feeling. Our senses are limited, very limited indeed; and
within these limitations exists what we call our universe; and our God
is the solution of that universe, but that cannot be the solution of the
whole problem. But man cannot stop there. He is a thinking being and
wants to find a solution which will comprehensively explain all the
universes. He wants to see a world which is at once the world of men,
and of gods, and of all possible beings, and to find a solution which
will explain all phenomena.

We see, we must first find the universe which includes all universes; we
must find something which, by itself, must be the material running
through all these various planes of existence, whether we apprehend it
through the senses or not. If we could possibly find something which we
could know as the common property of the lower as well as of the higher
worlds, then our problem would be solved. Even if by the sheer force of
logic alone we could understand that there must be one basis of all
existence, then our problem might approach to some sort of solution; but
this solution certainly cannot be obtained only through the world we see
and know, because it is only a partial view of the whole.

Our only hope then lies in penetrating deeper. The early thinkers
discovered that the farther they were from; the centre, the more marked
were the variations and differentiations; and that the nearer they
approached the centre, the nearer they were to unity. The nearer we are
to the centre of a circle, the nearer we are to the common ground in
which all the radii meet; and the farther we are from the centre, the
more divergent is our radial line from the others. The external world is
far away from the centre, and so there is no common ground in it where
all the phenomena of existence can meet. At best, the external world is
but one part of the whole of phenomena. There are other parts, the
mental, the moral, and the intellectual — the various planes of
existence — and to take up only one, and find a solution of the whole
out of that one, is simply impossible. We first, therefore, want to find
somewhere a centre from which, as it were, all the other planes of
existence start, and standing there we should try to find a solution.
That is the proposition. And where is that centre? It is within us. The
ancient sages penetrated deeper and deeper until they found that in the
innermost core of the human soul is the centre of the whole universe.
All the planes gravitate towards that one point. That is the common
ground, and standing there alone can we find a common solution. So the
question who made this world is not very philosophical, nor does its
solution amount to anything.

This the Katha Upanishad speaks in very figurative language. There was,
in ancient times, a very rich man, who made a certain sacrifice which
required that he should give away everything that he had. Now, this man
was not sincere. He wanted to get the fame and glory of having made the
sacrifice, but he was only giving things which were of no further use to
him — old cows, barren, blind, and lame. He had a boy called Nachiketas.
This boy saw that his father was not doing what was right, that he was
breaking his vow; but he did not know what to say to him. In India,
father and mother are living gods to their children. And so the boy
approached the father with the greatest respect and humbly inquired of
him, "Father, to whom are you going to give me? For your sacrifice
requires that everything shall be given away." The father was very much
vexed at this question and replied, "What do you mean, boy? A father
giving away his own son?" The boy asked the question a second and a
third time, and then the angry father answered, "Thee I give unto Death
(Yama)." And the story goes on to say that the boy went to Yama, the god
of death. Yama was the first man who died. He went to heaven and became
the governor of all the Pitris; all the good people who die, go, and
live with him for a long time. He is a very pure and holy person, chaste
and good, as his name (Yama) implies.

So the boy went to Yama's world. But even gods are sometimes not at
home, and three days this boy had to wait there. After the third day
Yama returned. "O learned one," said Yama, "you have been waiting here
for three days without food, and you are a guest worthy of respect.
Salutation to thee, O Brahmin, and welfare to me! I am very sorry I was
not at home. But for that I will make amends. Ask three boons, one for
each day." And the boy asked, "My first boon is that my father's anger
against me may pass away; that he will be kind to me and recognise me
when you allow me to depart." Yama granted this fully. The next boon was
that he wanted to know about a certain sacrifice which took people to
heaven. Now we have seen that the oldest idea which we got in the
Samhitâ portion of the Vedas was only about heaven where they had bright
bodies and lived with the fathers. Gradually other ideas came, but they
were not satisfying; there was still need for something higher. Living
in heaven would not be very different from life in this world. At best,
it would only be a very healthy rich man's life, with plenty of
sense-enjoyments and a sound body which knows no disease. It would be
this material world, only a little more refined; and we have seen the
difficulty that the external material world can never solve the problem.
So no heaven can solve the problem. If this world cannot solve the
problem, no multiplication of this world can do so, because we must
always remember that matter is only an infinitesimal part of the
phenomena of nature. The vast part of phenomena which we actually see is
not matter. For instance, in every moment of our life what a great part
is played by thought and feeling, compared with the material phenomena
outside! How vast is this internal world with its tremendous activity!
The sense-phenomena are very small compared with it. The heaven solution
commits this mistake; it insists that the whole of phenomena is only in
touch, taste, sight, etc. So this idea of heaven did not give full
satisfaction to all. Yet Nachiketas asks, as the second boon, about some
sacrifice through which people might attain to this heaven. There was an
idea in the Vedas that these sacrifices pleased the gods and took human
beings to heaven.

In studying all religions you will notice the fact that whatever is old
becomes holy. For instance, our forefathers in India used to write on
birch bark, but in time they learnt how to make paper. Yet the birch
bark is still looked upon as very holy. When the utensils in which they
used to cook in ancient times were improved upon, the old ones became
holy; and nowhere is this idea more kept up than in India. Old methods,
which must be nine or ten thousand years old, as of rubbing two sticks
together to make fire, are still followed. At the time of sacrifice no
other method will do. So with the other branch of the Asiatic Aryans.
Their modern descendants still like to obtain fire from lightning,
showing that they used to get fire in this way. Even when they learnt
other customs, they kept up the old ones, which then became holy. So
with the Hebrews. They used to write on parchment. They now write on
paper, but parchment is very holy. So with all nations. Every rite which
you now consider holy was simply an old custom, and the Vedic sacrifice
were of this nature. In course of time, as they found better methods of
life, their ideas were much improved; still these old forms remained,
and from time to time they were practiced and received a holy
significance.

Then, a body of men made it their business to carry on these sacrifices.
These were the priests, who speculated on the sacrifices, and the
sacrifices became everything to them. The gods came to enjoy the
fragrance of the sacrifices, and it was considered that everything in
this world could be got by the power of sacrifices. If certain oblations
were made, certain hymns chanted, certain peculiar forms of altars made,
the gods would grant everything. So Nachiketas asks by what form of
sacrifice can a man go to heaven. The second boon was also readily
granted by Yama who promised that this sacrifice should henceforth be
named after Nachiketas.

Then the third boon comes, and with that the Upanishad proper begins.
The boy said, "There is this difficulty: when a man dies some say he is,
others that he is not. Instructed by you I desire to understand this."
But Yama was frightened. He had been very glad to grant the other two
boons. Now he said, "The gods in ancient times were puzzled on this
point. This subtle law is not easy to understand. Choose some other
boon, O Nachiketas, do not press me on this point, release me."

The boy was determined, and said, "What you have said is true, O Death,
that even the gods had doubts on this point, and it is no easy matter to
understand. But I cannot obtain another exponent like you and there is
no other boon equal to this."

Death said, "Ask for sons and grandsons who will live one hundred years,
many cattle, elephants, gold, and horses. Ask for empire on this earth
and live as many years as you like. Or choose any other boon which you
think equal to these — wealth and long life. Or be thou a king, O
Nachiketas, on the wide earth. I will make thee the enjoyer of all
desires. Ask for all those desires which are difficult to obtain in the
world. These heavenly maidens with chariots and music, which are not to
be obtained by man, are yours. Let them serve you. O Nachiketas, but do
not question me as to what comes after death."

Nachiketas said, "These are merely things of a day, O Death, they wear
away the energy of all the sense-organs. Even the longest life is very
short. These horses and chariots, dances and songs, may remain with
Thee. Man cannot be satisfied by wealth. Can we retain wealth when we
behold Thee? We shall live only so long as Thou desires". Only the boon
which I have asked is chosen by me."

Yama was pleased with this answer and said, "Perfection is one thing and
enjoyment another; these two having different ends, engage men
differently. He who chooses perfection becomes pure. He who chooses
enjoyment misses his true end. Both perfection and enjoyment present
themselves to man; the wise man having examined both distinguishes one
from the other. He chooses perfection as being superior to enjoyment,
but the foolish man chooses enjoyment for the pleasure of his body. O
Nachiketas, having thought upon the things which are only apparently
desirable, thou hast wisely abandoned them." Death then proceeded to
teach Nachiketas.

We now get a very developed idea of renunciation and Vedic morality,
that until one has conquered the desires for enjoyment the truth will
not shine in him. So long as these vain desires of our senses are
clamouring and as it were dragging us outwards every moment, making us
slaves to everything outside — to a little colour, a little taste, a
little touch — notwithstanding all our pretensions, how can the truth
express itself in our hearts?

Yama said, "That which is beyond never rises before the mind of a
thoughtless child deluded by the folly of riches. 'This world exists,
the other does not,' thinking thus they come again and again under my
power. To understand this truth is very difficult. Many, even hearing it
continually, do not understand it, for the speaker must be wonderful, so
must be the hearer. The teacher must be wonderful, so must be the
taught. Neither is the mind to be disturbed by vain arguments, for it is
no more a question of argument, it is a question of fact." We have
always heard that every religion insists on our having faith. We have
been taught to believe blindly. Well, this idea of blind faith is
objectionable, no doubt, but analysing it, we find that behind it is a
very great truth. What it really means is what we read now. The mind is
not to be ruffled by vain arguments, because argument will not help us
to know God. It is a question of fact, and not of argument. All argument
and reasoning must be based upon certain perceptions. Without these,
there cannot be any argument. Reasoning is the method of comparison
between certain facts which we have already perceived. If these
perceived facts are not there already, there cannot be any reasoning. If
this is true of external phenomena, why should it not be so of the
internal? The chemist takes certain chemicals and certain results are
produced. This is a fact; you see it, sense it, and make that the basis
on which to build all your chemical arguments. So with the physicists,
so with all other sciences. All knowledge must stand on perception of
certain facts, and upon that we have to build our reasoning. But,
curiously enough the vast majority of mankind think, especially at the
present time, that no such perception is possible in religion, that
religion can only be apprehended by vain arguments. Therefore we are
told not to disturb the mind by vain arguments. Religion is a question
of fact, not of talk. We have to analyse our own souls and to find what
is there. We have to understand it and to realise what is understood.
That is religion. No amount of talk will make religion. So the question
whether there is a God or not can never be proved by argument, for the
arguments are as much on one side as on the other. But if there is a
God, He is in our own hearts. Have you ever seen Him? The question as to
whether this world exists or not has not yet been decided, and the
debate between the idealists and the realists is endless. Yet we know
that the world exists, that it goes on. We only change the meaning of
words. So, with all the questions of life, we must come to facts. There
are certain religious facts which, as in external science, have to be
perceived, and upon them religion will be built. Of course, the extreme
claim that you must believe every dogma of a religion is degrading to
the human mind. The man who asks you to believe everything, degrades
himself, and, if you believe, degrades you too. The sages of the world
have only the right to tell us that they have analysed their minds and
have found these facts, and if we do the same we shall also believe, and
not before. That is all that there is in religion. But you must always
remember this, that as a matter of fact 99.9 per cent of those who
attack religion have never analysed their minds, have never struggled to
get at the facts. So their arguments do not have any weight against
religion, any more than the words of a blind man who cries out, "You are
all fools who believe in the sun," would affect us.

This is one great idea to learn and to hold on to, this idea of
realisation. This turmoil and fight and difference in religions will
cease only when we understand that religion is not in books and temples.
It is an actual perception. Only the man who has actually perceived God
and soul has religion. There is no real difference between the highest
ecclesiastical giant who can talk by the volume, and the lowest, most
ignorant materialist. We are all atheists; let us confess it. Mere
intellectual assent does not make us religious. Take a Christian, or a
Mohammedan, or a follower of any other religion in the world. Any man
who truly realised the truth of the Sermon on the Mount would be
perfect, and become a god immediately. Yet it is said that there are
many millions of Christians in the world. What is meant is that mankind
may at some time try to realise that Sermon. Not one in twenty millions
is a real Christian.

So, in India, there are said to be three hundred millions of Vedantins.
But if there were one in a thousand who had actually realised religion,
this world would soon be greatly changed. We are all atheists, and yet
we try to fight the man who admits it. We are all in the dark; religion
is to us a mere intellectual assent, a mere talk, a mere nothing. We
often consider a man religious who can talk well. But this is not
religion. "Wonderful methods of joining words, rhetorical powers, and
explaining texts of the books in various ways — these are only for the
enjoyment of the learned, and not religion." Religion comes when that
actual realisation in our own souls begins. That will be the dawn of
religion; and then alone we shall be moral. Now we are not much more
moral than the animals. We are only held down by the whips of society.
If society said today, "I will not punish you if you steal", we should
just make a rush for each other's property. It is the policeman that
makes us moral. It is social opinion that makes us moral, and really we
are little better than animals. We understand how much this is so in the
secret of our own hearts. So let us not be hypocrites. Let us confess
that we are not religious and have no right to look down on others. We
are all brothers and we shall be truly moral when we have realised
religion.

If you have seen a certain country, and a man forces you to say that you
have not seen it, still in your heart of hearts you know you have. So,
when you see religion and God in a more intense sense than you see this
external world, nothing will be able to shake your belief. Then you have
real faith. That is what is meant by the words in your Gospel, "He who
has faith even as a grain of mustard seed." Then you will know the Truth
because you have become the Truth.

This is the watchword of the Vedanta — realise religion, no talking will
do. But it is done with great difficulty. He has hidden Himself inside
the atom, this Ancient One who resides in the inmost recess of every
human heart. The sages realised Him through the power of introspection,
and got beyond both joy and misery, beyond what we call virtue and vice,
beyond good and bad deeds, beyond being and non-being; he who has seen
Him has seen the Reality. But what then about heaven? It was the idea of
happiness minus unhappiness. That is to say, what we want is the joys of
this life minus its sorrows. That is a very good idea, no doubt; it
comes naturally; but it is a mistake throughout, because there is no
such thing as absolute good, nor any such thing as absolute evil.

You have all heard of that rich man in Rome who learnt one day that he
had only about a million pounds of his property left; he said, "What
shall I do tomorrow?" and forthwith committed suicide. A million pounds
was poverty to him. What is joy, and what is sorrow? It is a vanishing
quantity, continually vanishing. When I was a child I thought if I could
be a cabman, it would be the very acme of happiness for me to drive
about. I do not think so now. To what joy will you cling? This is the
one point we must all try to understand, and it is one of the last
superstitions to leave us. Everyone's idea of pleasure is different. I
have seen a man who is not happy unless he swallows a lump of opium
every day. He may dream of a heaven where the land is made of opium.
That would be a very bad heaven for me. Again and again in Arabian
poetry we read of heaven with beautiful gardens, through which rivers
run. I lived much of my life in a country where there is too much water;
many villages are flooded and thousands of lives are sacrificed every
year. So, my heaven would not have gardens through which rivers flow; I
would have a land where very little rain falls. Our pleasures are always
changing. If a young man dreams of heaven, he dreams of a heaven where
he will have a beautiful wife. When that same man becomes old he does
not want a wife. It is our necessities which make our heaven, and the
heaven changes with the change of our necessities. If we had a heaven
like that desired by those to whom sense-enjoyment is the very end of
existence, then we would not progress. That would be the most terrible
curse we could pronounce on the soul. Is this all we can come to? A
little weeping and dancing, and then to die like a dog! What a curse you
pronounce on the head of humanity when you long for these things! That
is what you do when you cry after the joys of this world, for you do not
know what true joy is. What philosophy insists on is not to give up
joys, but to know what joy really is. The Norwegian heaven is a
tremendous fighting place where they all sit before Odin; they have a
wild boar hunt, and then they go to war and slash each other to pieces.
But in some way or other, after a few hours of such fighting, the wounds
are all healed up, and they go into a hall where the boar has been
roasted, and have a carousal. And then the wild boar takes form again,
ready to be hunted the next day. That is much the same thing as our
heaven, not a whit worse, only our ideas may be a little more refined.
We want to hunt wild boars, and get to a place where all enjoyments will
continue, just as the Norwegian imagines that the wild boar is hunted
and eaten every day, and recovers the next day.

Now, philosophy insists that there is a joy which is absolute, which
never changes. That joy cannot be the joys and pleasures we have in this
life, and yet Vedanta shows that everything that is joyful in this life
is but a particle of that real joy, because that is the only joy there
is. Every moment really we are enjoying the absolute bliss, though
covered up, misunderstood, and caricatured. Wherever there is any
blessing, blissfulness, or joy, even the joy of the thief in stealing,
it is that absolute bliss coming out, only it has become obscured,
muddled up, as it were, with all sorts of extraneous conditions, and
misunderstood. But to understand that, we have to go through the
negation, and then the positive side will begin. We have to give up
ignorance and all that is false, and then truth will begin to reveal
itself to us. When we have grasped the truth, things which we gave up at
first will take new shape and form, will appear to us in a new light,
and become deified. They will have become sublimated, and then we shall
understand them in their true light. But to understand them, we have
first to get a glimpse of truth; we must give them up at first, and then
we get them back again, deified. We have to give up all our miseries and
sorrows, all our little joys.

"That which all the Vedas declare, which is proclaimed by all penances,
seeking which men lead lives of continence, I will tell you in one word
— it is 'Om'." You will find this word "Om" praised very much in the
Vedas, and it is held to be very sacred.

Now Yama answers the question: "What becomes of a man when the body dies
?" "This Wise One never dies, is never born, It arises from nothing, and
nothing arises from It. Unborn, Eternal, Everlasting, this Ancient One
can never be destroyed with the destruction of the body. If the slayer
thinks he can slay, or if the slain thinks he is slain, they both do not
know the truth, for the Self neither slays nor is slain." A most
tremendous position. I should like to draw your attention to the
adjective in the first line, which is "wise". As we proceed we shall
find that the ideal of the Vedanta is that all wisdom and all purity are
in the soul already, dimly expressed or better expressed — that is all
the difference. The difference between man and man, and all things in
the whole creation, is not in kind but only in degree. The background,
the reality, of everyone is that same Eternal, Ever Blessed, Ever Pure,
and Ever Perfect One. It is the Atman, the Soul, in the saint and the
sinner, in the happy and the miserable, in the beautiful and the ugly,
in men and in animals; it is the same throughout. It is the shining One.
The difference is caused by the power of expression. In some It is
expressed more, in others less, but this difference of expression has no
effect upon the Atman. If in their dress one man shows more of his body
than another, it does not make any difference in their bodies; the
difference is in their dress. We had better remember here that
throughout the Vedanta philosophy, there is no such thing as good and
bad, they are not two different things; the same thing is good or bad,
and the difference is only in degree. The very thing I call pleasurable
today, tomorrow under better circumstances I may call pain. The fire
that warms us can also consume us; it is not the fault of the fire.
Thus, the Soul being pure and perfect, the man who does evil is giving
the lie unto himself, he does not know the nature of himself. Even in
the murderer the pure Soul is there; It dies not. It was his mistake; he
could not manifest It; he had covered It up. Nor in the man who thinks
that he is killed is the Soul killed; It is eternal. It can never be
killed, never destroyed. "Infinitely smaller than the smallest,
infinitely larger than the largest, this Lord of all is present in the
depths of every human heart. The sinless, bereft of all misery, see Him
through the mercy of the Lord; the Bodiless, yet dwelling in the body;
the Spaceless, yet seeming to occupy space; Infinite, Omnipresent:
knowing such to be the Soul, the sages never are miserable."

"This Atman is not to be realised by the power of speech, nor by a vast
intellect, nor by the study of their Vedas." This is a very bold
utterance. As I told you before, the sages were very bold thinkers, and
never stopped at anything. You will remember that in India these Vedas
are regarded in a much higher light than even the Christians regard
their Bible. Your idea of revelation is that a man was inspired by God;
but in India the idea is that things exist because they are in the
Vedas. In and through the Vedas the whole creation has come. All that is
called knowledge is in the Vedas. Every word is sacred and eternal,
eternal as the soul, without beginning and without end. The whole of the
Creator's mind is in this book, as it were. That is the light in which
the Vedas are held. Why is this thing moral? Because the Vedas say so.
Why is that thing immoral? Because the Vedas say so. In spite of that,
look at the boldness of these sages whom proclaimed that the truth is
not to be found by much study of the Vedas. "With whom the Lord is
pleased, to that man He expresses Himself." But then, the objection may
be advanced that this is something like partisanship. But at Yama
explains, "Those who are evil-doers, whose minds area not peaceful, can
never see the Light. It is to those whore are true in heart, pure in
deed, whose senses are controlled, that this Self manifests Itself."

Here is a beautiful figure. Picture the Self to be then rider and this
body the chariot, the intellect to be the charioteer, mind the reins,
and the senses the horses. He whose horses are well broken, and whose
reins are strong and kept well in the hands of the charioteer (the
intellect) reaches the goal which is the state of Him, the Omnipresent.
But the man whose horses (the senses) are not controlled, nor the reins
(the mind) well managed, goes to destruction. This Atman in all beings
does not manifest Himself to the eyes or the senses, but those whose
minds have become purified and refined realise Him. Beyond all sound,
all sight, beyond form, absolute, beyond all taste and touch, infinite,
without beginning and without end, even beyond nature, the Unchangeable;
he who realises Him, frees himself from the jaws of death. But it is
very difficult. It is, as it were, walking on the edge of a razor; the
way is long and perilous, but struggle on, do not despair. Awake, arise,
and stop not till the goal is reached.

The one central idea throughout all the Upanishads is that of
realisation. A great many questions will arise from time to time, and
especially to the modern man. There will be the question of utility,
there will be various other questions, but in all we shall find that we
are prompted by our past associations. It is association of ideas that
has such a tremendous power over our minds. To those who from childhood
have always heard of a Personal God and the personality of the mind,
these ideas will of course appear very stern and harsh, but if they
listen to them and think over them, they will become part of their lives
and will no longer frighten them. The great question that generally
arises is the utility of philosophy. To that there can be only one
answer: if on the utilitarian ground it is good for men to seek for
pleasure, why should not those whose pleasure is in religious
speculation seek for that? Because sense-enjoyments please many, they
seek for them, but there may be others whom they do not please, who want
higher enjoyment. The dog's pleasure is only in eating and drinking. The
dog cannot understand the pleasure of the scientist who gives up
everything, and, perhaps, dwells on the top of a mountain to observe the
position of certain stars. The dogs may smile at him and think he is a
madman. Perhaps this poor scientist never had money enough to marry
even, and lives very simply. May be, the dog laughs at him. But the
scientist says, "My dear dog, your pleasure is only in the senses which
you enjoy, and you know nothing beyond; but for me this is the most
enjoyable life, and if you have the right to seek your pleasure in your
own way, so have I in mine." The mistake is that we want to tie the
whole world down to our own plane of thought and to make our mind the
measure of the whole universe. To you, the old sense-things are,
perhaps, the greatest pleasure, but it is not necessary that my pleasure
should be the same, and when you insist upon that, I differ from you.
That is the difference between the worldly utilitarian and the religious
man. The first man says, "See how happy I am. I get money, but do not
bother my head about religion. It is too unsearchable, and I am happy
without it." So far, so good; good for all utilitarians. But this world
is terrible. If a man gets happiness in any way excepting by injuring
his fellow-beings, godspeed him; but when this man comes to me and says,
"You too must do these things, you will be a fool if you do not," I say,
"You are wrong, because the very things, which are pleasurable to you,
have not the slightest attraction for me. If I had to go after a few
handfuls of gold, my life would not be worth living! I should die." That
is the answer the religious man would make. The fact is that religion is
possible only for those who have finished with these lower things. We
must have our own experiences, must have our full run. It is only when
we have finished this run that the other world opens.

The enjoyments of the senses sometimes assume another phase which is
dangerous and tempting. You will always hear the idea — in very old
times, in every religion — that a time will come when all the miseries
of life wills cease, and only its joys and pleasures will remain, and
this earth will become a heaven. That I do not believe. This earth will
always remain this same world. It is a most terrible thing to say, yet I
do not see my way out of item The misery in the world is like chronic
rheumatism in the body; drive it from one part and it goes to another,
drive it from there and you will feel it somewhere else. Whatever you
do, it is still there. In olden times people lived in forests, and ate
each other; in modern times they do not eat each other's flesh, but they
cheat one another. Whole countries and cities are ruined by cheating.
That does not show much progress. I do not see that what you call
progress in the world is other than the multiplication of desires. If
one thing is obvious to me it is this that desires bring all misery; it
is the state of the beggar, who is always begging for something, and
unable to see anything without the wish to possess it, is always
longing, longing for more. If the power to satisfy our desires is
increased in arithmetical progression, the power of desire is increased
in geometrical progression. The sum total of happiness and misery in
this world is at least the same throughout. If a wave rises in the ocean
it makes a hollow somewhere. If happiness comes to one man, unhappiness
comes to another or, perhaps, to some animal. Men are increasing in
numbers and some animals are decreasing; we are killing them off, and
taking their land ; we are taking all means of sustenance from them. How
can we say, then, that happiness is increasing? The strong race eats up
the weaker, but do you think that the strong race will be very happy?
No; they will begin to kill each other. I do not see on practical
grounds how this world can become a heaven. Facts are against it. On
theoretical grounds also, I see it cannot be.

Perfection is always infinite. We are this infinite already, and we are
trying to manifest that infinity. You and I, and all beings, are trying
to manifest it. So far it is all right. But from this fact some German
philosophers have started a peculiar theory — that this manifestation
will become higher and higher until we attain perfect manifestation,
until we have become perfect beings. What is meant by perfect
manifestation? Perfection means infinity, and manifestation means limit,
and so it means that we shall become unlimited limiteds, which is
self-contradictory. Such a theory may please children; but it is
poisoning their minds with lies, and is very bad for religion. But we
know that this world is a degradation, that man is a degradation of God,
and that Adam fell. There is no religion today that does not teach that
man is a degradation. We have been degraded down to the animal, and are
now going up, to emerge out of this bondage. But we shall never be able
entirely to manifest the Infinite here. We shall struggle hard, but
there will come a time when we shall find that it is impossible to be
perfect here, while we are bound by the senses. And then the march back
to our original state of Infinity will be sounded.

This is renunciation. We shall have to get out of the difficulty by
reversing the process by which we got in, and then morality and charity
will begin. What is the watchword of all ethical codes? "Not I, but
thou", and this "I" is the outcome of the Infinite behind, trying to
manifest Itself on the outside world. This little "I" is the result, and
it will have to go back and join the Infinite, its own nature. Every
time you say, "Not I, my brother, but thou", you are trying to go back,
and every time you say "I, and not thou", you take the false step of
trying to manifest the Infinite through the sense-world. That brings
struggles and evils into the world, but after a time renunciation must
come, eternal renunciation. The little "I" is dead and gone. Why care so
much for this little life? All these vain desires of living and enjoying
this life, here or in some other place, bring death.

If we are developed from animals, the animals also may be degraded men.
How do you know it is not so? You have seen that the proof of evolution
is simply this: you find a series of bodies from the lowest to the
highest rising in a gradually ascending scale. But from that how can you
insist that it is always from the lower upwards, and never from the
higher downwards? The argument applies both ways, and if anything is
true, I believe it is that the series is repeating itself in going up
and down. How can you have evolution without involution? Our struggle
for the higher life shows that we have been degraded from a high state.
It must be so, only it may vary as to details. I always cling to the
idea set forth with one voice by Christ, Buddha, and the Vedanta, that
we must all come to perfection in time, but only by giving up this
imperfection. This world is nothing. It is at best only a hideous
caricature, a shadow of the Reality. We must go to the Reality.
Renunciation will take us to It. Renunciation is the very basis of our
true life; every moment of goodness and real life that we enjoy is when
we do not think of ourselves. This little separate self must die. Then
we shall find that we are in the Real, and that Reality is God, and He
is our own true nature, and He is always in us and with us. Let us live
in Him and stand in Him. It is the only joyful state of existence. Life
on the plane of the Spirit is the only life, and let us all try to
attain to this realisation.

</div>
