---
title: 'THE COSMOS: THE MICROCOSM'

---
<div>

[←](the_macrocosm.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](immortality.htm)

  

CHAPTER XI

## THE COSMOS: THE MICROCOSM

(*Delivered in New York, 26th January 1896*)

The human mind naturally wants to get outside, to peer out of the body,
as it were, through the channels of the organs. The eye must see, the
ear must hear, the senses must sense the external world — and naturally
the beauties and sublimities of nature captivate the attention of man
first. The first questions that arose in the human soul were about the
external world. The solution of the mystery was asked of the sky, of the
stars, of the heavenly bodies, of the earth, of the rivers, of the
mountains, of the ocean; and in all ancient religions we find traces of
how the groping human mind at first caught at everything external. There
was a river-god, a sky-god, a cloud-god, a rain-god; everything
external, all of which we now call the powers of nature, became
metamorphosed, transfigured, into wills, into gods, into heavenly
messengers. As the question went deeper and deeper, these external
manifestations failed to satisfy the human mind, and finally the energy
turned inward, and the question was asked of man's own soul. From the
macrocosm the question was reflected back to the microcosm; from the
external world the question was reflected to the internal. From
analysing the external nature, man is led to analyse the internal; this
questioning of the internal man comes with a higher state of
civilisation, with a deeper insight into nature, with a higher state of
growth.

The subject of discussion this afternoon is this internal man. No
question is so near and dear to man's heart as that of the internal man.
How many millions of times, in how many countries has this question been
asked! Sages and kings, rich and poor, saints and sinners, every man,
every woman, all have from time to time asked this question. Is there
nothing permanent in this evanescent human life? Is there nothing, they
have asked, which does not die away when this body dies? Is there not
something living when this frame crumbles into dust? Is there not
something which survives the fire which burns the body into ashes? And
if so, what is its destiny? Where does it go? Whence did it come? These
questions have been asked again and again, and so long as this creation
lasts, so long as there are human brains to think, this question will
have to be asked. Yet, it is not that the answer did not come; each time
the answer came, and as time rolls on, the answer will gain strength
more and more. The question was answered once for all thousands of years
ago, and through all subsequent time it is being restated,
reillustrated, made clearer to our intellect. What we have to do,
therefore, is to make a restatement of the answer. We do not pretend to
throw any new light on those all-absorbing problems, but only to put
before you the ancient truth in the language of modern times, to speak
the thoughts of the ancients in the language of the moderns, to speak
the thoughts of the philosophers in the language of the people, to speak
the thoughts of the angels in the language of man, to speak the thoughts
of God in the language of poor humanity, so that man will understand
them; for the same divine essence from which the ideas emanated is ever
present in man, and, therefore, he can always understand them.

I am looking at you. How many things are necessary for this vision?
First, the eyes. For if I am perfect in every other way, and yet have no
eyes, I shall not be able to see you. Secondly, the real organ of
vision. For the eyes are not the organs. They are but the instruments of
vision, and behind them is the real organ, the nerve centre in the
brain. If that centre be injured, a man may have the clearest pair of
eyes, yet he will not be able to see anything. So, it is necessary that
this centre, or the real organ, be there. Thus, with all our senses. The
external ear is but the instrument for carrying the vibration of sound
inward to the centre. Yet, that is not sufficient. Suppose in your
library you are intently reading a book, and the clock strikes, yet you
do not hear it. The sound is there, the pulsations in the air are there,
the ear and the centre are also there, and these vibrations have been
carried through the ear to the centre, and yet you do not hear it. What
is wanting? The mind is not there. Thus we see that the third thing
necessary is, that the mind must be there. First the external
instruments, then the organ to which this external instrument will carry
the sensation, and lastly the organ itself must be joined to the mind.
When the mind is not joined to the organ, the organ and the ear may take
the impression, and yet we shall not be conscious of it. The mind, too,
is only the carrier; it has to carry the sensation still forward, and
present it to the intellect. The intellect is the determining faculty
and decides upon what is brought to it. Still this is not sufficient.
The intellect must carry it forward and present the whole thing before
the ruler in the body, the human soul, the king on the throne. Before
him this is presented, and then from him comes the order, what to do or
what not to do; and the order goes down in the same sequence to the
intellect, to the mind, to the organs, and the organs convey it to the
instruments, and the perception is complete.

The instruments are in the external body, the gross body of man; but the
mind and the intellect are not. They are in what is called in Hindu
philosophy the finer body; and what in Christian theology you read of as
the spiritual body of man; finer, very much finer than the body, and yet
not the soul. This soul is beyond them all. The external body perishes
in a few years; any simple cause may disturb and destroy it. The finer
body is not so easily perishable; yet it sometimes degenerates, and at
other times becomes strong. We see how, in the old man, the mind loses
its strength, how, when the body is vigorous, the mind becomes vigorous,
how various medicines and drugs affect it, how everything external acts
on it, and how it reacts on the external world. Just as the body has its
progress and decadence, so also has the mind, and, therefore, the mind
is not the soul, because the soul can neither decay nor degenerate. How
can we know that? How can we know that there is something behind this
mind? Because knowledge which is self-illuminating and the basis of
intelligence cannot belong to dull, dead matter. Never was seen any
gross matter which had intelligence as its own essence. No dull or dead
matter can illumine itself. It is intelligence that illumines all
matter. This hall is here only through intelligence because, as a hall,
its existence would be unknown unless some intelligence built it. This
body is not self-luminous; if it were, it would be so in a dead man
also. Neither can the mind nor the spiritual body be self-luminous. They
are not of the essence of intelligence. That which is self-luminous
cannot decay. The luminosity of that which shines through a borrowed
light comes and goes; but that which is light itself, what can make that
come and go, flourish and decay? We see that the moon waxes and wanes,
because it shines through the borrowed light of the sun. If a lump of
iron is put into the fire and made red-hot, it glows and shines, but its
light will vanish, because it is borrowed. So, decadence is possible
only of that light which is borrowed and is not of its own essence.

Now we see that the body, the external shape, has no light as its own
essence, is not self-luminous, and cannot know itself; neither can the
mind. Why not? Because the mind waxes and wanes, because it is vigorous
at one time and weak at another, because it can be acted upon by
anything and everything. Therefore the light which shines through the
mind is not its own. Whose is it then? It must belong to that which has
it as its own essence, and as such, can never decay or die, never become
stronger or weaker; it is self-luminous, it is luminosity itself. It
cannot be that the soul knows, it *is* knowledge. It cannot be that the
soul has existence, but it *is* existence. It cannot be that the soul is
happy, it *is* happiness itself. That which is happy has borrowed its
happiness; that which has knowledge has received its knowledge; and that
which has relative existence has only a reflected existence. Wherever
there are qualities these qualities have been reflected upon the
substance, but the soul has not knowledge, existence, and blessedness as
its qualities, they are the essence of the soul.

Again, it may be asked, why shall we take this for granted? Why shall we
admit that the soul has knowledge, blessedness, existence, as its
essence, and has not borrowed them? It may be argued, why not say that
the soul's luminosity, the soul's blessedness, the soul's knowledge, are
borrowed in the same way as the luminosity of the body is borrowed from
the mind? The fallacy of arguing in this way will be that there will be
no limit. From whom were these borrowed? If we say from some other
source, the same question will be asked again. So, at last we shall have
to come to one who is self-luminous; to make matters short then, the
logical way is to stop where we get self-luminosity, and proceed no
further.

We see, then, that this human being is composed first of this external
covering, the body; secondly, the finer body, consisting of mind,
intellect, and egoism. Behind them is the real Self of man. We have seen
that all the qualities and powers of the gross body are borrowed from
the mind, and the mind, the finer body, borrows its powers and
luminosity from the soul, standing behind.

A great many questions now arise about the nature of this soul. If the
existence of the soul is drawn from the argument that it is
self-luminous, that knowledge, existence, blessedness are its essence,
it naturally follows that this soul cannot have been created. A
self-luminous existence, independent of any other existence, could never
have been the outcome of anything. It always existed; there was never a
time when it did not exist, because if the soul did not exist, where was
time? Time is in the soul; it is when the soul reflects its powers on
the mind and the mind thinks, that time comes. When there was no soul,
certainly there was no thought, and without thought, there was no time.
How can the soul, therefore, be said to be existing in time, when time
itself exists in the soul? It has neither birth nor death, but it is
passing through all these various stages. It is manifesting slowly and
gradually from lower to higher, and so on. It is expressing its own
grandeur, working through the mind on the body; and through the body it
is grasping the external world and understanding it. It takes up a body
and uses it; and when that body has failed and is used up, it takes
another body; and so on it goes.

Here comes a very interesting question, that question which is generally
known as the reincarnation of the soul. Sometimes people get frightened
at the idea, and superstition is so strong that thinking men even
believe that they are the outcome of nothing, and then, with the
grandest logic, try to deduce the theory that although they have come
out of zero, they will be eternal ever afterwards. Those that come out
of zero will certainly have to go back to zero. Neither you, nor I nor
anyone present, has come out of zero, nor will go back to zero. We have
been existing eternally, and will exist, and there is no power under the
sun or above the sun which can undo your or my existence or send us back
to zero. Now this idea of reincarnation is not only not a frightening
idea, but is most essential for the moral well-being of the human race.
It is the only logical conclusion that thoughtful men can arrive at. If
you are going to exist in eternity hereafter, it must be that you have
existed through eternity in the past: it cannot be otherwise. I will try
to answer a few objections that are generally brought against the
theory. Although many of you will think they are very silly objections,
still we have to answer them, for sometimes we find that the most
thoughtful men are ready to advance the silliest ideas. Well has it been
said that there never was an idea so absurd that it did not find
philosophers to defend it. The first objection is, why do we not
remember our past? Do we remember all our past in this life? How many of
you remember what you did when you were babies? None of you remember
your early childhood, and if upon memory depends your existence, then
this argument proves that you did not exist as babies, because you do
not remember your babyhood. It is simply unmitigated nonsense to say
that our existence depends on our remembering it. Why should we remember
the past? That brain is gone, broken into pieces, and a new brain has
been manufactured. What has come to this brain is the resultant, the sum
total of the impressions acquired in our past, with which the mind has
come to inhabit the new body.

I, as I stand here, am the effect, the result, of all the infinite past
which is tacked on to me. And why is it necessary for me to remember all
the past? When a great ancient sage, a seer, or a prophet of old, who
came face to face with the truth, says something, these modern men stand
up and say, "Oh, he was a fool!" But just use another name, "Huxley says
it, or Tyndall"; then it must be true, and they take it for granted. In
place of ancient superstitions they have erected modern superstitions,
in place of the old Popes of religion they have installed modern Popes
of science. So we see that this objection as to memory is not valid, and
that is about the only serious objection that is raised against this
theory. Although we have seen that it is not necessary for the theory
that there shall be the memory of past lives, yet at the same time, we
are in a position to assert that there are instances which show that
this memory does come, and that each one of us will get back this memory
in that life in which he will become free. Then alone you will find that
this world is but a dream; then alone you will realise in the soul of
your soul that you are but actors and the world is a stage; then alone
will the idea of non-attachment come to you with the power of thunder;
then all this thirst for enjoyment, this clinging on to life and this
world will vanish for ever; then the mind will see dearly as daylight
how many times all these existed for you, how many millions of times you
had fathers and mothers, sons and daughters, husbands and wives,
relatives and friends, wealth and power. They came and went. How many
times you were on the topmost crest of the wave, and how many times you
were down at the bottom of despair! When memory will bring all these to
you, then alone will you stand as a hero and smile when the world frowns
upon you. Then alone will you stand up and say. "I care not for thee
even, O Death, what terrors hast thou for me?" This will come to all.

Are there any arguments, any rational proofs for this reincarnation of
the soul? So far we have been giving the negative side, showing that the
opposite arguments to disprove it are not valid. Are there any positive
proofs? There are; and most valid ones, too. No other theory except that
of reincarnation accounts for the wide divergence that we find between
man and man in their powers to acquire knowledge. First, let us consider
the process by means of which knowledge is acquired. Suppose I go into
the street and see a dog. How do I know it is a dog? I refer it to my
mind, and in my mind are groups of all my past experiences, arranged and
pigeon-holed, as it were. As soon as a new impression comes, I take it
up and refer it to some of the old pigeon-holes, and as soon as I find a
group of the same impressions already existing, I place it in that
group, and I am satisfied. I know it is a dog, because it coincides with
the impressions already there. When I do not find the cognates of this
new experience inside, I become dissatisfied. When, not finding the
cognates of an impression, we become dissatisfied, this state of the
mind is called "ignorance"; but, when, finding the cognates of an
impression already existing, we become satisfied, this is called
"knowledge". When one apple fell, men became dissatisfied. Then
gradually they found out the group. What was the group they found? That
all apples fell, so they called it "gravitation". Now we see that
without a fund of already existing experience, any new experience would
be impossible, for there would be nothing to which to refer the new
impression. So, if, as some of the European philosophers think, a child
came into the world with what they call *tabula rasa,* such a child
would never attain to any degree of intellectual power, because he would
have nothing to which to refer his new experiences. We see that the
power of acquiring knowledge varies in each individual, and this shows
that each one of us has come with his own fund of knowledge. Knowledge
can only be got in one way, the way of experience; there is no other way
to know. If we have not experienced it in this life, we must have
experienced it in other lives. How is it that the fear of death is
everywhere? A little chicken is just out of an egg and an eagle comes,
and the chicken flies in fear to its mother. There is an old explanation
(I should hardly dignify it by such a name). It is called instinct. What
makes that little chicken just out of the egg afraid to die? How is it
that as soon as a duckling hatched by a hen comes near water, it jumps
into it and swims? It never swam before, nor saw anything swim. People
call it instinct. It is a big word, but it leaves us where we were
before. Let us study this phenomenon of instinct. A child begins to play
on the piano. At first she must pay attention to every key she is
fingering, and as she goes on and on for months and years, the playing
becomes almost involuntary, instinctive. What was first done with
conscious will does not require later on an effort of the will. This is
not yet a complete proof. One half remains, and that is that almost all
the actions which are now instinctive can be brought under the control
of the will. Each muscle of the body can be brought under control. This
is perfectly well known. So the proof is complete by this double method,
that what we now call instinct is degeneration of voluntary actions;
therefore, if the analogy applies to the whole of creation, if all
nature is uniform, then what is instinct in lower animals, as well as in
men, must be the degeneration of will.

Applying the law we dwelt upon under macrocosm that each involution
presupposes an evolution, and each evolution an involution, we see that
instinct is involved reason. What we call instinct in men or animals
must therefore be involved, degenerated, voluntary actions, and
voluntary actions are impossible without experience. Experience started
that knowledge, and that knowledge is there. The fear of death, the
duckling taking to the water and all involuntary actions in the human
being which have become instinctive, are the results of past
experiences. So far we have proceeded very clearly, and so far the
latest science is with us. But here comes one more difficulty. The
latest scientific men are coming back to the ancient sages, and as far
as they have done so, there is perfect agreement. They admit that each
man and each animal is born with a fund of experience, and that all
these actions in the mind are the result of past experience. "But what,"
they ask, "is the use of saying that that experience belongs to the
soul? Why not say it belongs to the body, and the body alone? Why not
say it is hereditary transmission?" This is the last question. Why not
say that all the experience with which I am born is the resultant effect
of all the past experience of my ancestors? The sum total of the
experience from the little protoplasm up to the highest human being is
in me, but it has come from body to body in the course of hereditary
transmission. Where will the difficulty be? This question is very nice,
and we admit some part of this hereditary transmission. How far? As far
as furnishing the material. We, by our past actions, conform ourselves
to a certain birth in a certain body, and the only suitable material for
that body comes from the parents who have made themselves fit to have
that soul as their offspring.

The simple hereditary theory takes for granted the most astonishing
proposition without any proof, that mental experience can be recorded in
matters, that mental experience can be involved in matter. When I look
at you in the lake of my mind there is a wave. That wave subsides, but
it remains in fine form, as an impression. We understand a physical
impression remaining in the body. But what proof is there for assuming
that the mental impression can remain in the body, since the body goes
to pieces? What carries it? Even granting it were possible for each
mental impression to remain in the body, that every impression,
beginning from the first man down to my father, was in my father's body,
how could it be transmitted to me? Through the bioplasmic cell? How
could that be? Because the father's body does not come to the child *in
toto*. The same parents may have a number of children; then, from this
theory of hereditary transmission, where the impression and the
impressed (that is to say, material) are one, it rigorously follows that
by the birth of every child the parents must lose a part of their own
impressions, or, if the parents should transmit the whole of their
impressions, then, after the birth of the first child, their minds would
be a vacuum.

Again, if in the bioplasmic cell the infinite amount of impressions from
all time has entered, where and how is it? This is a most impossible
position, and until these physiologists can prove how and where those
impressions live in that cell, and what they mean by a mental impression
sleeping in the physical cell, their position cannot be taken for
granted. So far it is clear then, that this impression is in the mind,
that the mind comes to take its birth and rebirth, and uses the material
which is most proper for it, and that the mind which has made itself fit
for only a particular kind of body will have to wait until it gets that
material. This we understand. The theory then comes to this, that there
is hereditary transmission so far as furnishing the material to the soul
is concerned. But the soul migrates and manufactures body after body,
and each thought we think, and each deed we do, is stored in it in fine
forms, ready to spring up again and take a new shape. When I look at you
a wave rises in my mind. It dives down, as it were, and becomes finer
and finer, but it does not die. It is ready to start up again as a wave
in the shape of memory. So all these impressions are in my mind, and
when I die the resultant force of them will be upon me. A ball is here,
and each one of us takes a mallet in his hands and strikes the ball from
all sides; the ball goes from point to point in the room, and when it
reaches the door it flies out. What does it carry out with it? The
resultant of all these blows. That will give it its direction. So, what
directs the soul when the body dies? The resultant, the sum total of all
the works it has done, of the thoughts it has thought. If the resultant
is such that it has to manufacture a new body for further experience, it
will go to those parents who are ready to supply it with suitable
material for that body. Thus, from body to body it will go, sometimes to
a heaven, and back again to earth, becoming man, or some lower animal.
This way it will go on until it has finished its experience, and
completed the circle. It then knows its own nature, knows what it is,
and ignorance vanishes, its powers become manifest, it becomes perfect;
no more is there any necessity for the soul to work through physical
bodies, nor is there any necessity for it to work through finer, or
mental bodies. It shines in its own light, and is free, no more to be
born, no more to die.

We will not go now into the particulars of this. But I will bring before
you one more point with regard to this theory of reincarnation. It is
the theory that advances the freedom of the human soul. It is the one
theory that does not lay the blame of all our weakness upon somebody
else, which is a common human fallacy. We do not look at our own faults;
the eyes do not see themselves, they see the eyes of everybody else. We
human beings are very slow to recognise our own weakness, our own
faults, so long as we can lay the blame upon somebody else. Men in
general lay all the blame of life on their fellow-men, or, failing that,
on God, or they conjure up a ghost, and say it is fate. Where is fate,
and who is fate? We reap what we sow. We are the makers of our own fate.
None else has the blame, none has the praise. The wind is blowing; those
vessels whose sails are unfurled catch it, and go forward on their way,
but those which have their sails furled do not catch the wind. Is that
the fault of the wind? Is it the fault of the merciful Father, whose
wind of mercy is blowing without ceasing, day and night, whose mercy
knows no decay, is it His fault that some of us are happy and some
unhappy? We make our own destiny. His sun shines for the weak as well as
for the strong. His wind blows for saint and sinner alike. He is the
Lord of all, the Father of all, merciful, and impartial. Do you mean to
say that He, the Lord of creation, looks upon the petty things of our
life in the same light as we do? What a degenerate idea of God that
would be! We are like little puppies, making life-and-death struggles
here, and foolishly thinking that even God Himself will take it as
seriously as we do. He knows what the puppies' play means. Our attempts
to lay the blame on Him, making Him the punisher, and the rewarder, are
only foolish. He neither punishes, nor rewards any. His infinite mercy
is open to every one, at all times, in all places, under all conditions,
unfailing, unswerving. Upon *us* depends how we use it. Upon us depends
how we utilise it. Blame neither man, nor God, nor anyone in the world.
When you find yourselves suffering, blame yourselves, and try to do
better.

This is the only solution of the problem. Those that blame others — and,
alas! the number of them is increasing every day — are generally
miserable with helpless brains; they have brought themselves to that
pass through their own mistakes and blame others, but this does not
alter their position. It does not serve them in any way. This attempt to
throw the blame upon others only weakens them the more. Therefore, blame
none for your own faults, stand upon your own feet, and take the whole
responsibility upon yourselves. Say, "This misery that I am suffering is
of my own doing, and that very thing proves that it will have to be
undone by me alone." That which I created, I can demolish; that which is
created by some one else I shall never be able to destroy. Therefore,
stand up, be bold, be strong. Take the whole responsibility on your own
shoulders, and know that you are the creator of your own destiny. All
the strength and succour you want is within yourselves. Therefore, make
your own future. "Let the dead past bury its dead." The infinite future
is before you, and you must always remember that each word, thought, and
deed, lays up a store for you and that as the bad thoughts and bad works
are ready to spring upon you like tigers, so also there is the inspiring
hope that the good thoughts and good deeds are ready with the power of a
hundred thousand angels to defend you always and for ever.

</div>
