---
title: 'THE ATMAN: ITS BONDAGE AND FREEDOM'

---
<div>

[←](the_atman.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_real_and_the_apparent_man.htm)

  

CHAPTER XIV

## THE ATMAN: ITS BONDAGE AND FREEDOM

(*Delivered in America*)

According to the Advaita philosophy, there is only one thing real in the
universe, which it calls Brahman; everything else is unreal, manifested
and manufactured out of Brahman by the power of Mâyâ. To reach back to
that Brahman is our goal. We are, each one of us, that Brahman, that
Reality, plus this Maya. If we can get rid of this Maya or ignorance,
then we become what we really are. According to this philosophy, each
man consists of three parts — the body, the internal organ or the mind,
and behind that, what is called the Âtman, the Self. The body is the
external coating and the mind is the internal coating of the Atman who
is the real perceiver, the real enjoyer, the being in the body who is
working the body by means of the internal organ or the mind.

The Âtman is the only existence in the human body which is immaterial.
Because it is immaterial, it cannot be a compound, and because it is not
a compound, it does not obey the law of cause and effect, and so it is
immortal. That which is immortal can have no beginning because
everything with a beginning must have an end. It also follows that it
must be formless; there cannot be any fond without matter. Everything
that has form must have a beginning and an end. We have none of us seen
a form which had not a beginning and will not have an end. A form comes
out of a combination of force and matter. This chair has a peculiar
form, that is to say a certain quantity of matter is acted upon by a
certain amount of force and made to assume a particular shape. The shape
is the result of a combination of matter and force. The combination
cannot be eternal; there must come to every combination a time when it
will dissolve. So all forms have a beginning and an end. We know our
body will perish; it had a beginning and it will have an end. But the
Self having no form, cannot be bound by the law of beginning and end. It
is existing from infinite time; just as time is eternal, so is the Self
of man eternal. Secondly, it must be all-pervading. It is only form that
is conditioned and limited by space; that which is formless cannot be
confined in space. So, according to Advaita Vedanta, the Self, the
Atman, in you, in me, in every one, is omnipresent. You are as much in
the sun now as in this earth, as much in England as in America. But the
Self acts through the mind and the body, and where they are, its action
is visible.

Each work we do, each thought we think, produces an impression, called
in Sanskrit Samskâra, upon the mind and the sum total of these
impressions becomes the tremendous force which is called "character".
The character of a man is what he has created for himself; it is the
result of the mental and physical actions that he has done in his life.
The sum total of the Samskaras is the force which gives a man the next
direction after death. A man dies; the body falls away and goes back to
the elements; but the Samskaras remain, adhering to the mind which,
being made of fine material, does not dissolve, because the finer the
material, the more persistent it is. But the mind also dissolves in the
long run, and that is what we are struggling for. In this connection,
the best illustration that comes to my mind is that of the whirlwind.
Different currents of air coming from different directions meet and at
the meeting-point become united and go on rotating; as they rotate, they
form a body of dust, drawing in bits of paper, straw, etc., at one
place, only to drop them and go on to another, and so go on rotating,
raising and forming bodies out of the materials which are before them.
Even so the forces, called Prâna in Sanskrit, come together and form the
body and the mind out of matter, and move on until the body falls down,
when they raise other materials to make another body, and when this
falls, another rises, and thus the process goes on. Force cannot travel
without matter. So when the body falls down, the mind-stuff remains,
Prana in the form of Samskaras acting on it; and then it goes on to
another point, raises up another whirl from fresh materials, and begins
another motion; and so it travels from place to place until the force is
all spent; and then it falls down, ended. So when the mind will end, be
broken to pieces entirely, without leaving any Samskara, we shall be
entirely free, and until that time we are in bondage; until then the
Atman is covered by the whirl of the mind, and imagines it is being
taken from place to place. When the whirl falls down, the Atman finds
that It is all-pervading. It can go where It likes, is entirely free,
and is able to manufacture any number of minds or bodies It likes; but
until then It can go only with the whirl. This freedom is the goal
towards which we are all moving.

Suppose there is a ball in this room, and we each have a mallet in our
hands and begin to strike the ball, giving it hundreds of blows, driving
it from point to point, until at last it flies out of the room. With
what force and in what direction will it go out? These will be
determined by the forces that have been acting upon it all through the
room. All the different blows that have been given will have their
effects. Each one of our actions, mental and physical, is such a blow.
The human mind is a ball which is being hit. We are being hit about this
room of the world all the time, and our passage out of it is determined
by the force of all these blows. In each case, the speed and direction
of the ball is determined by the hits it has received; so all our
actions in this world will determine our future birth. Our present
birth, therefore, is the result of our past. This is one case: suppose I
give you an endless chain, in which there is a black link and a white
link alternately, without beginning and without end, and suppose I ask
you the nature of the chain. At first you will find a difficulty in
determining its nature, the chain being infinite at both ends, but
slowly you find out it is a chain. You soon discover that this infinite
chain is a repetition of the two links, black and white, and these
multiplied infinitely become a whole chain. If you know the nature of
one of these links, you know the nature of the whole chain, because it
is a perfect repetition. All our lives, past, present, and future, form,
as it were, an infinite chain, without beginning and without end, each
link of which is one life, with two ends, birth and death. What we are
and do here is being repeated again and again, with but little
variation. So if we know these two links, we shall know all the passages
we shall have to pass through in this world. We see, therefore, that our
passage into this world has been exactly determined by our previous
passages. Similarly we are in this world by our own actions. Just as we
go out with the sum total of our present actions upon us, so we see that
we come into it with the sum total of our past actions upon us; that
which takes us out is the very same thing that brings us in. What brings
us in? Our past deeds. What takes us out? Our own deeds *here*, and so
on and on we go. Like the caterpillar that takes the thread from its own
mouth and builds its cocoon and at last finds itself caught inside the
cocoon, we have bound ourselves by our own actions, we have thrown the
network of our actions around ourselves. We have set the law of
causation in motion, and we find it hard to get ourselves out of it. We
have set the wheel in motion, and we are being crushed under it. So this
philosophy teaches us that we are uniformly being bound by our own
actions, good or bad.

The Atman never comes nor goes, is never born nor dies. It is nature
moving before the Atman, and the reflection of this motion is on the
Atman; and the Atman ignorantly thinks it is moving, and not nature.
When the Atman thinks that, it is in bondage; but when it comes to find
it never moves, that it is omnipresent, then freedom comes. The Atman in
bondage is called Jiva. Thus you see that when it is said that the Atman
comes and goes, it is said only for facility of understanding, just as
for convenience in studying astronomy you are asked to suppose that the
sun moves round the earth, though such is not the case. So the Jiva, the
soul, comes to higher or lower states. This is the well-known law of
reincarnation; and this law binds all creation.

People in this country think it too horrible that man should come up
from an animal. Why? What will be the end of these millions of animals?
Are they nothing? If we have a soul, so have they, and if they have
none, neither have we. It is absurd to say that man alone has a soul,
and the animals none. I have seen men worse than animals.

The human soul has sojourned in lower and higher forms, migrating from
one to another, according to the Samskaras or impressions, but it is
only in the highest form as man that it attains to freedom. The man form
is higher than even the angel form, and of all forms it is the highest;
man is the highest being in creation, because he attains to freedom.

All this universe was in Brahman, and it was, as it were, projected out
of Him, and has been moving on to go back to the source from which it
was projected, like the electricity which comes out of the dynamo,
completes the circuit, and returns to it. The same is the case with the
soul. Projected from Brahman, it passed through all sorts of vegetable
and animal forms, and at last it is in man, and man is the nearest
approach to Brahman. To go back to Brahman from which we have been
projected is the great struggle of life. Whether people know it or not
does not matter. In the universe, whatever we see of motion, of
struggles in minerals or plants or animals is an effort to come back to
the centre and be at rest. There was an equilibrium, and that has been
destroyed; and all parts and atoms and molecules are struggling to find
their lost equilibrium again. In this struggle they are combining and
re-forming, giving rise to all the wonderful phenomena of nature. All
struggles and competitions in animal life, plant life, and everywhere
else, all social struggles and wars are but expressions of that eternal
struggle to get back to that equilibrium.

The going from birth to death, this travelling, is what is called
Samsara in Sanskrit, the round of birth and death literally. All
creation, passing through this round, will sooner or later become free.
The question may be raised that if we all shall come to freedom, why
should we *struggle* to attain it? If every one is going to be free, we
will sit down and wait. It is true that every being will become free,
sooner or later; no one can be lost. Nothing can come to destruction;
everything must come up. If that is so, what is the use of our
struggling? In the first place, the struggle is the only means that will
bring us to the centre, and in the second place, we do not know why we
struggle. We have to. "Of thousands of men some are awakened to the idea
that they will become free." The vast masses of mankind are content with
material things, but there are some who awake, and want to get back, who
have had enough of this playing, down here. These struggle consciously,
while the rest do it unconsciously.

The alpha and omega of Vedanta philosophy is to "give up the world,"
giving up the unreal and taking the real. Those who are enamoured of the
world may ask, "Why should we attempt to get out of it, to go back to
the centre? Suppose we have all come from God, but we find this world is
pleasurable and nice; then why should we not rather try to get more and
more of the world? Why should we try to get out of it?" They say, look
at the wonderful improvements going on in the world every day, how much
luxury is being manufactured for it. This is very enjoyable. Why should
we go away, and strive for something which is not this? The answer is
that the world is certain to die, to be broken into pieces and that many
times we have had the same enjoyments. All the forms which we are seeing
now have been manifested again and again, and the world in which we live
has been here many times before. I have been here and talked to you many
times before. You will know that it must be so, and the very words that
you have been listening to now, you have heard many times before. And
many times more it will be the same. Souls were never different, the
bodies have been constantly dissolving and recurring. Secondly, these
things periodically occur. Suppose here are three or four dice, and when
we throw them, one comes up five, another four, another three, and
another two. If you keep on throwing, there must come times when those
very same numbers will recur. Go on throwing, and no matter how long may
be the interval, those numbers must come again. It cannot be asserted in
how many throws they will come again; this is the law of chance. So with
souls and their associations. However distant may be the periods, the
same combinations and dissolutions will happen again and again. The same
birth, eating and drinking, and then death, come round again and again.
Some never find anything higher than the enjoyments of the world, but
those who want to soar higher find that these enjoyments are never
final, are only by the way.

Every form, let us say, beginning from the little worm and ending in
man, is like one of the cars of the Chicago Ferris Wheel which is in
motion all the time, but the occupants change. A man goes into a car,
moves with the wheel, and comes out. The wheel goes on and on. A soul
enters one form, resides in it for a time, then leaves it and goes into
another and quits that again for a third. Thus the round goes on till it
comes out of the wheel and becomes free.

Astonishing powers of reading the past and the future of a man's life
have been known in every country and every age. The explanation is that
so long as the Atman is within the realm of causation — though its
inherent freedom is not entirely lost and can assert itself, even to the
extent of taking the soul out of the causal chain, as it does in the
case of men who become free — its actions are greatly influenced by the
causal law and thus make it possible for men, possessed with the insight
to trace the sequence of effects, to tell the past and the future.

So long as there is desire or want, it is a sure sign that there is
imperfection. A perfect, free being cannot have any desire. God cannot
want anything. If He desires, He cannot be God. He will be imperfect. So
all the talk about God desiring this and that, and becoming angry and
pleased by turns is babies' talk, but means nothing. Therefore it has
been taught by all teachers, "Desire nothing, give up all desires and be
perfectly satisfied."

A child comes into the world crawling and without teeth, and the old man
gets out without teeth and crawling. The extremes are alike, but the one
has no experience of the life before him, while the other has gone
through it all. When the vibrations of ether are very low, we do not see
light, it is darkness; when very high, the result is also darkness. The
extremes generally appear to be the same, though one is as distant from
the other as the poles. The wall has no desires, so neither has the
perfect man. But the wall is not sentient enough to desire, while for
the perfect man there is nothing to desire. There are idiots who have no
desires in this world, because their brain is imperfect. At the same
time, the highest state is when we have no desires, but the two are
opposite poles of the same existence. One is near the animal, and the
other near to God.

</div>
