---
title: IS THE SOUL IMMORTAL?

---
<div>

[←](../lectures_and_discourses/the_practice_of_religion.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](reincarnation.htm)

  

## IS THE SOUL IMMORTAL?

(The Swamiji's contribution to the discussion of this question, carried
on in the pages of *The New York Morning Advertiser*.)

*"None has power to destroy the unchangeable."* — Bhagavad-Gitâ.

In the great Sanskrit epic, the Mahâbhârata, the story is told how the
hero, Yudhishthira, when asked by Dharma to tell what was the most
wonderful thing in the world, replied, that it was the persistent belief
of man kind in their own deathlessness in spite of their witnessing
death everywhere around them almost every moment of their lives. And, in
fact, this is the most stupendous wonder in human life. In spite of all
arguments to the contrary urged in different times by different schools,
in spite of the inability of reason to penetrate the veil of mystery
which will ever hang between the sensuous and the supersensuous worlds,
man is thoroughly persuaded that he cannot die.

We may study all our lives, and in the end fail to bring the problem of
life and death to the plane of rational demonstration, affirmative or
negative. We may talk or write, preach or teach, for or against the
permanency or impermanency of human existence as much as we like; we may
become violent partisans of this side or that; we may invent names by
the hundred, each more intricate than its predecessor, and lull
ourselves into a momentary rest under the delusion of our having solved
the problem once for all; we may cling with all our powers to any one of
the curious religious superstitions or the far more objectionable
scientific superstitions — but in the end, we find ourselves playing an
external game in the bowling alley of reason and raising intellectual
pin after pin, only to be knocked over again and again.

But behind all this mental strain and torture, not infrequently
productive of more dangerous results than mere games, stands a fact
unchallenged and unchallengeable — the fact, the wonder, which the
Mahabharata points out as the inability of our mind to conceive our own
annihilation. Even to imagine my own annihilation I shall have to stand
by and look on as a witness.

Now, before trying to understand what this curious phenomenon means, we
want to note that upon this one fact the whole world stands. The
permanence of the external world is inevitably joined to the permanence
of the internal; and, however plausible any theory of the universe may
seem which asserts the permanence of the one and denies that of the
other, the theorist himself will find that in his own mechanism not one
conscious action is possible, without the permanence of both the
internal and the external worlds being one of the factors in the motive
cause. Although it is perfectly true that when the human mind transcends
its own limitations, it finds the duality reduced to an indivisible
unity, on this side of the unconditioned, the whole objective world —
that is to say, the world we know — is and can be alone known to us as
existing for the subject, and therefore, before we would be able to
conceive the annihilation of the subject we are bound to conceive the
annihilation of the object.

So far it is plain enough. But now comes the difficulty. I cannot think
of myself ordinarily as anything else but a body. My idea of my own
permanence includes my idea of myself as a body. But the body is
obviously impermanent, as is the whole of nature — a constantly
vanishing quantity.

Where, then, is this permanence?

There is one more wonderful phenomenon connected with our lives, without
which "who will be able to live, who will be able to enjoy life a
moment?" — the idea of freedom.

This is the idea that guides each footstep of ours, makes our movements
possible, determines our relations to each other — nay, is the very warp
and woof in the fabric of human life. Intellectual knowledge tries to
drive it inch by inch from its territory, post after post is snatched
away from its domains, and each step is made fast and ironbound with the
railroadings of cause and effect. But it laughs at all our attempts,
and, lo, it keeps itself above all this massive pile of law and
causation with which we tried to smother it to death! How can it be
otherwise? The limited always requires a higher generalization of the
unlimited to explain itself. The bound can only be explained by the
free, the caused by the uncaused. But again, the same difficulty is also
here. What is free? The body or even the mind? It is apparent to all
that they are as much bound by law as anything else in the universe.

Now the problem resolves itself into this dilemma: either the whole
universe is a mass of never-ceasing change and nothing more, irrevocably
bound by the law of causation, not one particle having a unity of
itself, yet is curiously producing an ineradicable delusion of
permanence and freedom, or there is in us and in the universe something
which is permanent and free, showing that the basal constitutional
belief of the human mind is not a delusion. It is the duty of science to
explain facts by bringing them to a higher generalization. Any
explanation, therefore that first wants to destroy a part of the fact
given to be explained, in order to fit itself to the remainder, is not
scientific, whatever else it may be.

So any explanation that wants to overlook the fact of this persistent
and all-necessary idea of freedom commits the above-mentioned mistake of
denying a portion of the fact in order to explain the rest, and is,
therefore, wrong. The only other alternative possible, then, is to
acknowledge, in harmony with our nature, that there is something in us
which is free and permanent.

But it is not the body; neither is it the mind. The body is dying every
minute. The mind is constantly changing. The body is a combination, and
so is the mind, and as such can never reach to a state beyond all
change. But beyond this momentary sheathing of gross matter, beyond even
the finer covering of the mind is the Âtman, the true Self of man, the
permanent, the ever free. It is his freedom that is percolating through
layers of thought and matter, and, in spite of the colourings of name
and form, is ever asserting its unshackled existence. It is his
deathlessness, his bliss, his peace, his divinity that shines out and
makes itself felt in spite of the thickest layers of ignorance. He is
the real man, the fearless one, the deathless one, the free.

Now freedom is only possible when no external power can exert any
influence, produce any change. Freedom is only possible to the being who
is beyond all conditions, all laws, all bondages of cause and effect. In
other words, the unchangeable alone can be free and, therefore,
immortal. This Being, this Atman, this real Self of man, the free, the
unchangeable is beyond all conditions, and as such, it has neither birth
nor death.

"Without birth or death, eternal, ever-existing is this soul of man."

</div>
