---
title: REINCARNATION

---
<div>

[←](is_the_soul_immortal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](on_dr_paul_deussen.htm)

  

## REINCARNATION

(Contributed to the *Metaphysical Magazine*, New York, March, 1895)

*"Both you and I have passed through many births; you know them not, I
know them all."* — Bhagavad-Gitâ

Of the many riddles that have perplexed the intellect of man in all
climes and times, the most intricate is himself. Of the myriad mysteries
that have called forth his energies to struggle for solution from the
very dawn of history, the most mysterious is his own nature. It is at
once the most insoluble enigma and the problem of all problems. As the
starting-point and the repository of all we know and feel and do, there
never has been, nor will be, a time when man's own nature will cease to
demand his best and foremost attention.

Though through hunger after that truth, which of all others has the most
intimate connection with his very existence, though through an
all-absorbing desire for an inward standard by which to measure the
outward universe though through the absolute and inherent necessity of
finding a fixed point in a universe of change, man has sometimes
clutched at handfuls of dust for gold, and even when urged on by a voice
higher than reason or intellect, he has many times failed rightly to
interpret the real meaning of the divinity within — still there never
was a time since the search began, when some race, or some individuals,
did not hold aloft the lamp of truth.

Taking a one-sided, cursory and prejudiced view of the surroundings and
the unessential details, sometimes disgusted also with the vagueness of
many schools and sects, and often, alas, driven to the opposite extreme
by the violent superstitions of organised priestcraft — men have not
been wanting, especially among advanced intellects, in either ancient or
modern times, who not only gave up the search in despair, but declared
it fruitless and useless. Philosophers might fret and sneer, and priests
ply their trade even at the point of the sword, but truth comes to those
alone who worship at her shrine for her sake only, without fear and
without shopkeeping.

Light comes to individuals through the conscious efforts of their
intellect; it comes, slowly though, to the whole race through
unconscious percolations. The philosophers show the volitional struggles
of great minds; history reveals the silent process of permeation through
which truth is absorbed by the masses.

Of all the theories that have been held by man about himself, that of a
soul entity, separate from the body and immortal, has been the most
widespread; and among those that held the belief in such a soul, the
majority of the thoughtful had always believed also in its
pre-existence.

At present the greater portion of the human race, having organised
religion, believe in it; and many of the best thinkers in the most
favoured lands, though nurtured in religions avowedly hostile to every
idea of the preexistence of the soul, have endorsed it. Hinduism and
Buddhism have it for their foundation; the educated classes among the
ancient Egyptians believed in it; the ancient Persians arrived at it;
the Greek philosophers made it the corner-stone of their philosophy; the
Pharisees among the Hebrews accepted it; and the Sufis among the
Mohammedans almost universally acknowledged its truth.

There must be peculiar surroundings which generate and foster certain
forms of belief among nations. It required ages for the ancient races to
arrive at any idea about a part, even of the body, surviving after
death; it took ages more to come to any rational idea about this
something which persists and lives apart from the body. It was only when
the idea was reached of an entity whose connection with the body was
only for a time, and only among those nations who arrived at such a
conclusion, that the unavoidable question arose: Whither? Whence?

The ancient Hebrews never disturbed their equanimity by questioning
themselves about the soul. With them death ended all. Karl Heckel justly
says, "Though it is true that in the Old Testament, preceding the exile,
the Hebrews distinguish a life-principle, different from the body, which
is sometimes called 'Nephesh', or 'Ruakh', or 'Neshama', yet all these
words correspond rather to the idea of breath than to that of spirit or
soul. Also in the writings of the Palestinean Jews, after the exile,
there is never made mention of an individual immortal soul, but always
only of a life-breath emanating from God, which, after the body is
dissolved, is reabsorbed into the Divine 'Ruakh'."

The ancient Egyptians and the Chaldeans had peculiar beliefs of their
own about the soul; but their ideas about this living part after death
must not be confused with those of the ancient Hindu, the Persian, the
Greek, or any other Aryan race. There was, from the earliest times, a
broad distinction between the Âryas and the non-Sanskrit speaking
Mlechchhas in the conception of the soul. Externally it was typified by
their disposal of the dead — the Mlechchhas mostly trying their best to
*preserve* the dead bodies either by careful burial or by the more
elaborate processes of mummifying, and the Aryas generally burning their
dead.

Herein lies the key to a great secret — the fact that no Mlechchha race,
whether Egyptian, Assyrian, or Babylonian, ever attained to the idea of
the soul as a separate entity which can live *independent* of the body,
without he help of the Aryas, especially of the Hindus.

Although Herodotus states that the Egyptians were the first to conceive
the idea of the immortality of the soul, and states as a doctrine of the
Egyptians "that the soul after the dissolution of the body enters again
and again into a creature that comes to life; then, that the soul
wanders through all the animals of the land and the sea and through all
the birds, and finally after three thousand years returns to a human
body," yet, modern researches into Egyptology have hitherto found no
trace of metempsychosis in the popular Egyptian religion. On the other
hand, the most recent researches of Maspero, A. Erman, and other eminent
Egyptologists tend to confirm the supposition that the doctrine of
palingenesis was not at home with the Egyptians.

With the ancient Egyptians the soul was only a double, having no
individuality of its own, and never able to break its connection with
the body. It persists only so long as the body lasts; and if by chance
the corpse is destroyed, the departed soul must suffer a second death
and annihilation. The soul after death was allowed to roam freely all
over the world, but always returning at night to where the corpse was,
always miserable, always hungry and thirsty, always extremely desirous
to enjoy life once more, and never being able to fulfil the desire. If
any part of its old body was injured, the soul was also invariably
injured in its corresponding part. And this idea explains the solicitude
of the ancient Egyptians to preserve their dead. At first the deserts
were chosen as the burial-place, because the dryness of the air did not
allow the body to perish soon, thus granting to the departed soul a long
lease of existence. In course of time one of the gods discovered the
process of making mummies, through which the devout hoped to preserve
the dead bodies of their ancestors for almost an infinite length of
time, thus securing immortality to the departed ghost, however miserable
it might be.

The perpetual regret for the world, in which the soul can take no
further interest, never ceased to torture the deceased. "O. my brother,"
exclaims the departed "withhold not thyself from drinking and eating,
from drunkenness, from love, from all enjoyment, from following thy
desire by night and by day; put not sorrow within thy heart, for, what
are the years of man upon earth? The West is a land of sleep and of
heavy shadows, a place wherein the inhabitants, when once installed,
slumber on in their mummy forms, never more waking to see their
brethren; never more to recognise their fathers and mothers, with hearts
forgetful of their wives and children The living water, which earth
giveth to all who dwell upon it, is for me stagnant and dead; that water
floweth to all who are on earth, while for me it is but liquid
putrefaction, this water that is mine. Since I came into this funeral
valley I know not where nor what I am. Give me to drink of running water
. . . let me be placed by the edge of the water with my face to the
North, that the breeze may caress me and my heart be refreshed from its
sorrow."[1](#fn1)

Among the Chaldeans also, although they did not speculate so much as the
Egyptians as to the condition of the soul after death, the soul is still
a double and is bound to its sepulchre. They also could not conceive of
a state without this physical body, and expected a resurrection of the
corpse again to life; and though the goddess Ishtar, after great perils
and adventures, procured the resurrection of her shepherd, husband,
Dumuzi, the son of Ea and Damkina, "The most pious votaries pleaded in
rain from temple to temple, for the resurrection of their dead friends."

Thus we find, that the ancient Egyptians or Chaldeans never could
entirely dissociate the idea of the soul from the corpse of the departed
or the sepulchre. The state of earthly existence was best after all; and
the departed are always longing to have a chance once more to renew it;
and the living are fervently hoping to help them in prolonging the
existence of the miserable double and striving the best they can to help
them.

This is not the soil out of which any higher knowledge of the soul could
spring. In the first place it is grossly materialistic, and even then it
is one of terror and agony. Frightened by the almost innumerable powers
of evil, and with hopeless, agonised efforts to avoid them, the souls of
the living, like their ideas of the souls of the departed — wander all
over the world though they might — could never get beyond the sepulchre
and the crumbling corpse.

We must turn now for the source of the higher ideas of the soul to
another race, whose God was an all-merciful, all-pervading Being
manifesting Himself through various bright, benign, and helpful Devas,
the first of all the human race who addressed their God as Father "Oh,
take me by the hands even as a father takes his dear son"; with whom
life was a hope and not a despair; whose religion was not the
intermittent groans escaping from the lips of an agonised man during the
intervals of a life of mad excitement; but whose ideas come to us
redolent with the aroma of the field and forest; whose songs of praise —
spontaneous, free, joyful, like the songs which burst forth from the
throats of the birds when they hail this beautiful world illuminated by
the first rays of the lord of the day — come down to us even now through
the vista of eighty centuries as fresh calls from heaven; we turn to the
ancient Aryas.

"Place me in that deathless, undecaying world where is the light of
heaven, and everlasting lustre shines"; "Make me immortal in that realm
where dwells the King Vivasvân's son, where is the secret shrine of
heaven"; "Make me immortal in that realm where they move even as they
list"; "In the third sphere of inmost heaven, where worlds are full of
light, make me immortal in that realm of bliss"— These are the prayers
of the Aryas in their oldest record, the Rig-Veda Samhitâ.

We find at once a whole world of difference between the Mlechchha and
the Aryan ideals. To the one, this body and this world are all that are
real, and all that are desirable. A little life-fluid which flies off
from the body at death, to feel torture and agony at the loss of the
enjoyments of the senses, can, they fondly hope, be brought back if the
body is carefully preserved; and thus a corpse became more an object of
care than the living man. The other found out that, that which left the
body was the real man; and when separated from the body, it enjoyed a
state of bliss higher than it ever enjoyed when in the body. And they
hastened to annihilate the corrupted corpse by burning it.

Here we find the germ out of which a true idea of the soul could come.
Here it was — where the real man was not the body, but the soul, where
all ideas of an inseparable connection between the real man and the body
were utterly absent — that a noble idea of the freedom of the soul could
rise. And it was when the Aryas penetrated even beyond the shining cloth
of the body with which the departed soul was enveloped, and found its
real nature of a formless, individual, unit principle, that the question
inevitably arose: Whence?

It was in India and among the Aryas that the doctrine of the
pre-existence, the immortality, and the individuality of the soul first
arose. Recent researches in Egypt have failed to show any trace of the
doctrines of an independent and individual soul existing before and
after the earthly phase of existence. Some of the mysteries were no
doubt in possession of this idea, but in those it has been traced to
India.

"I am convinced", says Karl Heckel, "that the deeper we enter into the
study of the Egyptian religion, the clearer it is shown that the
doctrine of metem psychosis was entirely foreign to the popular Egyptian
religion; and that even that which single mysteries possessed of it was
not inherent to the Osiris teachings, but derived from Hindu sources."

Later on, we find the Alexandrian Jews imbued with the doctrine of an
individual soul, and the Pharisees of the time of Jesus, as already
stated, not only had faith in an individual soul, but believed in its
wandering through various bodies; and thus it is easy to find how Christ
was recognised as the incarnation of an older Prophet, and Jesus himself
directly asserted that John the Baptist was the Prophet Elias come back
again. "If ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come." —
*Matt*. XI. 14.

The ideas of a soul and of its individuality among the Hebrews,
evidently came through the higher mystical teachings of the Egyptians,
who in their turn derived it from India. And that it should come through
Alexandria is significant, as the Buddhistic records clearly show
Buddhistic missionary activity in Alexandria and Asia Minor.

Pythagoras is said to have been the first Greek who taught the doctrine
of palingenesis among the Hellenes. As an Aryan race, already burning
their dead and believing in the doctrine of an individual soul, it was
easy for the Greeks to accept the doctrine of reincarnation through the
Pythagorean teachings. According to Apuleius, Pythagoras had come to
India, where he had been instructed by the Brâhmins.

So far we have learnt that wherever the soul was held to be an
individual, the real man, and not a vivifying part of the body only, the
doctrine of its pre-existence had inevitably come, and that externally
those nations that believed in the independent individuality of the soul
had almost always signified it by burning the bodies of the departed.
Though one of the ancient Aryan races, the Persian, developed at an
early period and without any; Semitic influence a peculiar method of
disposing of the bodies of the dead, the very name by which they call
their "Towers of silence", comes from the root *Dah*, to burn.

In short, the races who did not pay much attention to the analysis of
their own nature, never went beyond the material body as their all in
all, and even when driven by higher light to penetrate beyond, they only
came to the conclusion that somehow or other, at some distant period of
time, this body will become incorruptible.

On the other hand, that race which spent the best part of its energies
in the inquiry into the nature of man as a thinking being — the
Indo-Aryan — soon found out that beyond this body, beyond even the
shining body which their forefathers longed after, is the real man, the
principle, the individual who clothes himself with this body, and then
throws it off when worn out. Was such a principle created? If creation
means something coming out of nothing, their answer is a decisive
*"No"*. This soul is without birth and without death; it is not a
compound or combination but an independent individual, and as such it
cannot be created or destroyed. It is only travelling through various
states.

Naturally, the question arises: Where was it all this time? The Hindu
philosophers say, "It was passing through different bodies in the
physical sense, or, really and metaphysically speaking, passing through
different mental planes."

Are there any proofs apart from the teachings of the Vedas upon which
the doctrine of reincarnation has been founded by the Hindu
philosophers? There are, and we hope to show later on that there are
grounds as valid for it as for any other universally accepted doctrine.
But first we will see what some of the greatest of modern European
thinkers have thought about reincarnation.

I. H. Fichte, speaking about the immortality of the soul, says:

"It is true there is one analogy in nature which might be brought forth
in refutation of the continuance. It is the well-known argument that
everything that has a beginning in time must also perish at some period
of time; hence, that the claimed past existence of the soul necessarily
implies its pre-existence. This is a fair conclusion, but instead of
being an objection to, it is rather an additional argument for its
continuance. Indeed, one needs only to understand the full meaning of
the metaphysico-physiological axiom that in reality nothing can be
created or annihilated, to recognise that the soul must have existed
prior to its becoming visible in a physical body."

Schopenhauer, in his book, *Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung*,
speaking about palingenesis, says:

"What sleep is for the individual, death is for the 'will'. It would not
endure to continue the same actions and sufferings throughout an
eternity without true gain, if memory and individuality remained to it.
It flings them off, and this is Lethe, and through this sleep of death
it reappears fitted out with another intellect as a new being; a new day
tempts to new shores. These constant new births, then, constitute the
succession of the life-dreams of a will which in itself is
indestructible, until instructed and improved by so much and such
various successive knowledge in a constantly new form, it abolishes and
abrogates itself.... It must not be neglected that even empirical
grounds support a palingenesis of this kind. As a matter of fact, there
does exist a connection between the birth of the newly appearing beings
and the death of those that are worn out. It shows itself in the great
fruitfulness of the human race which appears as a consequence of
devastating diseases. When in the fourteenth century the Black Death had
for the most part depopulated the Old World, a quite abnormal
fruitfulness appeared among the human race, and twin-births were very
frequent. The circumstance was also remarkable that none of the children
born at this time obtained their full number of teeth; thus nature,
exerting itself to the utmost, was niggardly in details. This is related
by F. Schnurrer in his *Chronik der Seuchen*, 1825. Casper, also, in his
*Ueber die Wahrscheinliche Lebensdauer des Menschen*, 1835, confirms the
principle that the number of births in a given population has the most
decided influence upon the length of life and mortality in it, as this
always keeps pace with mortality; so that always and everywhere the
deaths and the births increase and decrease in like proportion, which he
places beyond doubt by an accumulation of evidence collected from many
lands and their various provinces. And yet it is impossible that there
can be physical, causal connection between my early death and the
fruitfulness of a marriage with which I have nothing to do, or
conversely. Thus here the metaphysical appears undeniable, and in a
stupendous manner, as the immediate ground of explanation of the
physical. Every new-born being comes fresh and blithe into the new
existence, and enjoys it as a free gift; but there is and can be nothing
freely given. Its fresh existence is paid for by the old age and death
of a worn-out existence which has perished, but which contained the
indestructible seed out of which the new existence has arisen; they are
one being."

The great English philosopher Hume, nihilistic though he was, says in
the sceptical essay on immortality, "The metempsychosis is therefore the
only system of this kind that philosophy can listen to." The philosopher
Lessing, with a deep poetical insight, asks, "Is this hypothesis so
laughable merely because it is the oldest, because the human
understanding, before the sophistries of the schools had dissipated and
debilitated it, lighted upon it at once? . . . Why should not I come
back as often as I am capable of acquiring fresh knowledge, fresh
experience? Do I bring away so much from once that there is nothing to
repay the trouble of coming back?"

The arguments for and against the doctrine of a preexisting soul
reincarnating through many lives have been many, and some of the
greatest thinkers of all ages have taken up the gauntlet to defend it;
and so far as we can see, if there is an individual soul, that it
existed before seems inevitable. If the soul is not an individual but a
combination of "Skandhas" (notions), as the Mâdhyamikas among the
Buddhists insist, still they find pre-existence absolutely necessary to
explain their position.

The argument showing the impossibility of an infinite existence
beginning in time is unanswerable, though attempts have been made to
ward it off by appealing to the omnipotence of God to do anything,
however contrary to reason it may be. We are sorry to find this most
fallacious argument proceeding from some of the most thoughtful persons.

In the first place, God being the universal and common cause of all
phenomena, the question was to find the natural causes of certain
phenomena in the human soul, and the *Deus ex machina* theory is,
therefore, quite irrelevant. It amounts to nothing less than confession
of ignorance. We can give that answer to every question asked in every
branch of human knowledge and stop all inquiry and, therefore, knowledge
altogether.

Secondly, this constant appeal to the omnipotence of God is only a
word-puzzle. The cause, as cause, is and can only be known to us as
sufficient for the effect, and nothing more. As such we have no more
idea of an infinite effect than of an omnipotent cause. Moreover, all
our ideas of God are only limited; even the idea of cause limits our
idea of God. Thirdly, even taking the position for granted, we are not
bound to allow any such absurd theories as "Something coming out of
nothing", or "Infinity beginning in time", so long as we can give a
better explanation.

A so-called great argument is made against the idea of pre-existence by
asserting that the majority of mankind are not conscious of it. To prove
the validity of this argument, the party who offers it must prove that
the whole of the soul of man is bound up in the faculty of memory. If
memory be the test of existence, then all that part of our lives which
is not now in it must be non-existent, and every, person who in a state
of coma or otherwise loses his memory must be non-existent also.

The premises from which the inference is drawn of a previous existence,
and that too on the plane of conscious' action, as adduced by the Hindu
philosophers, are chiefly these:

First, how else to explain this world of inequalities? Here is one child
born in the province of a just and merciful God, with every circumstance
conducing to his becoming a good and useful member of the human race,
and perhaps at the same instant and in the same city another child is
born under circumstances every one of which is against his becoming
good. We see children born to suffer, perhaps all their lives, and that
owing to no fault of theirs. Why should it be so? What is the cause? Of
whose ignorance is it the result? If not the child's, why should it
suffer for its parents' actions?

It is much better to confess ignorance than to try to evade the question
by the allurements of future enjoyments in proportion to the evil here,
or by posing "mysteries". Not only undeserved suffering forced upon us
by any agent is immoral — not to say unjust — but even the
future-makingup theory has no legs to stand upon.

How many of the miserably born struggle towards a higher life, and how
many more succumb to the circumstances they are placed under? Should
those who grow worse and more wicked by being forced to be born under
evil circumstances be rewarded in the future for the wickedness of their
lives? In that case the more wicked the man is here, the better will be
his deserts hereafter.

There is no other way to vindicate the glory and the liberty of the
human soul and reconcile the inequalities and the horrors of this world
than by placing the whole burden upon the legitimate cause — our own
independent actions or Karma. Not only so, but every theory of the
creation of the soul from nothing inevitably leads to fatalism and
preordination, and instead of a Merciful Father, places before us a
hideous, cruel, and an ever-angry God to worship. And so far as the
power of religion for good or evil is concerned, this theory of a
created soul, leading to its corollaries of fatalism and predestination,
is responsible for the horrible idea prevailing among some Christians
and Mohammedans that the heathens are the lawful victims of their
swords, and all the horrors that have followed and are following it
still.

But an argument which the philosophers of the Nyâya school have always
advanced in favour of reincarnations and which to us seems conclusive,
is this: Our experiences cannot be annihilated. Our actions (Karma)
though apparently disappearing, remain still unperceived (Adrishta), and
reappear again in their effect as tendencies (Pravrittis). Even little
babies come with certain tendencies — fear of death, for example.

Now if a tendency is the result of repeated actions, the tendencies with
which we are born must be explained on that ground too. Evidently we
could not have got them in this life; therefore we must have to seek for
their genesis in the past. Now it is also evident that some of our
tendencies are the effects of the self-conscious efforts peculiar to
man; and if it is true that we are born with such tendencies, it
rigorously follows that their causes were conscious efforts in the past
— that is, we must have been on the same mental plane which we call the
human plane, before this present life.

So far as explaining the tendencies of the present life by past
conscious efforts goes, the reincarnationists of India and the latest
school of evolutionists are at once; the only difference is that the
Hindus, as spiritualists, explain it by the conscious efforts of
individual souls, and the materialistic school of evolutionists, by a
hereditary physical transmission. The schools which hold to the theory
of creation out of nothing are entirely out of court.

The issue has to be fought out between the reincarnationists who hold
that all experiences are stored up as; tendencies in the subject of
those experiences, the individual soul, and are transmitted by
reincarnation of that unbroken individuality — and the materialists who
hold that the brain is the subject of all actions and the theory of the
transmission through cells.

It is thus that the doctrine of reincarnation assumes an infinite
importance to our mind, for the fight between reincarnation and mere
cellular transmission is, in reality, the fight between spiritualism and
materialism. If cellular transmission is the all-sufficient explanation,
materialism is inevitable, and there is no necessity for the theory of a
soul. If it is not a sufficient explanation, the theory of an individual
soul bringing into this life the experiences of the past is as
absolutely true. There is no escape from the alternative, reincarnation
or materialism. Which shall we accept?

1.  [^](#txt1)This text has been translated into German by Brugsch, Die
    Egyptische Gräberwelt, pp. 39, 40, and into French by Maspero,
    Etudes Egyptiennes, vol. I., pp. 181-90.

</div>
