---
title: ON DR. PAUL DEUSSEN

---
<div>

[←](reincarnation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](on_professor_max_muller.htm)

  

## ON DR. PAUL DEUSSEN

(Written for the *Brahmavâdin*, 1896.)

More than a decade has passed since a young German student, one of eight
children of a not very well-to-do clergyman, heard on a certain day
Professor Lassen lecturing on a language and literature new — very new
even at that time — to European scholars, namely, Sanskrit. The lectures
were of course free; for even now it is impossible for any one in any
European University to make a living by teaching Sanskrit, unless indeed
the University backs him.

Lassen was almost the last of that heroic band of German scholars, the
pioneers of Sanskrit scholarship in Germany. Heroic certainly they were
— what interest except their pure and unselfish love of knowledge could
German scholars have had at that time in Indian literature? The veteran
Professor was expounding a chapter of *Shakuntalâ*; and on that day
there was no one present more eagerly and attentively listening to
Lassen's exposition than our young student. The subject-matter of the
exposition was of course interesting and wonderful, but more wonderful
was the strange language, the strange sounds of which, although uttered
with all those difficult peculiarities that Sanskrit consonants are
subjected to in the mouths of unaccustomed Europeans, had strange
fascination for him. He returned to his lodgings, but that night sleep
could not make him oblivious of what he bad heard. A glimpse of a
hitherto unknown land had been given to him, a land far more gorgeous in
its colours than any he had yet seen, and having a power of fascination
never yet experienced by his young and ardent soul.

Naturally his friends were anxiously looking forward to the ripening of
his brilliant parts, and expected that he would soon enter a learned
profession which might bring him respect, fame, and, above all, a good
salary and a high position. But then there was this Sanskrit! The vast
majority of European scholars had not even heard of it then; as for
making it pay — I have already said that such a thing is impossible even
now. Yet his desire to learn it was strong.

It has unfortunately become hard for us modern Indians to understand how
it could be like that; nevertheless, there are to be met with in
Varanasi and Nadia and other places even now, some old as well as young
persons among our Pandits, and mostly among the Sannyasins, who are mad
with this kind of thirst for knowledge for its own sake. Students, not
placed in the midst of the luxurious surroundings and materials of the
modern Europeanised Hindu, and with a thousand times less facilities for
study, poring over manuscripts in the flickering light of an oil lamp,
night after night, which alone would have been enough to completely
destroy the eye-sight of the students of any other nation; travelling on
foot hundreds of miles, begging their way all along, in search of a rare
manuscript or a noted teacher; and wonderfully concentrating all the
energy of their body and mind upon their one object of study, year in
and year out, till the hair turns grey and the infirmity of age
overtakes them — such students have not, through God's mercy, as yet
disappeared altogether from our country. Whatever India now holds as a
proud possession, has been undeniably the result of such labour on the
part of her worthy sons in days gone by; and the truth of this remark
will become at once evident on comparing the depth and solidity as well
as the unselfishness and the earnestness of purpose of India's ancient
scholarship with the results attained by our modern Indian Universities.
Unselfish and genuine zeal for real scholarship and honest earnest
thought must again become dominant in the life of our countrymen if they
are ever to rise to occupy among nations a rank worthy of their own
historic past. It is this kind of desire for knowledge which has made
Germany what she is now — one of the foremost, if not the foremost,
among the nations of the world.

Yes, the desire to learn Sanskrit was strong in the heart of this German
student. It was long, uphill work — this learning of Sanskrit; with him
too it was the same world-old story of successful scholars and their
hard work, their privations and their indomitable energy — and also the
same glorious conclusion of a really heroic achievement. He thus
achieved success; and now — not only Europe, but all India knows this
man, Paul Deussen, who is the Professor of Philosophy in the University
of Kiel. I have seen professors of Sanskrit in America and in Europe.
Some of them are very sympathetic towards Vedantic thought. I admire
their intellectual acumen and their lives of unselfish labour. But Paul
Deussen — or as he prefers to be called in Sanskrit, Deva-Sena — and the
veteran Max Müller have impressed me as being the truest friends of
India and Indian thought. It will always be among the most pleasing
episodes in my life — my first visit to this ardent Vedantist at Kiel,
his gentle wife who travelled with him in India, and his little
daughter, the darling of his heart — and our travelling together through
Germany and Holland to London, and the pleasant meetings we had in and
about London.

The earliest school of Sanskritists in Europe entered into the study of
Sanskrit with more imagination than critical ability. They knew a
little, expected much from that little, and often tried to make too much
of what little they knew. Then, in those days even, such vagaries as the
estimation of *Shakuntala* as forming the high watermark of Indian
philosophy were not altogether unknown! These were naturally followed by
a reactionary band of superficial critics, more than real scholars of
any kind, who knew little or nothing of Sanskrit, expected nothing from
Sanskrit studies, and ridiculed everything from the East. While
criticising the unsound imaginativeness of the early school to whom
everything in Indian literature was rose and musk, these, in their turn,
went into speculations which, to say the least, were equally highly
unsound and indeed very venturesome. And their boldness was very
naturally helped by the fact that these over-hasty and unsympathetic
scholars and critics were addressing an audience whose entire
qualification for pronouncing any judgment in the matter was their
absolute ignorance of Sanskrit. What a medley of results from such
critical scholarship! Suddenly, on one fine morning, the poor Hindu woke
up to find that everything that was his was gone; one strange race had
snatched away from him his arts, another his architecture, and a third,
whatever there was of his ancient sciences; why, even his religion was
not his own! Yes — that too had migrated into India in the wake of a
Pehlevi cross of stone! After a feverish period of such
treading-on-each-other's-toes of original research, a better state of
things has dawned. It has now been found out that mere adventure without
some amount of the capital of real and ripe scholarship produces nothing
but ridiculous failure even in the business of Oriental research, and
that the traditions in India are not to be rejected with supercilious
contempt, as there is really more in them than most people ever dream
of.

There is now happily coming into existence in Europe a new type of
Sanskrit scholars, reverential, sympathetic, and learned — reverential
because they are a better stamp of men, and sympathetic because they are
learned. And the link which connects the new portion of the chain with
the old one is, of course, our Max Müller. We Hindus certainly owe more
to him than to any other Sanskrit scholar in the West, and I am simply
astonished when I think of the gigantic task which he, in his
enthusiasm, undertook as a young man and brought to a successful
conclusion in his old age. Think of this man without any help, poring
over old manuscripts, hardly legible to the Hindus themselves, and in a
language to acquire which takes a lifetime even in India — without even
the help of any needy Pandit whose "brains could be picked", as the
Americans say, for ten shillings a month, and a mere mention of his name
in the introduction to some book of "very new researches" — think of
this man, spending days and sometimes months in elucidating the correct
reading and meaning of a word or a sentence in the commentary of Sâyana
(as he has himself told me), and in the end succeeding in making an easy
road through the forest of Vedic literature for all others to go along;
think of him and his work, and then say what he really is to us! Of
course we need not all agree with him in all that he says in his many
writings; certainly such an agreement is impossible. But agreement or no
agreement, the fact remains that this one man has done a thousand times
more for the preservation, spreading, and appreciation of the literature
of our forefathers than any of us can ever hope to do, and he has done
it all with a heart which is full of the sweet balm of love and
veneration.

If Max Müller is thus the old pioneer of the new movement, Deussen is
certainly one of its younger advance-guard. Philological interest had
hidden long from view the gems of thought and spirituality to be found
in the mine of our ancient scriptures. Max Müller brought out a few of
them and exhibited them to the public gaze, compelling attention to them
by means of his authority as the foremost philologist. Deussen,
unhampered by any philological leanings and possessing the training of a
philosopher singularly well versed in the speculations of ancient Greece
and modern Germany, took up the cue and plunged boldly into the
metaphysical depths of the Upanishads, found them to be fully safe and
satisfying, and then — equally boldly declared that fact before the
whole world. Deussen is certainly the freest among scholars in the
expression of his opinion about the Vedanta. He never stops to think
about the "What they would say" of the vast majority of scholars. We
indeed require bold men in this world to tell us bold words about truth;
and nowhere, is this more true now than in Europe where, through the
fear of social opinion and such other causes, there has been enough in
all conscience of the whitewashing and apologising attitude among
scholars towards creeds and customs which, in all probability, not many
among them really believe in. The greater is the glory, therefore, to
Max Müller and to Deussen for their bold and open advocacy of truth! May
they be as bold in showing to us our defects, the later corruptions in
our thought-systems in India, especially in their application to our
social needs! Just now we very much require the help of such genuine
friends as these to check the growing virulence of the disease, very
prevalent in India, of running either to the one extreme of slavish
panegyrists who cling to every village superstition as the innermost
essence of the Shâstras, or to the other extreme of demoniacal
denouncers who see no good in us and in our history, and will, if they
can, at once dynamite all the social and spiritual organizations of our
ancient land of religion and philosophy.

</div>
