---
title: ARYANS AND TAMILIANS

---
<div>

[←](sketch_of_the_life_of_pavhari_baba.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_social_conference_address.htm)

  

## ARYANS AND TAMILIANS

A veritable ethnological museum! Possibly, the half-ape skeleton of the
recently discovered Sumatra link will be found on search here, too. The
Dolmens are not wanting. Flint implements can be dug out almost
anywhere. The lake-dwellers — at least the river-dwellers — must have
been abundant at one time. The cave-men and leaf-wearers still persist.
The primitive hunters living in forests are in evidence in various parts
of the country. Then there are the more historical varieties — the
Negrito-Kolarian, the Dravidian, and the Aryan. To these have been added
from time to time dashes of nearly all the known races, and a great many
yet unknown — various breeds of Mongoloids, Mongols, Tartars, and the
so-called Aryans of the philologists. Well, here are the Persian, the
Greek, the Yunchi, the Hun, the Chin, the Scythian, and many more,
melted and fused, the Jews, Parsees, Arabs, Mongols, down to the
descendants of the Vikings and the lords of the German forests, yet
undigested — an ocean of humanity, composed of these race-waves
seething, boiling, struggling, constantly changing form, rising to the
surface, and spreading, and swallowing little ones, again subsiding —
this is the history of India.

In the midst of this madness of nature, one of the contending factions
discovered a method and, through the force of its superior culture,
succeeded in bringing the largest number of Indian humanity under its
sway.

The superior race styled themselves the Âryas or nobles, and their
method was the Varnâshramâchâra — the so-called caste.

Of course the men of the Aryan race reserved for themselves, consciously
or unconsciously a good many privileges; yet the institution of caste
has always been very flexible, sometimes too flexible to ensure a
healthy uprise of the races very low in the scale of culture.

It put, theoretically at least, the whole of India under the guidance —
not of wealth, nor of the sword — but of intellect — intellect chastened
and controlled by spirituality. The leading caste in India is the
highest of the Aryans — the Brahmins.

Though apparently different from the social methods of other nations, on
close inspection, the Aryan method of caste will not be found so very
different except on two points:

The first is, in every other country the highest honour belongs to the
Kshatriya — the man of the sword. The Pope of Rome will be glad to trace
his descent to some robber baron on the banks of the Rhine. In India,
the highest honour belongs to the man of peace — the Sharman the
Brahmin, the man of God.

The greatest Indian king would be gratified to trace his descent to some
ancient sage who lived in the forest, probably a recluse, possessing
nothing, dependent upon the villagers for his daily necessities, and all
his life trying to solve the problems of this life and the life
hereafter.

The second point is, the difference of *unit*. The law of caste in every
other country takes the individual man or woman as the sufficient unit.
Wealth, power, intellect, or beauty suffices for the individual to leave
the status of birth and scramble up to anywhere he can.

Here, the unit is all the members of a caste community.

Here, too, one has every chance of rising from a low caste to a higher
or the highest: only, in this birth-land of altruism, one is compelled
to take his whole caste along with him.

In India, you cannot, on account of your wealth, power, or any other
merit, leave your fellows behind and make common cause with your
superiors; you cannot deprive those who helped in your acquiring the
excellence of any benefit therefrom and give them in return only
contempt. If you want to rise to a higher caste in India, you have to
elevate all your caste first, and then there is nothing in your onward
path to hold you back.

This is the Indian method of fusion, and this has been going on from
time immemorial. For in India, more there elsewhere. such words as
Aryans and Dravidians are only of philological import, the so-called
craniological differentiation finding no solid ground to work upon.

Even so are the names Brahmin, Kshatriya, etc. They simply represent the
status of a community in itself continuously fluctuating, even when it
has reached the summit and all further endeavours are towards fixity of
the type by non-marriage, by being forced to admit fresh groups, from
lower castes or foreign lands, within its pale.

Whatever caste has the power of the sword, becomes Kshatriya; whatever
learning, Brahmin; whatever wealth, Vaishya.

The groups that have already reached the coveted goal, indeed, try to
keep themselves aloof from the newcomers, by making sub-divisions in the
same caste, but the fact remains that they coalesce in the long run.
This is going on before our own eyes, all over India.

Naturally, a group having raised itself would try to preserve the
privileges to itself. Hence, whenever it was possible to get the help of
a king, the higher castes, especially the Brahmins, have tried to put
down similar aspirations in lower castes, by the sword if practicable.
But the question is: Did they succeed? Look closely into your Purânas
and Upa-puranas, look especially into the local Khandas of the big
Puranas, look round and see what is happening before your eyes, and you
will find the answer.

We are, in spite of our various castes, and in spite of the modern
custom of marriage restricted within the sub- divisions of a caste
(though this is not universal), a mixed race in every sense of the word.

Whatever may be the import of the philological terms "Aryan" and
"Tamilian", even taking for granted that both these grand sub-divisions
of Indian humanity came from outside the Western frontier, the dividing
line had been, from the most ancient times, one of language and not of
blood. Not one of the epithets expressive of contempt for the ugly
physical features of the Dasyus of the Vedas would apply to the great
Tamilian race; in fact if there be a toss for good looks between the
Aryans and Tamilians, no sensible man would dare prognosticate the
result.

The super-arrogated excellence of birth of any caste in India is only
pure myth, and in no part of India has it, we are sorry to say, found
such congenial soil, owing to linguistic differences, as in the South.

We purposely refrain from going into the details of this social tyranny
in the South, just as we have stopped ourselves from scrutinising the
genesis of the various modern Brahmins and other castes. Sufficient for
us to note the extreme tension of feeling that is evident between the
Brahmins and non-Brahmins of the Madras Presidency.

We believe in Indian caste as one of the greatest social institutions
that the Lord gave to man. We also believe that though the unavoidable
defects, foreign persecutions, and, above all, the monumental ignorance
and pride of many Brahmins who do not deserve the name, have thwarted,
in many ways, the legitimate fructification of this most glorious Indian
institution, it has already worked wonders for the land of Bharata and
is destined to lead Indian humanity to its goal.

We earnestly entreat the Brahmins of the South not to forget the ideal
of India — the production of a universe of Brahmins, pure as purity,
good as God Himself: this was at the beginning, says the Mahâbhârata,
and so will it be in the end.

Then anyone who claims to be a Brahmin should prove his pretensions,
first by manifesting that spirituality, and next by raising others to
the same status. On the face of this, it seems that most of them are
only nursing a false pride of birth; and any schemer, native or foreign,
who can pander to this vanity and inherent laziness by fulsome
sophistry, appears to satisfy most.

Beware, Brahmins, this is the sign of death! Arise and show your
manhood, your Brahminhood, by raising the non-Brahmins around you — not
in the spirit of a master — not with the rotten canker of egotism
crawling with superstitions and the charlatanry of East and West — but
in the spirit of a servant. For verily he who knows how to serve knows
how to rule.

The non-Brahmins also have been spending their energy in kindling the
fire of caste hatred — vain and useless to solve the problem — to which
every non-Hindu is only too glad to throw on a load of fuel.

Not a step forward can be made by these inter-caste quarrels, not one
difficulty removed; only the beneficent onward march of events would be
thrown back, possibly for centuries, if the fire bursts out into flames

It would be a repetition of Buddhistic political blunders.

In the midst of this ignorant clamour and hatred, we are delighted to
find Pandit D. Savariroyan pursuing the only legitimate and the only
sensible course. Instead of wasting precious vitality in foolish and
meaningless quarrels, Pandit Savariroyan has undertaken in his articles
on the "Admixture of the Aryan with Tamilian" in the *Siddhânta
Deepikâ*, to clear away not only a lot of haze, created by a too
adventurous Western philology, but to pave the way to a better
understanding of the caste problem in the South.

Nobody ever got anything by begging. We get only what we deserve. The
first step to deserve is to desire: and we desire with success what we
feel ourselves worthy to get.

A gentle yet clear brushing off of the cobwebs of the so-called Aryan
theory and all its vicious corollaries is therefore absolutely
necessary, especially for the South, and a proper self-respect created
by a knowledge of the past grandeur of one of the great ancestors of the
Aryan race — the great Tamilians.

We stick, in spite of Western theories, to that definition of the word
"Arya" which we find in our sacred books, and which includes only the
multitude we now call Hindus. This Aryan race, itself a mixture of two
great races, Sanskrit-speaking and Tamil-speaking, applies to all Hindus
alike. That the Shudras have in some Smritis been excluded from this
epithet means nothing, for the Shudras were and still are only the
waiting Aryas — Aryas in novitiate.

Though we know Pandit Savariroyan is walking over rather insecure
ground, though we differ from many of his sweeping explanations of Vedic
names and races, yet we are glad that he has undertaken the task of
beginning a proper investigation into the culture of the great mother of
Indian civilisation — if the Sanskrit-speaking race was the father.

We are glad also that he boldly pushes forward the Accado-Sumerian
racial identity of the ancient Tamilians. And this makes us proud of the
blood of the great civilisation which flowered before all others —
compared to whose antiquity the Aryans and Semites are babies.

We would suggest, also, that the land of Punt of the Egyptians was not
only Malabar, but that the Egyptians as a race bodily migrated from
Malabar across the ocean and entered the delta along the course of the
Nile from north to south, to which Punt they have been always fondly
looking back as the home of the blessed.

This is a move in the right direction. Detailed and more careful work is
sure to follow with a better study of the Tamilian tongues and the
Tamilian elements found in the Sanskrit literature, philosophy, and
religion. And who are more competent to do this work than those who
learn the Tamilian idioms as their mother-tongue?

As for us Vedântins and Sannyâsins, ore are proud of our
Sanskrit-speaking ancestors of the Vedas; proud of our Tamil-speaking
ancestors whose civilization is the oldest yet known; we are proud of
our Kolarian ancestors older than either of the above — who lived and
hunted in forests; we are proud of our ancestors with flint implements —
the first of the human race; and if evolution is true, we are proud of
our animal ancestors, for they antedated man himself. We are proud that
we are descendants of the whole universe, sentient or insentient. Proud
that we are born, and work, and suffer — prouder still that we die when
the task is finished and enter forever the realm where there is no more
delusion.

</div>
