---
title: THE SOCIAL CONFERENCE ADDRESS

---
<div>

[←](aryans_and_tamilians.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](indias_message_to_the_world.htm)

  

## THE SOCIAL CONFERENCE ADDRESS

"God created the native, God created the European, but somebody else
created the mixed breed" — we heard a horribly blasphemous Englishman
say.

Before us lies the inaugural address of Mr. Justice Ranade, voicing the
reformatory zeal of the Indian Social Conference. In it there is a huge
array of instances of inter-caste marriages of yore, a good leaf about
the liberal spirit of the ancient Kshatriyas, good sober advice to
students, all expressed with an earnestness of goodwill and gentleness
of language that is truly admirable.

The last part, however, which offers advice as to the creation of a body
of teachers for the new movement strong in the Punjab, which we take for
granted is the Ârya Samâj, founded by a Sannyâsin, leaves us wondering
and asking ourselves the question:

It seems God created the Brâhmin, God created the Kshatriya, but who
created the Sannyasin?

There have been and are Sannyasins or monks in every known religion.
There are Hindu monks, Buddhist monks, Christian monks, and even Islam
had to yield its rigorous denial and take in whole orders of mendicant
monks.

There are the wholly shaved, the partly shaved, the long hair, short
hair, matted hair, and various other hirsute types.

There are the sky-clad, the rag-clad, the ochre-clad, the yellow-clad
(monks), the black-clad Christian and the blue-clad Mussulman. Then
there have been those that tortured their flesh in various ways, and
others who believed in keeping their bodies well and healthy. There was
also, in odd days in every country, the monk militant. The same spirit
and similar manifestations haste run in parallel lines with the women,
too — the nuns. Mr. Ranade is not only the President of the Indian
Social Conference but a chivalrous gentleman also: the nuns of the
Shrutis and Smritis seem to have been to his entire satisfaction. The
ancient celibate Brahmavâdinis, who travelled from court to court
challenging great philosophers, do not seem to him to thwart the central
plan of the Creator — the propagation of species; nor did they seem to
have lacked in the variety and completeness of human experience, in Mr.
Ranade's opinion, as the stronger sex following the same line of conduct
seem to have done.

We therefore dismiss the ancient nuns and their modern spiritual
descendants as having passed muster.

The arch-offender, man alone, has to bear the brunt of Mr. Ranade's
criticism, and let us see whether he survives it or not.

It seems to be the consensus of opinion amongst savants that this
world-wide monastic institution had its first inception in this curious
land of ours, which appears to stand so much in need of "social reform".

The married teacher and the celibate are both as old as the Vedas.
Whether the Soma-sipping married Rishi with his "all-rounded" experience
was the first in order of appearance, or the lack-human-experience
celibate Rishi was the primeval form, is hard to decide just now.
Possibly Mr. Ranade will solve the problem for us independently of the
hearsay of the so-called Western Sanskrit scholars; till then the
question stands a riddle like the hen and egg problem of yore.

But whatever be the order of genesis, the celibate teachers of the
Shrutis and Smritis stand on an entirely different platform from the
married ones, which is perfect chastity, Brahmacharya.

If the performance of Yajnas is the corner-stone of the work-portion of
the Vedas, as surely is Brahmacharya the foundation of the
knowledge-portion.

Why could not the blood-shedding sacrificers be the exponents of the
Upanishads — why?

On the one side was the married Rishi, with his meaningless, bizarre,
nay, terrible ceremonials, his misty sense of ethics, to say the least;
on the other hand, the celibate monks tapping, in spite of their want of
human experience, springs of spirituality and ethics at which the
monastic Jinas, the Buddhas, down to Shankara, Ramanuja, Kabir, and
Chaitanya, drank deep and acquired energy to propagate their marvellous
spiritual and social reforms, and which, reflected third-hand,
fourth-hand from the West, is giving our social reformers the power even
to criticise the Sannyasins.

At the present day, what support, what pay, do the mendicants receive in
India, compared to the pay and privilege of our social reformers? And
what work does the social reformer do, compared to the Sannyasin's
silent selfless labour of love?

But they have not learnt the modern method of self-advertisement!!

The Hindu drank in with his mother's milk that this life is as nothing —
a dream! In this he is at one with the Westerners; but the Westerner
sees no further and his conclusion is that of the Chârvâka — to "make
hay while the sun shines". "This world being a miserable hole, let us
enjoy to the utmost what morsels of pleasure are left to us." To the
Hindu, on the other hand, God and soul are the only realities,
infinitely more real than this world, and he is therefore ever ready to
let this go for the other.

So long as this attitude of the national mind continues, and we pray it
will continue for ever, what hope is there in our anglicised compatriots
to check the impulse in Indian men and women to renounce all "for the
good of the universe and for one's own freedom"?

And that rotten corpse of an argument against the monk — used first by
the Protestants in Europe, borrowed by the Bengali reformers, and now
embraced by our Bombay brethren — the monk on account of his celibacy
must lack the realisation of life "in all its fullness and in all its
varied experience!" We hope this time the corpse will go for good into
the Arabian Sea, especially in these days of plague, and notwithstanding
the filial love one may suppose the foremost clan of Brahmins there may
have for ancestors of great perfume, if the Paurânika accounts are of
any value in tracing their ancestry.

By the bye, in Europe, between the monks and nuns, they have brought up
and educated most of the children, whose parents, though married people,
were utterly unwilling to taste of the "varied experiences of life".

Then, of course, every faculty has been given to us by God for some use.
Therefore the monk is wrong in not propagating the race — a sinner!
Well, so also have been given us the faculties of anger, lust, cruelty,
theft, robbery, cheating, etc., every one of these being absolutely
necessary for the maintenance of social life, reformed or unreformed.
What about these? Ought they also to be maintained at full steam,
following the varied-experience theory or not? Of course the social
reformers, being in intimate acquaintance with God Almighty and His
purposes, must answer the query in the positive. Are we to follow
Vishvâmitra, Atri, and others in their ferocity and the Vasishtha family
in particular in their "full and varied experience" with womankind? For
the majority of married Rishis are as celebrated for their liberality in
begetting children wherever and whenever they could, as for their
hymn-singing and Soma-bibbing; or are we to follow the celibate Rishis
who upheld Brahmacharya as the *sine qua non* of spirituality?

Then there are the usual backsliders, who ought to come in for a load of
abuse — monks who could not keep up to their ideal — weak, wicked.

But if the ideal is straight and sound, a backsliding monk is head and
shoulders above any householder in the land, on the principle, "It is
better to have loved and lost."

Compared to the coward that never made the attempt, he is a hero.

If the searchlight of scrutiny were turned on the inner workings of our
social reform conclave, angels would have to take note of the percentage
of backsliders as between the monk and the householder; and the
recording angel is in our own heart.

But then, what about this marvellous experience of standing alone,
discarding all help, breasting the storms of life, of working without
any sense of recompense, without any sense of putrid duty? Working a
whole life, joyful, free — not goaded on to work like slaves by false
human love or ambition?

This the monk alone can have. What about religion? Has it to remain or
vanish? If it remains, it requires its experts, its soldiers. The monk
is the religious expert, having made religion his one *métier* of life.
He is the soldier of God. What religion dies so long as it has a band of
devoted monks?

Why are Protestant England and America shaking before the onrush of the
Catholic monk?

*Vive* Ranade and the Social Reformers! — but, O India! Anglicised
India! Do not forget, child, that there are in this society problems
that neither you nor your Western Guru can yet grasp the meaning of —
much less solve!

</div>
