---
title: REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF THE MAHARAJA OF KHETRI

---
<div>

[←](stray_remarks_on_theosophy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_madras_address.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/053_mother.htm) Chronology [»  
](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/29_dear.htm)[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/040_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)
Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/047_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

## REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF THE MAHARAJA OF KHETRI

INDIA — THE LAND OF RELIGION

During the residence of the Swamiji in America, the following Address
from the Maharaja of Khetri (Rajputana), dated March 4th, 1895, was
received by him:

My dear Swamiji,

As the head of this Durbar (a formal stately assemblage) held today for
this special purpose, I have much pleasure in conveying to you, in my
own name and that of my subjects, the heartfelt thanks of this State for
your worthy representation of Hinduism at the Parliament of Religions,
held at Chicago, in America.

I do not think the general principles of Hinduism could be expressed
more accurately and clearly in English than what you have done, with all
the restrictions imposed by the very natural shortcomings of language
itself.

The influence of your speech and behaviour in foreign lands has not only
spread admiration among men of different countries and different
religions, but has also served to familiarise you with them, to help in
the furtherance of your unselfish cause. This is very highly and
inexpressibly appreciated by us all, and we should feel to be failing in
our duty, were I not to write to you formally at least these few lines,
expressing our sincere gratitude for all the trouble you have taken in
going to foreign countries, and to expound in the American Parliament of
Religions the truths of our ancient religion which we ever hold so dear.
It is certainly applicable to the pride of India that it has been
fortunate in possessing the privilege of having secured so able a
representative as yourself.

Thanks are also due to those noble souls whose efforts succeeded in
organising the Parliament of Religions, and who accorded to you a very
enthusiastic reception. As you were quite a foreigner in that continent,
their kind treatment of you is due to their love of the several
qualifications you possess, and this speaks highly of their noble
nature.

I herewith enclose twenty printed copies of this letter and have to
request that, keeping this one with yourself you will kindly distribute
the other copies among your friends.

With best regards,  
I remain,  
Yours very sincerely,

RAJA AJIT SINGH BAHADUR OF KHETRI.

The Swamiji sent the following reply:

 

"*Whenever virtue subsides, and wickedness raises its head, I manifest
Myself to restore the glory of religion*" — are the words, O noble
Prince, of the Eternal One in the holy Gitâ, striking the keynote of the
pulsating ebb and flow of the spiritual energy in the universe.

These changes are manifesting themselves again and again in rhythms
peculiar to themselves, and like every other tremendous change, though
affecting, more or less, every particle within their sphere of action,
they show their effects more intensely upon those particles which are
naturally susceptible to their power.

As in a universal sense, the primal state is a state of sameness of the
qualitative forces — a disturbance of this equilibrium and all
succeeding struggles to regain it, composing what we call the
manifestation of nature, this universe, which state of things remains as
long as the primitive sameness is not reached — so, in a restricted
sense on our own earth, differentiation and its inevitable counterpart,
this struggle towards homogeneity, must remain as long as the human race
shall remain as such, creating strongly marked peculiarities between
ethnic divisions, sub-races and even down to individuals in all parts of
the world.

In this world of impartial division and balance, therefore, each nation
represents, as it were, a wonderful dynamo for the storage and
distribution of a particular species of energy, and amidst all other
possessions that particular property shines forth as the special
characteristic of that race. And as any upheaval in any particular part
of human nature, though affecting others more or less, stirs to its very
depth that nation of which it is a special characteristic, and from
which as a centre it generally starts, so any commotion in the religious
world is sure to produce momentous changes in India, that land which
again and again has had to furnish the centre of the wide-spread
religious upheavals; for, above all, India is the land of religion.

Each man calls that alone real which helps him to realise his ideal. To
the worldly-minded, everything that can be converted into money is real,
that which cannot be so converted is unreal. To the man of a domineering
spirit, anything that will conduce to his ambition of ruling over his
fellow men is real — the rest is naught; and man finds nothing in that
which does not echo back the heartbeats of his special love in life.

Those whose only aim is to barter the energies of life for gold, or
name, or any other enjoyment; those to whom the tramp of embattled
cohorts is the only manifestation of power; those to whom the enjoyments
of the senses are the only bliss that life can give — to these, India
will ever appear as an immense desert whose every blast is deadly to the
development of life, as it is known by them.

But to those whose thirst for life has been quenched for ever by
drinking from the stream of immortality that flows from far away beyond
the world of the senses, whose souls have cast away — as a serpent its
slough — the threefold bandages of lust, gold, and fame, who, from their
height of calmness, look with love and compassion upon the petty
quarrels and jealousies and fights for little gilded puff-balls, filled
with dust, called "enjoyment" by those under a sense-bondage; to those
whose accumulated force of past good deeds has caused the scales of
ignorance to fall off from their eyes, making them see through the
vanity of name and form — to such wheresoever they be, India, the
motherland and eternal mine of spirituality, stands transfigured, a
beacon of hope to everyone in search of Him who is the only real
Existence in a universe of vanishing shadows.

The majority of mankind can only understand power when it is presented
to them in a concrete form, fitted to their perceptions. To them, the
rush and excitement of war, with its power and spell, is something very
tangible, and any manifestation of life that does not come like a
whirlwind, bearing down everything before it, is to them as death. And
India, for centuries at the feet of foreign conquerors, without any idea
or hope of resistance, without the least solidarity among its masses,
without the least idea of patriotism, must needs appear to such, as a
land of rotten bones, a lifeless putrescent mass.

It is said — the fittest alone survive. How is it, then, that this most
unfitted of all races, according to commonly accepted ideas, could bear
the most awful misfortunes that ever befall a race, and yet not show the
least signs of decay? How is it that, while the multiplying powers of
the so-called vigorous and active races are dwindling every day, the
immoral (?) Hindu shows a power of increase beyond them all? Great
laurels are due, no doubt, to those who can deluge the world with blood
at a moment's notice; great indeed is the glory of those who, to keep up
a population of a few millions in plenty, have to starve half the
population of the earth, but is no credit due to those who can keep
hundreds of millions in peace and plenty, without snatching the bread
from the mouth of anyone else? Is there no power displayed in bringing
up and guiding the destinies of countless millions of human beings,
through hundreds of centuries, without the least violence to others?

The mythologists of all ancient races supply us with fables of heroes
whose life was concentrated in a certain small portion of their bodies,
and until that was touched they remained invulnerable. It seems as if
each nation also has such a peculiar centre of life, and so long as that
remains untouched, no amount of misery and misfortune can destroy it.

In religion lies the vitality of India, and so long as the Hindu race do
not forget the great inheritance of their forefathers, there is no power
on earth to destroy them.

Nowadays everybody blames those who constantly look back to their past.
It is said that so much looking back to the past is the cause of all
India's woes. To me, on the contrary, it seems that the opposite is
true. So long as they forgot the past, the Hindu nation remained in a
state of stupor; and as soon as they have begun to look into their past,
there is on every side a fresh manifestation of life. It is out of this
past that the future has to be moulded; this past will become the
future.

The more, therefore, the Hindus study the past, the more glorious will
be their future, and whoever tries to bring the past to the door of
everyone, is a great benefactor to his nation. The degeneration of India
came not because the laws and customs of the ancients were bad, but
because they were not allowed to be carried to their legitimate
conclusions.

Every critical student knows that the social laws of India have always
been subject to great periodic changes. At their inception, these laws
were the embodiment of a gigantic plan, which was to unfold itself
slowly through time. The great seers of ancient India saw so far ahead
of their time that the world has to wait centuries yet to appreciate
their wisdom, and it is this very inability on the part of their own
descendants to appreciate the full scope of this wonderful plan that is
the one and only cause of the degeneration of India.

Ancient India had for centuries been the battlefield for the ambitious
projects of two of her foremost classes — the Brâhmins and the
Kshatriyas.

On the one hand, the priesthood stood between the lawless social tyranny
of the princes over the masses whom the Kshatriyas declared to be their
legal food. On the other hand, the Kshatriya power was the one potent
force which struggled with any success against the spiritual tyranny of
the priesthood and the ever-increasing chain of ceremonials which they
were forging to bind down the people with.

The tug of war began in the earliest periods of the history of our race,
and throughout the Shrutis it can be distinctly traced. A momentary lull
came when Shri Krishna, leading the faction of Kshatriya power and of
Jnâna, showed the way to reconciliation. The result was the teachings of
the Gita — the essence of philosophy, of liberality, of religion. Yet
the causes were there, and the effect must follow.

The ambition of these two classes to be the masters of the poor and
ignorant was there, and the strife once more became fierce. The meagre
literature that has come down to us from that period brings to us but
faint echoes of that mighty past strife, but at last it broke out as a
victory for the Kshatriyas, a victory for Jnana, for liberty — and
ceremonial had to go down, much of it for ever. This upheaval was what
is known as the Buddhistic reformation. On the religious side, it
represented freedom from ceremonial; on the political side, overthrow of
the priesthood by the Kshatriyas.

It is a significant fact that the two greatest men ancient India
produced, were both Kshatriyas — Krishna and Buddha — and still more
significant is the fact that both of these God-men threw open the door
of knowledge to everyone, irrespective of birth or sex.

In spite of its wonderful moral strength, Buddhism was extremely
iconoclastic; and much of its force being spent in merely negative
attempts, it had to die out in the land of its birth, and what remained
of it became full of superstitions and ceremonials, a hundred times
cruder than those it was intended to suppress. Although it partially
succeeded in putting down the animal sacrifices of the Vedas, it filled
the land with temples, images, symbols, and bones of saints.

Above all, in the medley of Aryans, Mongols, and aborigines which it
created, it unconsciously led the way to some of the hideous Vâmâchâras.
This was especially the reason why this travesty of the teaching of the
great Master had to be driven out of India by Shri Shankara and his band
of Sannyâsins.

Thus even the current of life, set in motion by the greatest soul that
ever wore a human form, the Bhagavân Buddha himself, became a miasmatic
pool, and India had to wait for centuries until Shankara arose, followed
in quick succession by Râmânuja and Madhva.

By this time, an entirely new chapter had opened in the history of
India. The ancient Kshatriyas and the Brahmins had disappeared. The land
between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas, the home of the Âryas, the land
which gave birth to Krishna and Buddha, the cradle of great Râjarshis
and Brahmarshis, became silent, and from the very farther end of the
Indian Peninsula, from races alien in speech and form, from families
claiming descent from the ancient Brahmins, came the reaction against
the corrupted Buddhism.

What had become of the Brahmins and Kshatriyas of Âryâvarta? They had
entirely disappeared, except here and there a few mongrel clans claiming
to be Brahmins and Kshatriyas, and in spite of their inflated,
self-laudatory assertions that the whole world ought to learn from
एतद्देशप्रसूतस्य सकाशादग्रजन्मनः, they had to sit in sackcloth and
ashes, in all humility, to learn at the feet of the Southerners. The
result was the bringing back of the Vedas to India — a revival of
Vedânta, such as India never before had seen; even the householders
began to study the Âranyakas.

In the Buddhistic movement, the Kshatriyas were the real leaders, and
whole masses of them became Buddhists. In the zeal of reform and
conversion, the popular dialects had been almost exclusively cultivated
to the neglect of Sanskrit, and the larger portion of Kshatriyas had
become disjointed from the Vedic literature and Sanskrit learning. Thus
this wave of reform, which came from the South, benefited to a certain
extent the priesthood, and the priests only. For the rest of India's
millions, it forged more chains than they had ever known before.

The Kshatriyas had always been the backbone of India, so also they had
been the supporters of science and liberty, and their voices had rung
out again and again to clear the land from superstitions; and throughout
the history of India they ever formed the invulnerable barrier to
aggressive priestly tyranny.

When the greater part of their number sank into ignorance, and another
portion mixed their blood with savages from Central Asia and lent their
swords to establish the rules of priests in India, her cup became full
to the brim, and down sank the land of Bharata, not to rise again, until
the Kshatriya rouses himself, and making himself free, strikes the
chains from the feet of the rest. Priestcraft is the bane of India. Can
man degrade his brother, and himself escape degradation?

Know, Rajaji, the greatest of all truths, discovered by your ancestors,
is that the universe is one. Can one injure anyone without injuring
himself? The mass of Brahmin and Kshatriya tyranny has recoiled upon
their own heads with compound interest; and a thousand years of slavery
and degradation is what the inexorable law of Karma is visiting upon
them.

This is what one of your ancestors said: "Even in this life, they have
conquered relativity whose mind is fixed in sameness" — one who is
believed to be God incarnate. We all believe it. Are his words then vain
and without meaning? If not, and we know they are not, any attempt
against this perfect equality of all creation, irrespective of birth,
sex, or even qualification, is a terrible mistake, and no one can be
saved until he has attained to this idea of sameness.

Follow, therefore, noble Prince, the teachings of the Vedanta, not as
explained by this or that commentator, but as the Lord within you
understands them. Above all, follow this great doctrine of sameness in
all things, through all beings, seeing the same God in all.

This is the way to freedom; inequality, the way to bondage. No man and
no nation can attempt to gain physical freedom without physical
equality, nor mental freedom without mental equality.

Ignorance, inequality, and desire are the three causes of human misery,
and each follows the other in inevitable union. Why should a man think
himself above any other man, or even an animal? It is the same
throughout:

त्वं स्त्री त्वं पुमानसि त्वं कुमार उत वा कुमारी।

—"Thou art the man, Thou the woman, Thou art the young man, Thou the
young woman."

Many will say, "That is all right for the Sannyasins, but we are
householders." No doubt, a householder having many other duties to
perform, cannot as fully attain to this sameness; yet this should be
also their ideal, for it is the ideal of all societies, of all mankind,
all animals, and all nature, to attain to this sameness. But alas! they
think inequality is the way to attain equality as if they could come to
right by doing wrong!

This is the bane of human nature, the curse upon mankind, the root of
all misery — this inequality. This is the source of all bondage,
physical, mental, and spiritual.

समं पश्यन् हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम् ।  
न हिनस्त्यात्मनात्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥

— "Since seeing the Lord equally existent everywhere he injures not Self
by self, and so goes to the Highest Goal" (Gita, XIII. 28). This one
saying contains, in a few words, the universal way to salvation.

You, Rajputs, have been the glories of ancient India. With your
degradation came national decay, and India can only be raised if the
descendants of the Kshatriyas co-operate with the descendants of the
Brahmins, not to share the spoils of pelf and power, but to help the
weak to enlighten the ignorant, and to restore the lost glory of the
holy land of their forefathers.

And who can say but that the time is propitious? Once more the wheel is
turning up, once more vibrations have been set in motion from India,
which are destined at no distant day to reach the farthest limits of the
earth. One voice has spoken, whose echoes are rolling on and gathering
strength every day, a voice even mightier than those which have preceded
it, for it is the summation of them all. Once more the voice that spoke
to the sages on the banks of the Sarasvati, the voice whose echoes
reverberated from peak to peak of the "Father of Mountains", and
descended upon the plains through Krishna Buddha, and Chaitanya in
all-carrying floods, has spoken again. Once more the doors have opened.
Enter ye into the realms of light, the gates have been opened wide once
more.

And you, my beloved Prince — you the scion of a race who are the living
pillars upon which rests the religion eternal, its sworn defenders and
helpers, the descendants of Râma and Krishna, will you remain outside? I
know, this cannot be. Yours, I am sure, will be the first hand that will
be stretched forth to help religion once more. And when I think of you,
Raja Ajit Singh, one in whom the well-known scientific attainments of
your house have been joined to a purity of character of which a saint
ought to be proud, to an unbounded love for humanity, I cannot help
believing in the glorious renaissance of the religion eternal, when such
hands are willing to rebuild it again.

May the blessings of Ramakrishna be on you and yours for ever and ever,
and that you may live long for the good of many, and for the spread of
truth is the constant prayer of —

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
