---
title: REPLY TO THE CALCUTTA ADDRESS

---
<div>

[←](our_duty_to_the_masses.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](to_my_brave_boys.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/034_diwanji.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/044_mother.htm)

## REPLY TO THE CALCUTTA ADDRESS

(Written from New York on Nov. 18, 1894, to Raja Pyari Mohan Mukherji,
President of the public meeting held on Sept. 5, 1894 at the Calcutta
Town Hall in appreciation of Swami Vivekananda's work in the West.)

I am in receipt of the resolutions that were passed at the recent Town
Hall meeting in Calcutta and the kind words my fellow-citizens sent over
to me.

Accept, sir, my most heartfelt gratitude for your appreciation of my
insignificant services.

I am thoroughly convinced that no individual or nation can live by
holding itself apart from the community of others, and whenever such an
attempt has been made under false ideas of greatness, policy, or
holiness — the result has always been disastrous to the secluding one.

To my mind, the one great cause of the downfall and the degeneration of
India was the building of a wall of custom — whose foundation was hatred
of others — round the nation, and the real aim of which in ancient times
was to prevent the Hindus from coming in contact with the surrounding
Buddhistic nations.

Whatever cloak ancient or modern sophistry may try to throw over it, the
inevitable result — the vindication of the moral law, that none can hate
others without degenerating himself — is that the race that was foremost
amongst the ancient races is now a byword, and a scorn among nations. We
are object-lessons of the violation of that law which our ancestors were
the first to discover and disseminate.

Give and take is the law; and if India wants to raise herself once more,
it is absolutely necessary that she brings out her treasures and throws
them broadcast among the nations of the earth, and in return be ready to
receive what others have to give her. Expansion is life, contraction is
death. Love is life, and hatred is death. We commenced to die the day we
began to hate other races; and nothing can prevent our death unless we
come back to expansion, which is life.

We must mix, therefore, with all the races of the earth. And every Hindu
that goes out to travel in foreign parts renders more benefit to his
country than hundreds of men who are bundles of superstitions and
selfishness, and whose one aim in life seems to be like that of the dog
in the manger. The wonderful structures of national life which the
Western nations have raised, are supported by the strong pillars of
character, and until we can produce members of such, it is useless to
fret and fume against this or that power.

Do any deserve liberty who are not ready to give it to others? Let us
calmly and in a manly fashion go to work, instead of dissipating our
energy in unnecessary frettings and fumings. I, for one, thoroughly
believe that no power in the universe can withhold from anyone anything
he really deserves. The past was great no doubt, but I sincerely believe
that the future will be more glorious still.

May Shankara keep us steady in purity, patience, and perseverance!

</div>
