---
title: A PLAN OF WORK FOR INDIA

---
<div>

[←](to_my_brave_boys.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](fundamentals_of_religion.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/028_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/029_gg.htm)

## A PLAN OF WORK FOR INDIA

(Written to Justice Sir Subrahmanya Iyer from Chicago, 3rd Jan., 1895.)

It is with a heart full of love, gratitude, and trust that I take up my
pen to write to you. Let me tell you first, that you are one of the few
men that I have met in my life who are thorough in their convictions.
You have a whole-souled possession of a wonderful combination of feeling
and knowledge, and withal a practical ability to bring ideas into
realised forms. Above all, you are sincere, and as such I confide to you
some of my ideas.

The work has begun well in India, and it should not only be kept up, but
pushed on with the greatest vigour. Now or never is the time. After
taking a far and wide view of things, my mind has now been concentrated
on the following plan. First, it would be well to open a Theological
College in Madras, and then gradually extend its scope, to give a
thorough education to young men in the Vedas and the different Bhâshyas
and philosophies, including a knowledge of the other religions of the
world. At the same time a paper in English and the vernacular should be
started as an organ of the College.

This is the first step to be taken, and huge things grow out of small
undertakings. Madras just now is following the golden mean by
appreciating both the ancient and modern phases of life.

I fully agree with the educated classes in India that a thorough
overhauling of society is necessary. But how to do it? The destructive
plans of reformers have failed. My plan is this. We have not done
*badly* in the past, certainly not. Our society is not *bad* but good,
only I want it to be better still. Not from error to truth, nor from bad
to good, but from truth to higher truth, from good to better, best. I
tell my countrymen that so far they have done well — now is the time to
do better.

Non, take the case of caste — in Sanskrit, Jâti, i.e. species. Now, this
is the first idea of creation. Variation (Vichitratâ), that is to say
Jati, means creation. "I am One, I become many" (various Vedas). Unity
is before creation, diversity is creation. Now if this diversity stops,
creation will be destroyed. So long as any species is vigorous and
active, it must throw out varieties. When it ceases or is stopped from
breeding varieties, it dies. Now the original idea of Jati was this
freedom of the individual to express his nature, his Prakriti, his Jati,
his caste; and so it remained for thousands of years. Not even in the
latest books is inter-dining prohibited; nor in any of the older books
is inter-marriage forbidden. Then what was the cause of India's
downfall? — the giving up of this idea of caste. As Gitâ says, with the
extinction of caste the world will be destroyed. Now does it seem true
that with the stoppage of these variations the world will be destroyed?
The present caste is not the real Jati, but a hindrance to its progress.
It really has prevented the free action of Jati, i.e. caste or
variation. Any crystallized custom or privilege or hereditary class in
any shape really prevents caste (Jati) from having its full sway; and
whenever any nation ceases to produce this immense variety, it must die.
Therefore what I have to tell you, my countrymen, is this, that India
fell because you prevented and abolished caste. Every frozen aristocracy
or privileged class is a blow to caste and is not-caste. Let Jati have
its sway; break down every barrier in the way of caste, and we shall
rise. Now look at Europe. When it succeeded in giving free scope to
caste and took away most of the barriers that stood in the way of
individuals, each developing his caste — Europe rose. In America, there
is the best scope for caste (real Jati) to develop, and so the people
are great. Every Hindu knows that astrologers try to fix the caste of
every boy or girl as soon as he or she is born. That is the real caste —
the individuality, and Jyotisha (astrology) recognises that. And we can
only rise by giving it full sway again. This variety does not mean
inequality, nor any special privilege.

This is my method — to show the Hindus that they have to give up
nothing, but only to move on in the line laid down by the sages and
shake off their inertia, the result of centuries of servitude. Of
course, we had to stop advancing during the Mohammedan tyranny, for then
it was not a question of progress but of life and death. Now that that
pressure has gone, we must move forward, not on the lines of destruction
directed by renegades and missionaries, but along our own line, our own
road. Everything is hideous because the building is unfinished. We had
to stop building during centuries of oppression. Now finish the building
and everything will look beautiful in its own place. This is all my
plan. I am thoroughly convinced of this. Each nation has a main current
in life; in India it is religion. Make it strong and the waters on
either side must move along with it. This is one phase of my line of
thought. In time, I hope to bring them all out, but at present I find I
have a mission in this country also. Moreover, I expect help in this
country and from here alone. But up to date I could not do anything
except spreading my ideas. Now I want that a similar attempt be made in
India.

I do not know when I shall go over to India. I obey the leading of the
Lord. I am in His hands.

"In this world in search of wealth, Thou art, O Lord, the greatest jewel
I have found. I sacrifice myself unto Thee."

"In search of some one to love, Thou art the One Beloved I have found. I
sacrifice myself unto Thee." (Yajurveda Samhitâ).

May the Lord bless you for ever and ever!

</div>
