---
title: FUNDAMENTALS OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](a_plan_of_work_for_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](../writings_poems/kali_the_mother.htm)

  

## FUNDAMENTALS OF RELIGION

(This incomplete article was found in the papers of Miss S. E. Waldo.
The heading is inserted by us — *Publisher*.)

My mind can best grasp the religions of the world, ancient or modern,
dead or living, through this fourfold division:

1\. Symbology — The employment of various external aids to preserve and
develop the religious faculty of man.

2\. History — The philosophy of each religion as illustrated in the
lives of divine or human teachers acknowledged by each religion. This
includes mythology; for what is mythology to one race, or period, is or
was history to other races or periods. Even in cases of human teachers,
much of their history is taken as mythology by successive generations.

3\. Philosophy — The rationale of the whole scope of each religion.

4\. Mysticism — The assertion of something superior to sense-knowledge
and reason which particular persons, or all persons under certain
circumstances, possess; runs through the other divisions also.

All the religions of the world, past or present, embrace one or more of
these principles, the highly developed ones having all the four.

Of these highly developed religions again, some had no sacred book or
books and they have disappeared; but those which were based on sacred
books are living to the present day. As such, all the great religions of
the world today are founded on sacred books.

The Vedic on the Vedas (misnamed the Hindu or Brahminic).

The Avestic on the Avesta.

The Mosaic on the Old Testament.

The Buddhistic on the Tripitaka.

The Christian on the New Testament.

The Mohammedan on the Koran.

The Taoists and the Confucianists in China, having also books, are so
inextricably mixed up with the Buddhistic form of religion as to be
catalogued with Buddhism.

Again, although strictly speaking there are no absolutely racial
religions, yet it may be said that, of this group, the Vedic, the
Mosaic, and the Avestic religions are confined to the races to which
they originally belonged; while the Buddhistic, the Christian, and the
Mohammedan religions have been from their very beginning spreading
religions.

The struggle will be between the Buddhists and Christians and
Mohammedans to conquer the world, and the racial religions also will
have unavoidably to join in the struggle. Each one of these religions,
racial or spreading, has been already split into various branches and
has undergone vast changes consciously or unconsciously to adapt itself
to varying circumstances. This very fact shows that not one of them is
fitted alone to be the religion of the entire human race. Each religion
being the effect of certain peculiarities of the race it sprang from,
and being in turn the cause of the intensification and preservation of
those very peculiarities, not one of them can fit the universal human
nature. Not only so, but there is a negative element in each. Each one
helps the growth of a certain part of human nature, but represses
everything else which the race from which it sprang had not. Thus one
religion to become universal would be dangerous and degenerating to man.

Now the history of the world shows that these two dreams — that of a
universal political Empire and that of a universal religious Empire —
have been long before mankind, but that again and again the plans of the
greatest conquerors had been frustrated by the splitting up of his
territories before he could conquer only a little part of the earth; and
similarly every religion has been split into sects before it was fairly
out of its cradle.

Yet it seems to be true, that the solidarity of the human race, social
as well as religious, with a scope for infinite variation, is the plan
of nature; and if the line of least resistance is the true line of
action, it seems to me that this splitting up of each religion into
sects is the preservation of religion by frustrating the tendency to
rigid sameness, as well as the dear indication to us of the line of
procedure.

The end seems, therefore, to be not destruction but a multiplication of
sects until each individual is a sect unto himself. Again a background
of unity will come by the fusion of all the existing religions into one
grand philosophy. In the mythologies or the ceremonials there never will
be unity, because we differ more in the concrete than in the abstract.
Even while admitting the same *principle*, men will differ as to the
greatness of each of his ideal teacher.

So, by this fusion will be found out a union of philosophy as the basis
of union, leaving each at liberty to choose his teacher or his form as
illustrations of that unity. This fusion is what is naturally going on
for thousands of years; only, by mutual antagonism, it has been woefully
held back.

Instead of antagonising, therefore, we must help all such interchange of
ideas between different races, by sending teachers to each other, so as
to educate humanity in all the various religions of the world; but we
must insist as the great Buddhist Emperor of India, Asoka, did, in the
second century before Christ, not to abuse others, or to try to make a
living out of others' faults; but to help, to sympathise, and to
enlighten.

There is a great outcry going over the world against metaphysical
knowledge as opposed to what is styled physical knowledge. This crusade
against the metaphysical and the beyond-this-life, to establish the
present life and the present world on a firmer basis, is fast becoming a
fashion to which even the preachers of religion one after the other are
fast succumbing. Of course, the unthinking multitude are always
following things which present to them a pleasing surface; but when
those who ought to know better, follow unmeaning fashions,
pseudo-philosophical though they profess to be, it becomes a mournful
fact.

Now, no one denies that our senses, as long as they are normal, are the
most trustworthy guides we have, and the facts they gather in for us
form the very foundation of the structure of human knowledge. But if
they mean that all human knowledge is only sense-perception and nothing
but that, we deny it. If by physical sciences are meant systems of
knowledge which are entirely based and built upon sense-perception, and
nothing but that, we contend that such a science never existed nor will
ever exist. Nor will any system of knowledge, built upon
sense-perception alone, ever be a science.

Senses no doubt cull the materials of knowledge and find similarities
and dissimilarities; but there they have to stop. In the first place the
physical gatherings of facts are conditioned by certain metaphysical
conceptions, such as space and time. Secondly, grouping facts, or
generalisation, is impossible without some abstract notion as the
background. The higher the generalization, the more metaphysical is the
abstract background upon which the detached facts are arranged. Now,
such ideas as matter, force, mind, law, causation, time, and space are
the results of very high abstractions, and nobody has ever sensed any
one of them; in other words, they are entirely metaphysical. Yet without
these metaphysical conceptions, no physical fact is possible to be
understood. Thus a certain motion becomes understood when it is referred
to a force; certain sensations, to matter; certain changes outside, to
law; certain changes in thought, to mind; certain order singly, to
causation — and joined to time, to law. Yet nobody has seen or even
imagined matter or force, law or causation, time or space.

It may be urged that these, as abstracted concepts do not exist, and
that these abstractions are nothing separate or separable from the
groups of which they are, so to say, only qualities.

Apart from the question whether abstractions are possible or not, or
whether there is something besides the generalized groups or not, it is
plain that these notions of matter or force, time or space, causation,
law, or mind, are held to be units abstracted and independent (by
themselves) of the groups, and that it is only when they are thought of
as such, they furnish themselves as explanations of the facts in
sense-perception. That is to say, apart from the validity of these
notions, we see two facts about them — first, they are metaphysical;
second, that only as metaphysical do they explain the physical and not
otherwise.

Whether the external conforms to the internal, or the internal to the
external, whether matter conforms to mind, or mind to matter, whether
the surroundings mould the mind, or the mind moulds the circumstances,
is old, old question, and is still today as new and vigorous as it ever
was. Apart from the question of precedence or causation — without trying
to solve the problem as to whether the mind is the cause of matter or
matter the cause of mind — it is evident that whether the external was
formed by the internal or not, it must conform itself to the internal
for us to be able to know it. Supposing that the external world is the
cause of the internal, yet we shall of have to admit that the external
world, as cause of ours mind, is unknown and unknowable, because the
mind can only know that much or that view of the external or that view
which conforms to or is a reflection of its own nature. That which is
its own reflection could not have been its cause. Now that view of the
whole mass of existence, which is cut off by mind and known, certainly
cannot be the cause of mind, as its very existence is known in and
through the mind.

Thus it is impossible to deduce a mind from matter. Nay, it is absurd.
Because on the very face of it that portion of existence which is bereft
of the qualities of thought and life and endowed with the quality of
externality is called matter, and that portion which is bereft of
externality and endowed with the qualities of thought and life is called
mind. Now to prove matter from mind, or mind from matter, is to deduce
from each the very qualities we have taken away from each; and,
therefore, all the fight about the causality of mind or matter is merely
a word puzzle and nothing more. Again, throughout all these
controversies runs, as a rule, the fallacy of imparting different
meanings to the words mind and matter. If sometimes the word mind is
used as something opposed and external to matter, at others as something
which embraces both the mind and matter, i.e. of which both the external
and internal are parts on the materialistic side; the word matter is
sometimes used in is the restricted sense of something external which we
sense, and again it means something which is the cause of all the
phenomena both external and internal. The materialist frightens the
idealist by claiming to derive his mind from the elements of the
laboratory, while all the time he is struggling to express something
higher than all elements and atoms, something of which both the external
and the internal phenomena are results, and which he terms matter. The
idealist, on the other hand, wants to derive all the elements and atoms
of the materialist from his own thought, even while catching glimpses of
something which is the cause of both mind and matter, and which he
oft-times calls God. That is to say, one party wants to explain the
whole universe by a portion of it which is external, the other by
another portion which is internal. Both of these attempts are
impossible. Mind and matter cannot explain each other. The only
explanation is to be sought for in something which will embrace both
matter and mind.

It may be argued that thought cannot exist without mind, for supposing
there was a time when there was no thought, matter, as we know it,
certainly could not have existed. On the other hand, it may be said that
knowledge being impossible without experience, and experience
presupposing the external world, the existence of mind, as we know it,
is impossible without the existence of matter.

Nor is it possible that either of them had a beginning. Generalisation
is the essence of knowledge. Generalisation is impossible without a
storage of similarities. Even the fact of comparison is impossible
without previous experience. Knowledge thus is impossible without
previous knowledge — and knowledge necessitating the existence of both
thought and matter, both of them are without beginning.

Again generalization, the essence of sense-knowledge, is impossible
without something upon which the detached facts of perception unite. The
whole world of external perceptions requires something upon which to
unite in order to form a concept of the world, as painting must have its
canvas. If thought or mind be this canvas to the external world, it, in
its turn requires another. Mind being a series of different feelings and
willing — and not a unit, requires something besides itself as its
background of unity. Here all analysis is bound to stop, for a real
unity has been found. The analysis of a compound cannot stop until an
indivisible unit has been reached. The fact that presents us with such a
*unity* for both thought and matter must necessarily be the last
indivisible basis of every phenomenon, for we cannot conceive any
further analysis; nor is any further analysis necessary, as this
includes an analysis of all our external and internal perceptions.

So far then, we see that a totality of mental and material phenomena,
*and* something beyond, upon which they are both playing, are the
results of our investigation.

Now this something beyond is not in sense-perception; it is a logical
necessity, and a feeling of its indefinable presence runs through all
our sense-perceptions. We see also that to this something we are driven
by the sheer necessity of being true to our reason and generalising
faculty.

It may be urged that there is no necessity whatsoever of postulating any
such substance or being beyond the mass of mental and material
phenomena. The totality of phenomena is all that we know or can know,
and it requires nothing beyond itself to explain itself. An analysis
beyond the senses is impossible, and the feeling of a substance in which
everything inheres is simply an illusion.

We see, that from the most ancient times, there has been these two
schools among thinkers. One party claims that the unavoidable necessity
of the human mind to form concepts and abstractions is the natural guide
to knowledge, and that it can stop nowhere until we have transcended all
phenomena and formed a concept which is absolute in all directions,
transcending time and space and causality. Now if this ultimate concept
is arrived at by analysing the whole phenomena of thought and matter,
step by step, taking the cruder first and resolving it into a finer, and
still finer, until we arrive at something which stands as the solution
of everything else, it is obvious that everything else beyond this final
result is a momentary modification of itself, and as such, this final
result alone is real and everything else is but its shadow. The reality,
therefore, is not in the senses but beyond them.

On the other hand, the other party holds that the only reality in the
universe is what our senses bring to us, and although a sense of
something beyond hangs on to all our sense-perceptions, that is only a
trick of the mind, and therefore unreal.

Now a changing something can never be understood, without the idea of
something unchanging; and if it be said that that unchanging something,
to which the changing is referred, is also a changing phenomenon only
relatively unchanging, and is therefore to be referred to something
else, and so on, we say that however infinitely long this series be, the
very fact of our inability to understand a changeable without an
unchangeable forces us to postulate one as the background of all the
changeable. And no one has the right to take one part of a whole as
right and reject the other at will. If one takes the obverse he must
take the reverse of the same coin also, however he may dislike it.

Again, with every movement, man asserts his freedom. From the highest
thinker to the most ignorant man everyone knows that he is free. Now
every man at the same time finds out with a little thinking that every
action of his had motives and conditions, and given those motives and
conditions his particular action can be as rigorously deduced as any
other fact in causation.

Here, again, the same difficulty occurs. Man's will is as rigorously
bound by the law of causation as the growth of any little plant or the
falling of a stone, and yet, through all this bondage runs the
indestructible idea of freedom. Here also the totality side will declare
that the idea of freedom is an illusion and man is wholly a creature of
necessity.

Now, on one hand, this denial of freedom as an illusion is no
explanation; on the other hand, why not say that the idea of necessity
or bondage or causation is an illusion of the ignorant? Any theory which
can fit itself to facts which it wants to explain, by first cutting as
many of them as prevents its fitting itself into them, is on the face of
it wrong. Therefore the only way left to us is to admit first that the
body is not free, neither is the will but that there must be something
beyond both the mind and body which is free and

(*incomplete*)

</div>
