---
title: 'RAJA YOGA

  SECOND LESSON'

---
<div>

[←](raja-yoga_i.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Six Lessons on
Raja-Yoga](six_lessons_on_raja-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](raja-yoga_iii.htm)

  

## RAJA YOGA SECOND LESSON

(These lessons are composed of notes of class talks given by Swami
Vivekananda to an intimate audience in the house of Mrs. Sara C. Bull, a
devoted American disciple, and were preserved by her and finally printed
in 1913 for private circulation — *Ed*.)

This Yoga is known as the eightfold Yoga, because it is divided into
eight principal parts. These are:

First — Yama. This is most important and has to govern the whole life;
it has five divisions:  
        1st. Not injuring any being by thought, word, or deed.  
        2nd. Non-covetousness in thought, word, or deed.  
        3rd. Perfect chastity in thought, word, or deed.  
        4th. Perfect truthfulness in thought, word, or deed.  
        5th. Non-receiving of gifts.

Second — Niyama. The bodily care, bathing daily, dietary, etc.

Third — Âsana, posture. Hips, shoulders, and head must be held straight,
leaving the spine free.

Fourth — Prânâyâma, restraining the breath (in order to get control of
the Prâna or vital force).

Fifth — Pratyâhâra, turning the mind inward and restraining it from
going outward, revolving the matter in the mind in order to understand
it.

Sixth — Dhâranâ, concentration on one subject.

Seventh — Dhyâna, meditation.

Eighth — Samâdhi, illumination, the aim of all our efforts.

Yama and Niyama are for lifelong practice. As for the others, we do as
the leech does, not leave one blade of grass before firmly grasping
another. In other words, we have thoroughly to understand and practise
one step before taking another.

The subject of this lesson is Pranayama, or controlling the Prana. In
Raja-Yoga breathing enters the psychic plane and brings us to the
spiritual. It is the fly-wheel of the whole bodily system. It acts first
upon the lungs, the lungs act on the heart, the heart acts upon the
circulation, this in turn upon the brain, and the brain upon the mind.
The will can produce an outside sensation, and the outside sensation can
arouse the will. Our wills are weak; we do not realise their power, we
are so much bound up in matter. Most of our action is from outside in.
Outside nature throws us off our balance, and we cannot (as we ought)
throw nature off her balance. This is all wrong; the stronger power is
really within.

The great saints and teachers were those who had conquered this world of
thought within themselves and so spake with power. The story (For the
[story](../../../volume_1/raja-yoga/the_first_steps.htm#There_was_once_a)
see *Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda*, Vol. I.) of the minister
confined in a high tower, who was released through the efforts of his
wife who brought him a beetle, honey, a silken thread, a cord, and a
rope, illustrates the way we gain control of our mind by using first the
physical regulation of the breath as the silken thread. That enables us
to lay hold on one power after another until the rope of concentration
delivers us from the prison of the body and we are free. Reaching
freedom, we can discard the means used to bring us there.

Pranayama has three parts:  
        1st. Puraka — inhaling.  
        2nd. Kumbhaka — restraining.  
        3rd. Rechaka — exhaling.

There are two currents passing through the brain and circulating down
the sides of the spine, crossing at the base and returning to the brain.
One of these currents, called the "sun" (Pingalâ), starts from the left
hemisphere of the brain, crosses at the base of the brain to the right
side of the spine, and recrosses at the base of the spine, like one-half
of the figure eight.

The other current, the "moon" (Idâ), reverses this action and completes
this figure eight. Of course, the lower part is much longer than the
upper. These currents flow day and night and make deposits of the great
life forces at different points, commonly known as "plexuses"; but we
are rarely conscious of them. By concentration we can learn to feel them
and trace them over all parts of the body. These "sun" and "moon"
currents are intimately connected with breathing, and by regulating this
we get control of the body.

In the Katha Upanishad the body is described as the chariot, the mind is
the reins, the intellect is the charioteer, the senses are the horses,
and the objects of the senses their road. The self is the rider, seated
in the chariot. Unless the rider has understanding and can make the
charioteer control his horses, he can never attain the goal; but the
senses, like vicious steeds, will drag him where they please and may
even destroy him. These two currents are the great "check rein" in the
hands of the charioteer, and he must get control of this to control the
horses. We have to get the power to become moral; until we do that, we
cannot control our actions. Yoga alone enables us to carry into practice
the teachings of morality. To become moral is the object of Yoga. All
great teachers were Yogis and controlled every current. The Yogis arrest
these currents at the base of the spine and force them through the
centre of the spinal column. They then become the current of knowledge,
which only exists in the Yogi.

Second Lesson in Breathing: One method is not for all. This breathing
must be done with rhythmic regularity, and the easiest way is by
counting; as that is purely mechanical, we repeat the sacred word "Om" a
certain number of times instead.

The process of Pranayama is as follows: Close the right nostril with the
thumb and then slowly inhale through the left nostril, repeating the
word "Om" four times.

Then firmly close both nostrils by placing the forefinger on the left
one and hold the breath in, mentally repeating "Om" eight times.

Then, removing the thumb from the right nostril, exhale slowly through
that, repeating "Om" four times.

As you close the exhalation, draw in the abdomen forcibly to expel all
the air from the lungs. Then slowly inhale through the right nostril,
keeping the left one closed, repeating "Om" four times. Next close the
right nostril with the thumb and hold the breath while repeating "Om"
eight times. Then unclose the left nostril and slowly exhale, repeating
"Om" four times, drawing in the abdomen as before. Repeat this whole
operation twice at each sitting, that is, making four Pranayamas, two
for each nostril. Before taking your seat it is well to begin with
prayer.

This needs to be practised a week; then gradually increase the duration
of breathing, keeping the same ratio, that is, if you repeat "Om" six
times at inhalation, then do the same at exhalation and twelve times
during Kumbhaka. These exercises will make us more spiritual, more pure,
more holy. Do not be led aside into any byways or seek after power. Love
is the only power that stays by us and increases. He who seeks to come
to God through Raja-Yoga must be strong mentally, physically, morally,
and spiritually. Take every step in that light.

Of hundreds of thousands only one soul will say, "I will go beyond, and
I will penetrate to God." Few can face the truth; but to accomplish
anything, we must be willing to die for Truth.

</div>
