---
title: MATTER FOR SERIOUS THOUGHT

---
<div>

[←](the_bengali_language.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm) / [→](shivas_demon.htm)

  

## MATTER FOR SERIOUS THOUGHT

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6034_bhabbar_katha.pdf)* )

A man presented himself to be blessed by a sight of the Deity. He had an
access of joy and devotion at the sight; and perhaps to pay back the
good he received, he burst out into a song. In one corner of the hall,
reclining against a pillar, was Chobeji dozing. He was the priest in the
temple, an athlete, a player on the guitar, was a good hand in
swallowing two jugfuls of Bhâng (an intoxicating drink.), and had
various other qualifications besides. All on a sudden, a dreadful noise
assailing his tympanum, the fantastic universe conjured up under the
influence of the inebriating liquor vanished for a moment from Chobeji's
enormous chest of two and forty inches! And casting his crimson-tinged,
languid eyes around in search of the cause of disturbance to his
tranquil mind, Chobeji discovered that in front of the God was a man
singing, overwhelmed with his own feelings, in a tune as touching as the
scouring of cauldrons in a festive house, and, in so doing, he was
subjecting the shades of the whole host of musical masters like Nârada,
Bharata, Hanumân, Nâyaka, and the rest to ineffable anguish. The
mortified Chobeji in a sharp reprimanding tone addressed the man who had
been the direct obstacle to his enjoyment of that peculiar bliss of
inebriation, "Hello, my friend, what are you shouting like that for,
without caring for time or tune?" Quick came the response, "What need I
care for time or tune? I am trying to win the Lord's heart." "Humph!"
retorted Chobeji, "do you think the Lord is such a fool? You must be
mad! You could not win my heart even — and has the Lord less brains than
I?"

\*    \*    \*

The Lord has declared unto Arjuna: "Take thou refuge in Me, thou hast
nothing else to do. And I shall deliver thee." Bholâchand is mighty glad
to hear this from some people; he now and then yells out in a trenchant
note: "I have taken refuge in the Lord. I shall not have to do anything
further." Bholachand is under the: impression that it is the height of
devotion to bawl out those words repeatedly in the harshest tone
possible. Moreover, he does not fail to make it known now and then in
the aforesaid pitch that he is ever ready to lay down his life even, for
the Lord's sake, and that if the Lord does not voluntarily surrender
Himself to this tie of devotion, everything would be hollow and false.
And a few foolish satellites of his also share the same opinion. But
Bholachand is not prepared to give up a single piece of wickedness for
the sake of the Lord. Well, is the Lord really such a fool? Why, this is
not enough to hoodwink us even!

\*    \*    \*

Bholâ Puri an out and out Vedantin — in everything he is careful to
trumpet his Brahminhood. If all people are about to starve for food
around Bhola Puri, it does not touch him even in the least; he expounds
the unsubstantiality of pleasure and pain. If through disease, or
affliction, or starvation people die by the thousand, what matters even
that to him? He at once reflects on the immortality of the soul! If the
strong overpower the weak and even kill them before his very eyes, Bhola
Puri is lost in the profound depths of the meaning of the spiritual
dictum, "The soul neither kills nor is killed." He is exceedingly averse
to action of any kind. If hard pressed, he replies that he finished all
actions in his previous births. But Bhola Puri's realisation of unity of
the Self suffers a terrible check when he is hurt in one point. When
there is some anomaly in the completeness of his Bhikshâ, or when the
householder is unwilling to offer him worship according to his
expectations, then, in the opinion of Puriji, there are no more
despicable creatures on earth than householders, and he is at a loss to
make out why the village that failed to offer adequate worship to him
should, even for a moment add to the world's burden.

He, too, has evidently thought the Lord more foolish than ourselves.

\*    \*    \*

"I say, Râm Charan, you have neither education nor the means to set up a
trade, nor are you fit for physical labour. Besides, you cannot give up
indulging in intoxications, nor do away with your wickednesses. Tell me,
how do you manage to make your living?"

RAM CHARAN — "That is an easy job, sir; I preach unto all."

What has Ram Charan taken the Lord for?

\*    \*    \*

The city of Lucknow is astir with the festivities of the Mohurrum. The
gorgeous decorations and illumination in the principal mosque, the
Imambara, know no bounds. Countless people have congregated. Hindus,
Mohammedans, Christians, Jews — all sorts of people — men, women, and
children of all races and creeds have crowded today to witness the
Mohurrum. Lucknow is the capital of the Shias, and wailings in the name
of the illustrious Hassan and Hossain rend the skies today. Who was
there whose heart was not touched by the lamentation and beating of
breasts that took place on this mournful occasion? The tale of the
Kârbâlâ, now a thousand years old, has been renovated today.

Among this crowd of spectators were two Rajput gentlemen, who had come
from a far-off village to see the festival. The Thakur Sahibs were — as
is generally the case with village zemindârs (landlords) — innocent of
learning. That Mohammedan culture, the shower of euphuistic phraseology
with its nice and correct pronunciation, the varieties of fashionable
dress — the loose-fitting cloaks and tight trousers and turbans, of a
hundred different colours, to suit the taste of the townsfolk — all
these had not yet found their way to such a remote village to convert
the Thakur Sahibs. The Thakurs were, therefore, simple and
straightforward, always fond of hunting, stalwart and hardy, and of
exceedingly tough hearts.

The Thakurs had crossed the gate and were about to enter the mosque,
when the guard interrupted them. Upon inquiring into the reasons, he
answered, "Look here, this giant figure that you see standing by the
doorway, you must give it five kicks first, and then you can go in."
"Whose is the statue, pray?" "It is the statue of the nefarious Yejid
who killed the illustrious Hassan and Hossain a thousand years ago.
Therefore is this crying and this mourning." The guard thought that
after this elaborate explanation the statue of Yejid was sure to merit
ten kicks instead of five. But mysterious are the workings of Karma, and
everything was sadly misunderstood. The Thakurs reverentially put their
scarfs round their neck and prostrated and rolled themselves at the feet
of the statue of Yeiid, praying with faltering accents: "What is the use
of going in any more? What other gods need be seen? Bravo Yejid! Thou
alone art the true God. Thou hast thrashed the rascals so well that they
are weeping till now!"

\*    \*    \*

There is the towering temple of the Eternal Hindu Religion, and how many
ways of approaching it! And what can you not find there? From the
Absolute Brahman of the Vedantin down to Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, Shakti,
Uncle Sun, (The Sun is popularly given this familiar appellation.) the
rat-riding Ganesha, and the minor deities such as Shashthi and Mâkâl,
and so forth — which is lacking there? And in the Vedas, in the Vedanta,
and the Philosophies, in the Puranas and the Tantras, there are lots of
materials, a single sentence of which is enough to break one's chain of
transmigration for ever. And oh, the crowd! Millions and millions of
people are rushing towards the temple. I, too, had a curiosity to see
and join in the rush. But what was this that met my eyes when I reached
the spot! Nobody was going inside the temple! By the side of the door,
there was a standing figure, with fifty heads, a hundred arms, two
hundred bellies, and five hundred legs, and everyone was rolling at the
feet of that. I asked one for the reason and got the reply: "Those
deities that you see in the interior, it is worship enough for them to
make a short prostration, or throw in a few flowers from a distance. But
the real worship must be offered to him who is at the gate; and those
Vedas, the Vedanta, and the Philosophies, the Puranas and other
scriptures that you see — there is no harm if you hear them read now and
then; but you must obey the mandate of this one." Then I asked again,
"Well, what is the name of this God of gods?" "He is named Popular
Custom" — came the reply. I was reminded of the Thakur Sahibs, and
exclaimed, "Bravo, Popular Custom! Thou hast thrashed them so well",
etc.

\*    \*    \*

Gurguré Krishnavyâl Bhattâchârya is a vastly learned man, who has the
knowledge of the whole world at his finger-ends. His frame is a
skeleton; his friends say it is through the rigours of his austerities,
but his enemies ascribe it to want of food. The wicked, again, are of
opinion that such a physique is but natural to one who has a dozen
issues every year. However that may be, there is nothing on earth that
Krishnavyal does not know; specially, he is omniscient about the flow of
electric magnetic currents all over the human body, from the hair-tuft
to its furthest nook and corner. And being possessed of this esoteric
knowledge, he is incomparably the best authority for giving a scientific
explanation all things — from a certain earth used in the worship of the
goddess Durga down to the reasonable age of puberty of a girl being ten,
and sundry inexplicable and mysterious rites pertaining to allied
matters. And as for adducing precedents, well, he has made the thing so
clear that even boys could understand it. There is forsooth no other
land for religion than India, and within India itself none but the
Brahmins have the qualification for understanding religion and among
Brahmins, too, all others excepting the Krishnavyal family are as
nothing and, of these latter again, Gurguré has the pre-eminent claim!
Therefore whatever Gurguré Krishnavyal says is self-evident truth.

Learning is being cultivated to a considerable extent, and people are
becoming a bit conscious and active, so that they want to understand
anal taste everything; so Krishnavyal is assuring everybody: "Discard
all fear! Whatever doubts are arising in your minds, I am giving
scientific explanations for them. You remain just as you were. Sleep to
your heart's content and never mind anything else. Only, don't forget my
honorarium." The people exclaimed: "Oh, what a relief! What a great
danger did really confront us! We should have had to sit up, and walk,
and move — what a pest!" So they said, "Long live Krishnavyal", and
turned on one side on the bed once more. The habit of a thousand years
was not to go so soon. The body itself would resent it. The inveterate
obtuseness of the mind of a thousand years was not to pass away at a
moment's notice. And is it not for this that the Krishnavyal class are
held in repute? "Bravo, Habit! Thou hast thrashed them so well", etc.

</div>
