---
title: NOTES ON VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](freedom_of_the_self.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](hindu_and_greek.htm)

  

## NOTES ON VEDANTA

The cardinal features of the Hindu religion are founded on the
meditative and speculative philosophy and on the ethical teachings
contained in the various books of the Vedas, which assert that the
universe is infinite in space and eternal in duration. It never had a
beginning and it never will have an end. Innumerable have been the
manifestations of the power of the Spirit in the realm of matter, of the
force or the Infinite in the domain of the finite, but the Infinite
Itself is self-existent, eternal, and unchangeable. The passage of time
makes no mark whatever on the dial of eternity. In its super Sensuous
region, which cannot be comprehended at all by the human understanding,
there is no past and there is no future.

The Vedas teach that the soul of man is immortal. The body is subject to
the law of growth and decay what grows must of necessity decay. But the
indwelling spirit is related to the infinite and eternal life; it never
had a beginning, and it will never have an end. One of the chief
distinctions between the Vedic and the Christian religion is that the
Christian religion teaches that each human soul had its beginning at its
birth into this world; whereas the Vedic religion asserts that the
spirit of man is an emanation of the Eternal Being and had no more a
beginning than God Himself. Innumerable have been and will be its
manifestations in its passage from one personality to another, subject
to the great law of spiritual evolution, until it reaches perfection,
when there is no more change.

</div>
