---
title: HINDU AND GREEK

---
<div>

[←](notes_on_vedanta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](thoughts_on_the_vedas_and_upanishads.htm)

  

## HINDU AND GREEK

Three mountains stand as typical of progress — the Himalayas of
Indo-Aryan, Sinai of Hebrew, and Olympus of Greek civilisation. When the
Aryans reached India, they found the climate so hot that they would not
work incessantly, so they began to think; thus they became introspective
and developed religion. They discovered that there was no limit to the
power of mind; they therefore sought to master that; and through it they
learnt that there was something infinite coiled up in the frame we call
man, which was seeking to become kinetic. To evolve this became their
chief aim. Another branch of the Aryans went into the smaller and more
picturesque country of Greece, where the climate and natural conditions
were more favourable; so their activity turned outwards, and they
developed the external arts and outward liberty. The Greek sought
political liberty. The Hindu has always sought spiritual liberty. Both
are one-sided. The Indian cares not enough for national protection or
patriotism, he will defend only his religion; while with the Greek and
in Europe (where the Greek civilisation finds its continuation) the
country comes first. To care only for spiritual liberty and not for
social liberty is a defect, but the opposite is a still greater defect.
Liberty of both soul and body is to be striven for.

</div>
