---
title: THE DESIGN THEORY

---
<div>

[←](on_proof_of_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](spirit_and_nature.htm)

  

## THE DESIGN THEORY

The idea that nature in all her orderly arrangements shows design on the
part of the Creator of the universe is good as a kindergarten teaching
to show the beauty, power, and glory of God, in order to lead children
in religion up to a philosophical conception of God; but apart from
that, it is not good, and perfectly illogical. As a philosophical idea,
it is entirely without foundation, if God is taken to be omnipotent.

If nature shows the power of God in creating the universe, (then) to
have a design in so doing also shows His weakness. If God is omnipotent,
He needs no design, no scheme, to do anything. He has but to will it,
and it is done. No question, no scheme, no plan, of God in nature.

The material universe is the result of the limited consciousness of man.
When man becomes conscious of his divinity, all matter, all nature, *as
we know it*, will cease to exist.

The material world, as such, has no place in the consciousness of the
All-Presence as a necessity of any end. If it had, God would be limited
by the universe. To say that nature exists by His permission is not to
say that it exists as a necessity for Him to make man perfect, or for
any other reason.

It is a creation for man's necessity, not God's. There, is no scheme of
God in the plan of the universe. How could there be any if He is
omnipotent? Why should He have need of a plan, or a scheme, or a reason
to do anything? To say that He has is to limit Him and to rob Him of His
character of omnipotence.

For instance, if you came to a very wide river, so wide that you could
not get across it except by building a bridge, the very fact that you
would have to build the bridge to get across the river would show your
limitation, would show your weakness, even if the ability to build the
bridge did show your strength. If you were not limited but could just
fly or jump across, you would not be under the necessity of building the
bridge; and to build the bridge just to exhibit your power to do so
would show your weakness again by showing your vanity, more than it
would show anything else.

Monism and dualism are essentially the same. The difference consists in
the expression. As the dualists hold the Father and Son to be two, the
monists hold them to be really one. Dualism is in nature, in
manifestation, and monism is pure spirituality in the essence.

The idea of renunciation and sacrifice is in all religions as a means to
reach God.

</div>
