---
title: THE PRACTICE OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](spirit_and_nature.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](fragmentary_notes_on_the_ramayana.htm)

  

## THE PRACTICE OF RELIGION

(*At Alameda, Calif., March 18, 1900*)

We read many books, but that does not bring us knowledge. We may read
all the Bibles in the world, but that will not give us religion.
Theoretical religion is easy enough to get, any one may get that. What
we want is practical religion.

The Christian idea of a practical religion is in doing good works —
worldly utility.

What good is utility? Judged from a utilitarian standpoint, religion is
a failure. Every hospital is a prayer that more people may come there.
What is meant by charity? Charity is not fundamental. It is really
helping on the misery of the world, not eradicating it. One looks for
name and fame and covers his efforts to obtain them with the enamel of
charity and good works. He is working for himself under the pretext of
working for others. Every so-called charity is an encouragement of the
very evil it claims to operate against.

Men and women go to balls and dance all night in honour of some hospital
or other charitable institution then go home, behave like beasts, and
bring devils into the world to fill jails, insane asylums, and
hospitals. So it goes on, and it is called good works — building
hospital etc. The ideal of good works is to lessen, or eradicate, the
misery of the world. The Yogi says, all misery comes from not being able
to control the mind. The Yogi's ideal is freedom from nature. Conquest
of nature is his standard of work. The Yogi says that all power is in
the soul, and by the controlling of the mind and body one conquers
nature by the power of the soul.

Every ounce of muscle in excess of what is beyond the needs of one's
physical work is that much less of brain. Do not exercise too hard; it
is injurious. The one who does not work hard will live the longest. Eat
less food and work less. Store up brain food.

Household work is enough for women.

Do not make the lamp burn fast; let it burn slowly.

Proper diet means simple diet, not highly spiced.

</div>
