---
title: CONCENTRATION

---
<div>

[←](notes_taken_down_in_madras.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_power_of_the_mind.htm)

  

## CONCENTRATION

Concentration is the essence of all knowledge, nothing can be done
without it. Ninety per cent of thought force is wasted by the ordinary
human being, and therefore he is constantly committing blunders; the
trained man or mind never makes a mistake. When the mind is concentrated
and turned backward on itself, all within us will be our servants, not
our masters. The Greeks applied their concentration to the external
world, and the result was perfection in art, literature, etc. The Hindu
concentrated on the internal world, upon the unseen realms in the Self,
and developed the science of Yoga. Yoga is controlling the senses, will
and mind. The benefit of its study is that we learn to control instead
of being controlled. Mind seems to be layer on layer. Our real goal is
to cross all these intervening strata of our being and find God. The end
and aim of Yoga is to realise God. To do this we must go beyond relative
knowledge, go beyond the sense-world. The world is awake to the senses,
the children of the Lord are asleep on that plane. The world is asleep
to the Eternal, the children of the Lord are awake in that realm. These
are the sons of God. There is but one way to control the senses — to see
Him who is the Reality in the universe. Then and only then can we really
conquer our senses.

Concentration is restraining the mind into smaller and smaller limits.
There are eight processes for thus restraining the mind. The first is
Yama, controlling the mind by avoiding externals. All morality is
included in this. Beget no evil. Injure no living creature. If you
injure nothing for twelve years, then even lions and tigers will go down
before you. Practise truthfulness. Twelve years of absolute truthfulness
in thought, word, and deed gives a man what he wills. Be chaste in
thought, word, and action. Chastity is the basis of all religions.
Personal purity is imperative. Next is Niyama, not allowing the mind to
wander in any direction. Then Âsana, posture. There are eighty-four
postures: but the best is that most natural to each one; that is, which
can be kept longest with the greatest ease. After this comes Prânâyâma,
restraint of breath. Then Pratyâhâra, drawing in of the organs from
their objects. Then Dhâranâ, concentration. Then Dhyâna, contemplation
or meditation. (This is the kernel of the Yoga system.) And last,
Samâdhi, superconsciousness. The purer the body and mind, the quicker
the desired result will be obtained. You must be perfectly pure. Do not
think of evil things, such thoughts will surely drag you down. If you
are perfectly pure and practice faithfully, your mind can finally be
made a searchlight of infinite power. There is no limit to its scope.
But there must be constant practice and non-attachment to the world.
When a man reaches the superconscious state, all feeling of body melts
away. Then alone does he become free and immortal. To all external
appearance, unconsciousness and superconsciousness are the same; but
they differ as a lump of clay from a lump of gold. The one whose whole
soul is given up to God has reached the superconscious plane.

</div>
