---
title: LESSONS ON RAJA-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](the_power_of_the_mind.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](lessons_on_bhakti-yoga.htm)

  

## LESSONS ON RAJA-YOGA

(These lessons and those on Bhakti-Yoga that follow are made out of
class notes preserved in England — Ed.)

PRANA

The theory of creation is that matter is subject to five conditions:
ether, luminous ether, gaseous, liquid, and solid. They are all evoked
out of one primal element, which is very finest ether.

The name of the energy in the universe is Prâna, which is the force
residing in these elements. Mind is the great instrument for using the
Prana. Mind is material. Behind the mind is Âtman which takes hold of
the Prana. Prana is the driving power of the world, and can be seen in
every manifestation of life. The body is mortal and the mind is mortal;
both, being compounds, must die. Behind all is the Atman which never
dies. The Atman is pure intelligence controlling and directing Prana.
But the intelligence we see around us is always imperfect. When
intelligence is perfect, we get the Incarnation — the Christ.
Intelligence is always trying to manifest itself, and in order to do
this it is creating minds and bodies of different degrees of
development. In reality, and at the back of all things, every being is
equal.

Mind is very fine matter; it is the instrument for manifesting Prana.
Force requires matter for manifestation.

The next point is how to use this Prana. We all use it, but how sadly we
waste it! The first doctrine in the preparatory stage is that all
knowledge is the outcome of experience. Whatever is beyond the five
senses must also be experienced in order to become true to us.

Our mind is acting on three planes: the subconscious, conscious, and
superconscious. Of men, the Yogi alone is superconscious. The whole
theory of Yoga is to go beyond the mind. These three planes can be
understood by considering the vibrations of light or sound. There are
certain vibrations of light too slow to become visible; then as they get
faster, we see them as light; and then they get too fast for us to see
them at all. The same with sound.

How to transcend the senses without disturbing the health is what we
want to learn. The Western mind has stumbled into acquiring some of the
psychic gifts which in them are abnormal and are frequently the sign of
disease. The Hindu has studied and made perfect this subject of science,
which all may now study without fear or danger.

Mental healing is a fine proof of the superconscious state; for the
thought which heals is a sort of vibration in the Prana, and it does not
go as a thought but as something higher for which we have no name.

Each thought has three states. First, the rising or beginning, of which
we are unconscious; second, when the thought rises to the surface; and
third, when it goes from us. Thought is like a bubble rising to the
surface. When thought is joined to will, we call it power. That which
strikes the sick person whom you are trying to help is not thought, but
power. The self-man running through it all is called in Sanskrit
Sutrâtmâ, the "Thread-self".

The last and highest manifestation of Prana is love. The moment you have
succeeded in manufacturing love out of Prana, you are free. It is the
hardest and the greatest thing to gain. You must not criticise others;
you must criticise *yourself*. If you see a drunkard, do not criticise
him; remember he is you in another shape. He who has not darkness sees
no darkness in others. What you have inside you is that you see in
others. This is the surest way of reform. If the would-be reformers who
criticise and see evil would themselves stop creating evil, the world
would be better. Beat this idea into yourself.

  

THE PRACTICE OF YOGA

 

The body must be properly taken care of. The people who torture their
flesh are demoniacal. Always keep your mind joyful; if melancholy
thoughts come, kick them out. A Yogi must not eat too much, but he also
must not fast; he must not sleep too much, but he must not go without
any sleep. In all things only the man who holds the golden mean can
become a Yogi.

What is the best time for practice in Yoga? The junction time of dawn
and twilight, when all nature becomes calm. Take help of nature. Take
the easiest posture in sitting. Have the three parts straight — the
ribs, the shoulders, and the head — leaving the spine free and straight,
no leaning backwards or forwards. Then mentally hold the body as
perfect, part by part. Then send a current of love to all the world;
then pray for enlightenment. And lastly, join your mind to your breath
and gradually attain the power of concentrating your attention on its
movements. The reason for this will be apparent by degrees.

THE OJAS

The "Ojas" is that which makes the difference between man and man. The
man who has much Ojas is the leader of men. It gives a tremendous power
of attraction. Ojas is manufactured from the nerve-currents. It has this
peculiarity: it is most easily made from that force which manifests
itself in the sexual powers. If the powers of the sexual centres are not
frittered away and their energies wasted (action is only thought in a
grosser state), they can be manufactured into Ojas. The two great
nerve-currents of the body start from the brain, go down on each side of
the spinal cord, but they cross in the shape of the figure 8 at the back
of the head. Thus the left side of the body is governed by the right
side of the head. At the lowest point of the circuit is the sexual
centre, the Sacral Plexus. The energy conveyed by these two currents of
nerves comes down, and a large amount is continually being stored in the
Sacral Plexus. The last bone in the spine is over the Sacral Plexus and
is described in symbolic language as a triangle; and as the energy is
stored up beside it, this energy is symbolised by a serpent.
Consciousness and subconsciousness work through these two
nerve-currents. But superconsciousness takes off the nerve-current when
it reaches the lower end of the circuit, and instead of allowing it to
go up and complete the circuit, stops and forces it up the spinal cord
as Ojas from the Sacral Plexus. The spinal cord is naturally closed, but
it can be opened to form a passage for this Ojas. As the current travels
from one centre of the spinal cord to another, *you* can travel from one
plane of existence to another. This is why the human being is greater
than others, because all planes, all experiences, are possible to the
spirit in the human body. We do not need another; for man can, if he
likes, finish in his body his probation and can after that become pure
spirit. When the Ojas has gone from centre to centre and reaches the
Pineal Gland (a part of the brain to which science can assign no
function), man then becomes neither mind nor body, he is free from all
bondage.

The great danger of psychic powers is that man stumbles, as it were,
into them, and knows not how to use them rightly. He is without training
and without knowledge of what has happened to him. The danger is that in
using these psychic powers, the sexual feelings are abnormally roused as
these powers are in fact manufactured out of the sexual centre. The best
and safest way is to avoid psychic manifestations, for they play the
most horrible pranks on their ignorant and untrained owners.

To go back to symbols. Because this movement of the Ojas up the spinal
cord feels like a spiral one, it is called the "snake". The snake,
therefore, or the serpent, rests on the bone or triangle. When it is
roused, it travels up the spinal cord; and as it goes from centre to
centre, a new natural world is opened inside us — the Kundalini is
roused.

PRANAYAMA

The practice of Pranayama is the training of the superconscious mind.
The physical practice is divided into three parts and deals entirely
with the breath. It consists of drawing in, holding, and throwing out
the breath. The breath must be drawn in by one nostril whilst you count
four, then held whilst you count sixteen, and thrown away by the other
nostril whilst you count eight. Then reverse the process closing the
other nostril while you breathe in. You will have to begin by holding
one nostril with your thumb; but in time your breathing will obey your
mind. Make four of these Pranayamas morning and evening.

METAGNOSTICISM

"Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." The word "repent" is in
Greek "metanoeite" ("meta" means behind, after, beyond) and means
literally "go beyond knowledge — the knowledge of the (five) senses —
"and look within where you will find the kingdom of heaven".

Sir William Hamilton says at the end of a philosophical work, "Here
philosophy ends, here religion begins". Religion is not, and never can
be, in the field of intellect. Intellectual reasoning is based on facts
evident to the senses. Now religion has nothing to do with the *senses*.
The agnostics say they cannot know God, and rightly, for they have
exhausted the limits of their senses and yet get no further in knowledge
of God. Therefore in order to prove religion — that is, the existence of
God, immortality, etc. — we have to go beyond the knowledge of the
senses. All great prophets and seers claim to have "seen God", that is
to say, they have had direct experience. There is no knowledge without
experience, and man has to see God in his own soul. When man has come
face to face with the one great fact in the universe, then alone will
doubts vanish and crooked things become straight. This is "seeing God".
Our business is to verify, not to swallow. Religion, like other
sciences, requires you to gather facts, to see for yourself, and this is
possible when you go beyond the knowledge which lies in the region of
the five senses. Religious truths need verification by everyone. To see
God is the one goal. Power is not the goal. Pure Existence-Knowledge and
Love is the goal; and Love is God.

THOUGHT, IMAGINATION, AND MEDITATION

The same faculty that we employ in dreams and thoughts, namely,
imagination, will also be the means by which we arrive at Truth. When
the imagination is very powerful, the object becomes visualised.
Therefore by it we can bring our bodies to any state of health or
disease. When we see a thing, the particles of the brain fall into a
certain position like the mosaics of a kaleidoscope. Memory consists in
getting back this combination and the same setting of the particles of
the brain. The stronger the will, the greater will be the success in
resetting these particles of the brain. There is only one power to cure
the body, and that is in every man. Medicine only rouses this power.
Disease is only the manifest struggle of that power to throw off the
poison which has entered the body. Although the power to overthrow
poison may be roused by medicine, it may be snore permanently roused by
the force of thought. Imagination must hold to the thought of health and
strength in order that in case of illness the memory of the ideal of
health may be roused and the particles re-arranged in the position into
which they fell when healthy. The tendency of the body is then to follow
the brain.

The next step is when this process can be arrived at by another's mind
working on us. Instances of this may be seen every day. Words are only a
mode of mind acting on mind. Good and evil thoughts are each a potent
power, and they fill the universe. As vibration continues so thought
remains in the form of thought until translated into action. For
example, force is latent in the man's arm until he strikes a blow, when
he translates it into activity. We are the heirs of good and evil
thought. If we make ourselves pure and the instruments of good thoughts,
these will enter us. The good soul will not be receptive to evil
thoughts. Evil thoughts find the best field in evil people; they are
like microbes which germinate and increase only when they find a
suitable soil. Mere thoughts are like little waveless; fresh impulses to
vibration come to them simultaneously, until at last one great wave
seems to stand up and swallow up the rest. These universal thought-waves
seem to recur every five hundred years, when invariably the great wave
typifies and swallows up the others. It is this which constitutes a
prophet. He focuses in his own mind the thought of the age in which he
is living and gives it back to mankind in concrete form. Krishna,
Buddha, Christ, Mohammed, and Luther may be instanced as the great waves
that stood up above their fellows (with a probable lapse of five hundred
years between them). Always the wave that is backed by the greatest
purity and the noblest character is what breaks upon the world as a
movement of social reform. Once again in our day there is a vibration of
the waves of thought and the central idea is that of the Immanent God,
and this is everywhere cropping up in every form and every sect. In
these waves, construction alternates with destruction; yet the
construction always makes an end of the work of destruction. Now, as a
man dives deeper to reach his spiritual nature, he feels no longer bound
by superstition. The majority of sects will be transient, and last only
as bubbles because the leaders are not usually men of character. Perfect
love, the heart never reacting, this is what builds character. There is
no allegiance possible where there is no character in the leader, and
perfect purity ensures the most lasting allegiance and confidence.

Take up an idea, devote yourself to it, struggle on in patience, and the
sun will rise for you.

\*    \*    \*

To return to imagination:

We have to visualise the Kundalini. The symbol is the serpent coiled on
the triangular bone.

Then practice the breathing as described before, and, while holding the
breath, imagine that breath like the current which flows down the figure
8; when it reaches the lowest point, imagine that it strikes the serpent
on the triangle and causes the serpent to mount up the channel within
the spinal cord. Direct the breath in thought to this triangle.

We have now finished the physical process and from this point it becomes
mental.

The first exercise is called the "gathering-in". The mind has to be
gathered up or withdrawn from wandering.

After the physical process, let the mind run on and do not restrain it;
but keep watch on your mind as a witness watching its action. This mind
is thus divided into two — the player and the witness. Now strengthen
the witnessing part and do not waste time in restraining your
wanderings. The mind must think; but slowly and gradually, as the
witness does its part, the player will come more and more under control,
until at last you cease to play or wander.

2nd Exercise: Meditation — which may be divided into two. We are
concrete in constitution and the mind must think in forms. Religion
admits this necessity and gives the help of outward forms and
ceremonies. You cannot meditate on God without some form. One will come
to you, for thought and symbol are inseparable. Try to fix your mind on
that form.

3rd Exercise: This is attained by practicing meditation and is really
"one-pointedness". The mind usually works in a circle; make it remain on
one point.

The last is the result. When the mind has reached this, all is gained —
healing, clairvoyance, and all psychic gifts. In a moment you can direct
this current of thought to anyone, as Jesus did, with instantaneous
result.

People have stumbled upon these gifts without previous training, but I
advise you to wait and practice all these steps slowly; then you will
get everything under your control. You may practice healing a little if
love is the motive, for that cannot hurt. Man is very short-sighted and
impatient. All want power, but few will wait to gain it for themselves.
He distributes but will not store up. It takes a long time to earn and
but a short time to distribute. Therefore store up your powers as you
acquire them and do not dissipate them.

Every wave of passion restrained is a balance in your favour. It is
therefore good *policy* not to return anger for anger, as with all true
morality. Christ said, "Resist not evil", and we do not understand it
until we discover that it is not only moral but actually the best
policy, for anger is loss of energy to the man who displays it. You
should not allow your minds to come into those brain-combinations of
anger and hatred.

When the primal element is discovered in chemical science, the work of
the chemist will be finished. When unity is discovered, perfection in
the science of religion is reached, and this was attained thousands of y
ears ago. Perfect unity is reached when man says, "I and my Father are
one".

</div>
