---
title: I

---
<div>

[←](../epistles_second_series/168_nivedita.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](ii_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## I

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_01.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Calcutta, the house of the late Babu Priyanath Mukhopadhyaya,
Baghbazar*. Year: *1897*.\]

It is three or four days since Swamiji has set his foot in Calcutta (On
February 20, 1897.) after his first return from the West. The joy of the
devotees of Shri Ramakrishna knows no bounds at enjoying his holy
presence after a long time. And the well-to-do among them are
considering themselves blessed to cordially invite Swamiji to their own
houses. This afternoon Swamiji had an invitation to the house of Srijut
Priyanath Mukhopadhyaya, a devotee of Shri Ramakrishna, at
Rajballabhpara in Baghbazar. Receiving this news, many devotees
assembled today in his house.

The disciple also, informed of it through indirect sources, reached the
house of Mr. Mukherjee at about 2-30 p.m. He had not yet made his
acquaintance with Swamiji. So this was to be his first meeting with the
Swami.

On the disciple's reaching there, Swami Turiyananda took him to Swamiji
and introduced him. After his return to the Math, the Swami had already
heard about him, having read a Hymn on Shri Ramakrishna composed by the
disciple.

Swamiji also had come to know that the disciple used to visit Nâg
Mahâshaya, a foremost devotee of Shri Ramakrishna.[1](#fn1)

When the disciple prostrated himself before him and took his seat,
Swamiji addressed him in Sanskrit and asked him about Nag Mahashaya and
his health, and while referring to his superhuman renunciation, his
unbounded love for God, and his humility, he said:

"वयं तत्त्वान्वेषात् हला मधुकर त्वं खलुकृती।"  
(Words addressed by King Dushyanta to the bee which was teasing
Shakuntalâ by darting at her lips — Kalidasa's *Shâkuntalam*.)

— "We are undone by our vain quest after reality; while, O bee, you are
indeed blessed with success!" He then asked the disciple to send these
words to Nag Mahashaya. Afterwards, finding it rather inconvenient to
talk to the disciple in the crowd, he called him and Swami Turiyananda
to a small room to the west and, addressing himself to the disciple,
began to recite these words from the *Vivekachudâmani* (43):

"मा भैष्ट विद्वंस्तव नास्त्यपायः  
संसारसिन्धोस्तरणेऽस्त्युपायः।  
येनैव याता यतयोऽस्य पारं  
तमेव मार्गं तव निर्दिशामि॥"

— "O wise one, fear not; you have not to perish. Means there are for
crossing the ocean of this round of birth and death. I shall show you
the same way by which holy men of renunciation have crossed this ocean."
He then asked him to read Âchârya Shankara's work named
*Vivekachudâmani*.

At these words, the disciple went on musing within himself. Was the
Swami in this way hinting at the desirability of his own formal
initiation? The disciple was at that time a staunch orthodox man in his
ways, and a Vedantin. He had not yet settled his mind as regards the
adoption of a Guru and was a devoted advocate of Varnâshrama or caste
ordinances.

While various topics were going on, a man came in and announced that Mr.
Narendranath Sen, the Editor of the *Mirror*, had come for an interview
with Swamiji. Swamiji asked the bearer of this news to show him into
that small room. Narendra Babu came and taking a seat there introduced
various topics about England and America. In answer to his questions
Swamiji said, "Nowhere in the world is to be found another nation like
the Americans, so generous, broad-minded, hospitable, and so sincerely
eager to accept new ideas." "Wherever work", he went on, "has been done
in America has not been done through my power. The people of America
have accepted the ideas of Vedanta, because they are so good-hearted."
Referring to England he said, "There is no nation in the world so
conservative as the English. They do not like so easily to accept any
new idea, but if through perseverance they can be once made to
understand any idea, they will never give it up by any means. Such firm
determination you will find in no other nation. This is why they occupy
the foremost position in the world in power and civilization."

Then declaring that if qualified preachers could be had, there was
greater likelihood of the Vedanta work being permanently established in
England than in America, he continued, "I have only laid the foundation
of the work. If future preachers follow my path, a good deal of work may
be done in time."

Narendra Babu asked, "What future prospect is there for us in preaching
religion in this way?"

Swamiji said: "In our country there is only this religion of Vedanta.
Compared with the Western civilisation, it may be said, we have hardly
got anything else. But by the preaching of this universal religion of
Vedanta, a religion which gives equal rights to acquire spirituality to
men of all creeds and all paths of religious practice, the civilised
West would come to know what a wonderful degree of spirituality once
developed in India and how that is still existing. By the study of this
religion, the Western nations will have increasing regard and sympathy
for us. Already these have grown to some extent. In this way, if we have
their real sympathy and regard, we would learn from them the sciences
bearing on our material life, thereby qualifying ourselves better for
the struggle for existence. On the other hand, by learning this Vedanta
from us, they will be enabled to secure their own spiritual welfare."

Narendra Babu asked, "Is there any hope of our political progress in
this kind of interchange?"

Swamiji said, "They (the Westerners) are the children of the great
hero Virochana![2](#fn2) Their power makes the five elements play like
puppets in their hands. If you people believe that we shall in case of
conflict with them gain freedom by applying those material forces, you
are profoundly mistaken. Just as a little piece of stone figures before
the Himalayas, so we differ from them in point of skill in the use of
those forces. Do you know what my idea is? By preaching the profound
secrets of the Vedanta religion in the Western world, we shall attract
the sympathy and regard of these mighty nations, maintaining for ever
the position of their teacher in spiritual matters, and they will remain
our teachers in all material concerns. The day when, surrendering the
spiritual into their hands, our countrymen would sit at the feet of the
West to learn religion, that day indeed the nationality of this fallen
nation will be dead and gone for good. Nothing will come of crying day
and night before them, 'Give me this or give me that.' When there will
grow a link of sympathy and regard between both nations by this
give-and-take intercourse, there will be then no need for these noisy
cries. They will do everything of their own accord. I believe that by
this cultivation of religion and the wider diffusion of Vedanta, both
this country and the West will gain enormously. To me the pursuit of
politics is a secondary means in comparison with this. I will lay down
my life to carry out this belief practically. If you believe in any
other way of accomplishing the good of India, well, you may go on
working your own way."

Narendra Babu shortly left, expressing his unqualified agreement with
Swamiji's ideas. The disciple, hearing the above words from Swamiji,
astonishingly contemplated his luminous features with steadfast gaze.

When Narendra Babu had departed, an enthusiastic preacher belonging to
the society for the protection of cows came for an interview with
Swamiji. He was dressed almost like a Sannyasin, if not fully so — with
a Geruâ turban on the head; he was evidently an up-country Indian. At
the announcement of this preacher of cow-protection Swamiji came out to
the parlour room. The preacher saluted Swamiji and presented him with a
picture of the mother-cow. Swamiji took that in his hand and, making it
over to one standing by, commenced the following conversation with the
preacher:

Swamiji: What is the object of your society?

Preacher: We protect the mother-cows of our country from the hands of
the butcher. Cow-infirmaries have been founded in some places where the
diseased, decrepit mother-cows or those bought from the butchers are
provided for.

Swamiji: That is very good indeed. What is the source of your income?

Preacher: The work of the society is carried on only by gifts kindly
made by great men like you.

Swamiji: What amount of money have you now laid by?

Preacher: The Marwari traders' community are the special supporters of
this work. They have given a big amount for this good cause.

Swamiji: A terrible famine has now broken out in Central India. The
Indian Government has published a death-roll of nine lakhs of starved
people. Has your society done anything to render help in this time of
famine?

Preacher: We do not help during famine or other distresses. This society
has been established only for the protection of mother-cows.

Swamiji: During a famine when lakhs of people, your own brothers and
sisters, have fallen into the jaws of death, you have not thought it
your duty, though having the means, to help them in that terrible
calamity with food!

Preacher: No. This famine broke out as a result of men's Karma, their
sins. It is a case of "like Karma, like fruit".

Hearing the words of the preacher, sparks of fire, as it were,
scintillated in Swamiji's large eyes; his face became flushed. But he
suppressed his feeling and said: "Those associations which do not feel
sympathy for men and, even seeing their own brothers dying from
starvation, do not give them a handful of rice to save their lives,
while giving away piles of food to save birds and beasts, I have not the
least sympathy for, and I do not believe that society derives any good
from them. If you make a plea of Karma by saying that men die through
their Karma, then it becomes a settled fact that it is useless to try or
struggle for anything in this world; and your work for the protection of
animals is no exception. With regard to your cause also, it can be said
— the mother-cows through their own Karma fall into the hands of the
butchers and die, and we need not do anything in the matter."

The preacher was a little abashed and said: "Yes, what you say is true,
but the Shâstras say that the cow is our mother."

Swamiji smilingly said, "Yes, that the cow is our mother, I understand:
who else could give birth to *such* accomplished children?"

The up-country preacher did not speak further on the subject; perhaps he
could not understand the point of Swamiji's poignant ridicule. He told
Swamiji that he was begging something of him for the objects of the
society.

Swamiji: I am a Sannyasin, a fakir. Where shall I find money enough to
help you? But if ever I get money in my possession, I shall first spend
that in the service of man. Man is first to be saved; he must be given
food, education, and spirituality. If any money is left after doing all
these, then only something would be given to your society.

At these words, the preacher went away after saluting Swamiji. Then
Swamiji began to speak to us: "What words, these, forsooth! Says he that
men are dying by reason of their Karma, so what avails doing any
kindness to them! This is decisive proof that the country has gone to
rack and ruin! Do you see how much abused the Karma theory of your
Hinduism has been? Those who are men and yet have no feeling in the
heart for man, well, are such to be counted as men at all?" While
speaking these words, Swamiji's whole body seemed to shiver in anguish
and grief.

Then, while smoking, Swamiji said to the disciple, "Well, see me again."

Disciple: Where will you be staying, sir? Perhaps you might put up in
some rich man's house. Will he allow me there?

Swamiji: At present, I shall be living either at the Alambazar Math or
at the garden-house of Gopal Lal Seal at Cossipore. You may come to
either place.

Disciple: Sir, I very much wish to speak with you in solitude.

Swamiji: All right. Come one night. We shall speak plenty of Vedanta.

Disciple: Sir, I have heard that some Europeans and Americans have come
with you. Will they not get offended at my dress or my talk?

Swamiji: Why, they are also men, and moreover they are devoted to the
Vedanta religion. They will be glad to converse with you.

Disciple: Sir, Vedanta speaks of some distinctive qualifications for its
aspirants; how could these come out in your Western disciples? The
Shastras say — he who has studied the Vedas and the Vedanta, who has
formally expiated his sins, who has performed all the daily and
occasional duties enjoined by the scriptures, who is self-restrained in
his food and general conduct, and specially he who is accomplished in
the four special Sâdhanâs (preliminary disciplines), he alone has a
right to the practice of Vedanta. Your Western disciples are in the
first place non-Brahmins, and then they are lax in point of proper food
and dress; how could they understand the system of Vedanta?

Swamiji: When you speak with them, you will know at once whether they
have understood Vedanta or not.

Swamiji, perhaps, could now see that the disciple was rigidly devoted to
the external observances of orthodox Hinduism. Swamiji then, surrounded
by some devotees of Shri Ramakrishna, went over to the house of Srijut
Balaram Basu of Baghbazar. The disciple bought the book
*Vivekachudamani* at Bat-tala and went towards his own home at
Darjipara.

1.  [^](#txt1)Durgacharan Nag, the great saint and perfected soul,
    living as a householder, who wonderfully reflected in his life — in
    many of its phases — the greatness of the Master, Shri Ramakrishna.
2.  [^](#txt2)In ancient Indian tradition Virochana was the first great
    king of the Asuras, possessing supernatural powers. Recent
    investigations in Assyrian mythology prove the existence of a
    tradition in Assyrian history about such a king, called Berosus in
    certain ancient genealogies.

</div>
