---
title: III

---
<div>

[←](ii_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](iv_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## III

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_03.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Cossipore, at the garden of the late Gopal Lal Seal*. Year:
*1897*.\]

After his first return from the West, Swamiji resided for a few days at
the garden of the late Gopal Lal Seal at Cossipore. Some well-known
Pundits living at Barabazar, Calcutta, came to the garden one day with a
view to holding a disputation with him. The disciple was present there
on the occasion.

All the Pundits who came there could speak in Sanskrit fluently. They
came and greeting Swamiji, who sat surrounded by a circle of visitors,
began their conversation in Sanskrit. Swamiji also responded to them in
melodious Sanskrit. The disciple cannot remember now the subject on
which the Pundits argued with him that day. But this much he remembers
that the Pundits, almost all in one strident voice, were rapping out to
Swamiji in Sanskrit subtle questions of philosophy, and he, in a
dignified serious mood, was giving out to them calmly his own well
argued conclusions about those questions.

In the discussion with the Pundits Swamiji represented the side of the
Siddhânta or conclusions to be established, while the Pundits
represented that of the Purvapaksha or objections to be raised. The
disciple remembers that, while arguing, Swamiji wrongly used in one
place the word Asti instead of Svasti, which made the Pundits laugh out.
At this, Swamiji at once submitted: "पण्डितानां दासोऽहं क्षन्तव्यमेतत्
स्खलनम्" — I am but a servant of the Pundits, please excuse this
mistake." The Pundits also were charmed at this humility of Swamiji.
After a long dispute, the Pundits at last admitted that the conclusions
of the Siddhanta side were adequate, and preparing to depart, they made
their greetings to Swamiji.

After the Pundits had left, the disciple learnt from Swamiji that these
Pundits who took the side of the Purvapaksha were well versed in the
Purva-Mimâmsâ Shâstras, Swamiji advocated the philosophy of the
Uttara-Mimâmsâ or Vedanta and proved to them the superiority of the path
of knowledge, and they were obliged to accept his conclusions.

About the way the Pundits laughed at Swamiji, picking up one grammatical
mistake, he said that this error of his was due to the fact of his not
having spoken in Sanskrit for many years together. He did not blame the
Pundits a bit for all that. But he pointed out in this connection that
in the West it would imply a great incivility on the part of an opponent
to point out any such slip in language, deviating from the real issue of
dispute. A civilised society in such cases would accept the idea, taking
no notice of the language. "But in your country, all the fighting is
going on over the husk, nobody searches for the kernel within." So
saying, Swamiji began to talk with the disciple in Sanskrit. The
disciple also gave answers in broken Sanskrit. Yet Swamiji praised him
for the sake of encouragement. From that day, at the request of Swamiji,
the disciple used to speak with him in Sanskrit off and on.

In reply to the question, what is civilisation, Swamiji said that day:
"The more advanced a society or nation is in spirituality, the more is
that society or nation civilised. No nation can be said to have become
civilised only because it has succeeded in increasing the comforts of
material life by bringing into use lots of machinery and things of that
sort. The present-day civilization of the West is multiplying day by day
only the wants and distresses of men. On the other hand, the ancient
Indian civilisation by showing people the way to spiritual advancement,
doubtless succeeded, if not in removing once for all, at least in
lessening, in a great measure, the material needs of men. In the present
age, it is to bring into coalition both these civilisations that
Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna was born. In this age, as on the one hand
people have to be intensely practical, so on the other hand they have to
acquire deep spiritual knowledge." Swamiji made us clearly understand
that day that from such interaction of the Indian civilization with that
of the West would dawn on the world a new era. In the course of dilating
upon this, he happened to remark in one place, "Well, another thing.
People there in the West think that the more a man is religious, the
more demure he must be in his outward bearing — no word about anything
else from his lips! As the priests in the West would on the one hand be
struck with wonder at my liberal religious discourses, they would be as
much puzzled on the other hand when they found me, after such
discourses, talking frivolities with my friends. Sometimes they would
speak out to my face: 'Swami, you are a priest, you should not be joking
and laughing in this way like ordinary men. Such levity does not look
well in you.' To which I would reply, 'We are children of bliss, why
should we look morose and sombre?' But I doubt if they could rightly
catch the drift of my words."

That day Swamiji spoke many things about Bhâva Samâdhi and Nirvikalpa
Samadhi as well. These are produced below as far as possible:

Suppose a man is cultivating that type of devotion to God which Hanumân
represents. The more intense the attitude becomes, the more will the
pose and demeanour of that aspirant, nay even his physical
configuration, be cast in that would. It is in this way that
transmutation of species takes place. Taking up any such emotional
attitude, the worshipper becomes gradually shaped into the very form of
his ideal. The ultimate stage of any such sentiment is called Bhava
Samadhi. While the aspirant in the path of Jnana, pursuing the process
of Neti, Neti, "not this, not this", such as "I am not the body, nor the
mind, nor the intellect", and so on, attains to the Nirvikalpa Samadhi
when he is established in absolute consciousness. It requires striving
through many births to reach perfection or the ultimate stage with
regard to a single one of these devotional attitudes. But Shri
Ramakrishna, the king of the realm of spiritual sentiment, perfected
himself in no less than eighteen different forms of devotion! He also
used to say that his body would not have endured, had he not held
himself on to this play of spiritual sentiment.

The disciple asked that day, "Sir, what sort of food did you use to take
in the West?"

Swamiji: The same as they take there. We are Sannyasins and nothing can
take away our caste!

On the subject of how he would work in future in this country, Swamiji
said that day that starting two centres, one in Madras and another in
Calcutta, he would rear up a new type of Sannyasins for the good of all
men in all its phases. He further said that by a destructive method no
progress either for the society or for the country could be achieved. In
all ages and times progress has been effected by the constructive
process, that is, by giving a new mould to old methods and customs.
Every religious preacher in India, during the past ages, worked in that
line. Only the religion of Bhagavan Buddha was destructive. Hence that
religion has been extirpated from India.

The disciple remembers that while thus speaking on, he remarked, "If the
Brahman is manifested in one man, thousands of men advance, finding
their way out in that light. Only the knowers of Brahman are the
spiritual teachers of mankind. This is corroborated by all scriptures
and by reason too. It is only the selfish Brahmins who have introduced
into this country the system of hereditary Gurus, which is against the
Vedas and against the Shastras. Hence it is that even through their
spiritual practice men do not now succeed in perfecting themselves or in
realising Brahman. To remove all this corruption in religion, the Lord
has incarnated Himself on earth in the present age in the person of Shri
Ramakrishna. The universal teachings that he offered, if spread all over
the world, will do good to humanity and the world. Not for many a
century past has India produced so great, so wonderful, a teacher of
religious synthesis."

A brother-disciple of Swamiji at that time asked him, "Why did you not
publicly preach Shri Ramakrishna as an Avatâra in the West?"

Swamiji: They make much flourish and fuss over their science and
philosophy. Hence, unless you first knock to pieces their intellectual
conceit through reasoning, scientific argument, and philosophy, you
cannot build anything there. Those who finding themselves off their
moorings through their utmost intellectual reasoning would approach me
in a real spirit of truth-seeking, to them alone, I would speak of Shri
Ramakrishna. If, otherwise, I had forthwith spoken of the doctrine of
incarnation, they might have said, "Oh, you do not say anything new —
why, we have our Lord Jesus for all that!"

After thus spending some three or four delightful hours, the disciple
came back to Calcutta that day along with the other visitors.

</div>
