---
title: IV

---
<div>

[←](iii_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](v_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## IV

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_04.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *The Kali-temple at Dakshineswar and the Alambazar Math*. Year:
*1897, March*.\]

When Swamiji returned from England for the first time, the Ramakrishna
Math was located at Alambazar. The birthday anniversary of Bhagavan Shri
Ramakrishna was being celebrated this year at the Kali-temple of Rani
Râsmani at Dakshineswar. Swamiji with some of his brother- disciples
reached there from the Alambazar Math at about 9 or 10 a.m. He was
barefooted, with a yellow turban on his head. Crowds of people were
waiting to see and hear him. In the temple of Mother Kali, Swamiji
prostrated himself before the Mother of the Universe, and thousands of
heads, following him, bent low. Then after prostrating himself before
Râdhâkântaji he came into the room which Shri Ramakrishna used to
occupy. There was not the least breathing space in the room.

Two European ladies who accompanied Swamiji to India attended the
festival. Swamiji took them along with himself to show them the holy
Panchavati and the Vilva tree.[1](#fn1) Though the disciple was not yet
quite familiar with Swamiji, he followed him, and presented him with the
copy of a Sanskrit Ode about the Utsava (celebration) composed by
himself. Swamiji read it while walking towards the Panchavati. And on
the way he once looked aside towards the disciple and said, "Yes, it's
done well. Attempt others like it."

The householder devotees of Shri Ramakrishna happened to be assembled on
one side of the Panchavati, among whom was Babu Girish Chandra Ghosh.
Swamiji, accompanied by a throng, came to Girish Babu and saluted him,
saying, "Hello! here is Mr. Ghosh." Girish Babu returned his salutation
with folded hands. Reminding Girish Babu of the old days, Swamiji said,
"Think of it, Mr. Ghosh — from those days to these, what a transition! "
Girish Babu endorsed Swamiji's sentiment and said, "Yes, that is true;
but yet the mind longs to see more of it." After a short conversation,
Swamiji proceeded towards the Vilva tree situated on the north-east of
the Panchavati.

Now a huge crowd stood in keen expectancy to hear a lecture from
Swamiji. But though he tried his utmost, Swamiji could not speak louder
than the noise and clamour of the people. Hence he had to give up
attempting a lecture and left with the two European ladies to show them
sites connected with Shri Ramakrishna's spiritual practices and
introduce them to particular devotees and followers of the Master.

After 3 p.m. Swamiji said to the disciple, "Fetch me a cab, please; I
must go to the Math now." The disciple brought one accordingly. Swamiji
himself sat on one side and asked Swami Niranjanananda and the disciple
to sit on the other and they drove towards the Alambazar Math. On the
way, Swamiji said to the disciple, "It won't do to live on abstract
ideas merely. These festivals and the like are also necessary; for then
only, these ideas will spread gradually among the masses. You see, the
Hindus have got their festivals throughout the year, and the secret of
it is to infuse the great ideals of religion gradually into the minds of
the people. It has also its drawback, though. For people in general miss
their inner significance and become so much engrossed in externals that
no sooner are these festivities over than they become their old selves
again. Hence it is true that all these form the outer covering of
religion, which in a way hide real spirituality and self-knowledge.

"But there are those who cannot at all understand in the abstract what
'religion' is or what the 'Self' is, and they try to realise
spirituality gradually through these festivals and ceremonies. Just take
this festival celebrated today; those that attended it will at least
once think of Shri Ramakrishna. The thought will occur to their mind as
to who he was, in whose name such a great crowd assembled and why so
many people came at all in his name. And those who will not feel that
much even, will come once in a year to see all the devotional dancing
and singing, or at least to partake of the sacred food-offerings, and
will also have a look at the devotees of Shri Ramakrishna. This will
rather benefit them than do any harm."

Disciple: But, sir, suppose somebody thinks these festivals and
ceremonies to be the only thing essential, can he possibly advance any
further? They will gradually come down to the level of commonplace
observances, like the worship in our country of (the goddesses)
Shashthi, Mangala-chandi, and the like. People are found to observe
these rites till death; but where do we find even one among them rising
through such observances to the knowledge of Brahman?

Swamiji: Why? In India so many spiritual heroes were born, and did they
not make them the means of scaling the heights of greatness? When by
persevering in practice through these props they gained a vision of the
Self, they ceased to be keen on them. Yet, for the preservation of
social balance even great men of the type of Incarnations follow these
observances.

Disciple: Yes, they may observe these for appearance only. But when to a
knower of the Self even this world itself becomes unreal like magic, is
it possible for him to recognise these external observances as true?

Swamiji: Why not? Is not our idea of truth also a relative one, varying
in relation to time, place, and person? Hence all observances have their
utility, relatively to the varying qualifications in men. It is just as
Shri Ramakrishna used to say, that the mother cooks Polâo and Kâlia
(rich dishes) for one son, and sago for another.

Now the disciple understood at last and kept quiet. Meanwhile the
carriage arrived at the Alambazar Math. The disciple followed Swamiji
into the Math where Swamiji, being thirsty, drank some water. Then
putting off his coat, he rested recumbent on the blanket spread on the
floor. Swami Niranjanananda, seated by his side, said, "We never had
such a great crowd in any year's Utsava before! As if the whole of
Calcutta flocked there!"

Swamiji: It was quite natural; stranger things will happen hereafter.

Disciple: Sir, in every religious sect are found to exist external
festivals of some kind or other. But there is no amity between one sect
and another in this matter. Even in the case of such a liberal religion
as that of Mohammed, I have found in Dacca that the Shiâs and Sunnis go
to loggerheads with each other.

Swamiji: That is incidental more or less wherever you have sects. But do
you know what the ruling sentiment amongst us is? — non-sectarianism.
Our Lord was born to point that out. He would accept all forms, but
would say withal that, looked at from the standpoint of the knowledge of
Brahman, they were only like illusory Mâyâ.

Disciple: Sir, I can't understand your point. Sometimes it seems to me
that, by thus celebrating these festivals, you are also inaugurating
another sect round the name of Shri Ramakrishna. I have heard it from
the lips of Nâg Mahâshaya that Shri Ramakrishna did not belong to any
sect. He used to pay great respect to all creeds such as the Shâktas,
the Vaishnavas, the Brahmos, the Mohammedans, and the Christians.

Swamiji: How do you know that we do not also hold in great esteem all
the religious creeds?

So saying, Swamiji called out in evident amusement to Swami
Niranjanananda: "Just think what this Bângâl[2](#fn2) is saying!"

Disciple: Kindly make me understand, sir, what you mean.

Swamiji: Well, you have, to be sure, read my lectures. But where have I
built on Shri Ramakrishna's name? It is only the pure Upanishadic
religion that I have gone about preaching in the world.

Disciple: That's true, indeed. But what I find by being familiar with
you is that you have surrendered yourself, body and soul, to
Ramakrishna. If you have understood Shri Ramakrishna to be the Lord
Himself, why not give it out to the people at large?

Swamiji: Well, I do preach what I have understood. And if you have found
the Advaitic principles of Vedanta to be the truest religion, then why
don't you go out and preach it to all men?

Disciple: But I must realise, before I can preach it to others. I have
only studied Advaitism in books.

Swamiji: Good; realise first and then preach. Now, therefore, you have
no right to say anything of the beliefs each man tries to live by. For
you also proceed now by merely putting your faith on some such beliefs.

Disciple: True, I am also living now by believing in something; but I
have the Shâstras for my authority. I do not accept any faith opposed to
the Shastras.

Swamiji: What do you mean by the Shastras? If the Upanishads are
authority, why not the Bible or the Zend-Avesta equally so?

Disciple: Granted these scriptures are also good authority, they are
not, however, as old as the Vedas. And nowhere, moreover, is the theory
of the Âtman better established than in the Vedas.

Swamiji: Supposing I admit that contention of yours, what right have you
to maintain that truth can be found nowhere except in the Vedas?

Disciple: Yes, truth may also exist in all the scriptures other than the
Vedas, and I don't say anything to the contrary. But as for me, I choose
to abide by the teachings of the Upanishads, for I have very great faith
in them.

Swamiji: Quite welcome to do that, but if somebody else has "very great"
faith in any other set of doctrines, surely you should allow him to
abide by that. You will discover that in the long run both he and
yourself will arrive at the same goal. For haven't you read in the
*Mahimnah-stotram*, "त्वमसि पयसामर्णव इव — Thou art as the ocean to the
rivers falling into it"?

1.  [^](#txt1)Panchavati is a grove of five special trees arranged and
    grown to serve purposes of spiritual practice. The Vilva is also a
    holy tree of that sort.
2.  [^](#txt2)This term as used of people hailing from East Bengal is
    too often supposed to have a ring of derision. But in the case of
    the disciple, it very easily and naturally grew to be a term of
    peculiar endearment. — Ed.

</div>
