---
title: V

---
<div>

[←](iv_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](vi_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## V

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_08e5.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Alambazar Math*. Year: *1897, May*.\]

It was the 19th Vaishâkha (April-May) of the year 1303 B.S. Swamiji had
agreed to initiate the disciple today. So, early in the morning, he
reached the Alambazar Math. Seeing the disciple Swamiji jocosely said,
"Well, you are to be 'sacrificed' today, are you not?"

After this remark to the disciple, Swamiji with a smile resumed his talk
with others about American subjects. And in due relevancy came along
such topics also as how one-pointed in devotion one has to be in order
to build up a spiritual life, how firm faith and strong devotion to the
Guru have to be kept up, how deep reliance has to be placed on the words
of the Guru, and how even one's life has to be laid down for his sake.
Then putting some questions to the disciple, Swamiji began to test his
heart: "Well, are you ready to do my bidding to your utmost, whatever it
be and whenever it may come? If I ask you to plunge into the Ganga or to
jump from the roof of a house, meaning it all for your good, could you
do even that without any hesitation? Just think of it even now;
otherwise don't rush forward on the spur of the moment to accept me as
your Guru." And the disciple nodded assent to all questions of the kind.

Swamiji then continued: "The real Guru is he who leads you beyond this
Mâyâ of endless birth and death — who graciously destroys all the griefs
and maladies of the soul. The disciple of old used to repair to the
hermitage of the Guru, fuel in hand; and the Guru, after ascertaining
his competence, would teach him the Vedas after initiation, fastening
round his waist the threefold filament of Munja, a kind of grass, as the
emblem of his vow to keep his body, mind, and speech in control. With
the help of this girdle, the disciples used to tie up their Kaupinas.
Later on, the custom of wearing the sacred thread superseded this girdle
of Munja grass."

Disciple: Would you, then, say, sir, that the use of the holy thread we
have adopted is not really a Vedic custom?

Swamiji: Nowhere is there mention of thread being so used in the Vedas.
The modern author of Smritis, Raghunandana Bhattacharya, also puts it
thus: "At this stage,[](#fn1)[1](#fn1) the sacrificial girdle should be
put on." Neither in Gobhila's *Grihya-Sutras* do we find any mention of
the girdle made of thread. In the Shâstras, this first Vedic Samskâra
(purification ceremony) before the Guru has been called the Upanayana;
but see, to what a sad pass our country has been brought! Straying away
from the true path of the Shastras, the country has been overwhelmed
with usages and observances originating in particular localities, or
popular opinion, or with the womenfolk! That's why I ask you to proceed
along the path of the Shastras as in olden times. Have faith within
yourselves and thereby bring it back into the country. Plant in your
heart the faith of Nachiketâ. Even go up to the world of Yama like him.
Yes, if to know the secrets of the Atman, to liberate your soul, to
reach the true solution of the mystery of birth and death, you have to
go to the very jaws of death and realise the truth thereby, well, go
there with an undaunted heart. It is fear alone that is death. You have
to go beyond all fear. So from this day be fearless. Off at once, to lay
down your life for your own liberation and for the good of others. What
good is it carrying along a load of bones and flesh! Initiated into the
Mantra of extreme self-sacrifice for the sake of God, go, lay down for
others this body of flesh and bones like the Muni Dadhichi! Those alone,
say the Shastras, are the real Gurus, who have studied the Vedas and the
Vedanta, who are knowers of the Brahman, who are able to lead others
beyond to fearlessness; when such are at hand, get yourself initiated,
"no speculation in such a case". Do you know what has become of this
principle now? — "like the blind leading the blind"!

\*    \*    \*

The initiation ceremony was duly gone through in the chapel. After this
Swamiji spoke out: "Give me the Guru-dakshinâ."[2](#fn2) The disciple
replied, "Oh, what shall I give?" On this Swamiji suggested, "Well,
fetch any fruit from the store-room." So the disciple ran to the
store-room and came back into the chapel with ten or twelve lichis.
These Swamiji took from his hand and ate them one by one, saying, "Now,
your Guru-dakshina is made."

A member of the Math, Brahmachâri (now Swami) Shuddhananda, also had his
initiation from Swamiji on this occasion.

Swamiji then had his dinner and went to take a short rest.

After the siesta, he came and sat in the hall of the upper storey. The
disciple finding this opportunity asked, "Sir, how and whence came the
ideas of virtue and vice?"

Swamiji: It is from the idea of the manifold that these have evolved.
The more a man advances towards oneness, the more ideas of "I" and "you"
subside, ideas from which all these pairs of opposites such as virtue
and vice have originated. When the idea that So-and-so is different from
me comes to the mind, all other ideas of distinction begin to manifest,
while with the complete realisation of oneness, no more grief or
illusion remains for man, "तत्र को मोहः कः शोकः एकत्वमनुपश्यतः — For him
who sees oneness, where is there any grief or any delusion?" Sin may be
said to be the feeling of every kind of weakness. From this weakness
spring jealousy, malice, and so forth. Hence weakness is sin. The Self
within is always shining forth resplendent. Turning away from that
people say "I", "I", "I", with their attention held up by this material
body, this queer cage of flesh and bones. This is the root of all
weakness. From that habit only, the relative outlook on life has emerged
in this world. The absolute Truth lies beyond that duality.

Disciple: Well, is then all this relative experience not true?

Swamiji: As long as the idea of "I" remains, it is true. And the instant
the realisation of "I" as the Atman comes, this world of relative
existence becomes false. What people speak of as sin is the result of
weakness — is but another form of the egoistic idea, "I am the body".
When the mind gets steadfast in the truth, "I am the Self", then you go
beyond merit and demerit, virtue and vice. Shri Ramakrishna used to say,
"When the 'I' dies, all trouble is at an end."

Disciple: Sir, this "I" has a most tenacious life. It is very difficult
to kill it.

Swamiji: Yes, in one sense, it is very difficult, but in another sense,
it is quite easy. Can you tell me where this "I" exists? How can you
speak of anything being killed, which never exists at all? Man only
remains hypnotised with the false idea of an ego. When this ghost is off
from us, all dreams vanish, and then it is found that the one Self only
exists from the highest Being to a blade of grass. This will have to be
known, to be realised. All practice or worship is only for taking off
this veil. When that will go, you will find that the Sun of Absolute
Knowledge is shining in Its own lustre. For the Atman only is
self-luminous and has to be realised by Itself. How can that, which can
be experienced only by itself be known with the help of any other thing?
Hence the Shruti says, says, "विज्ञातारमरे केन विजानीयात् — Well,
through what means is that to be known which is the Knower?" Whatever
you know, you know through the instrumentality of your mind. But mind is
something material. It is active only because there is the pure Self
behind it. So, how can you know that Self through your mind? But this
only becomes known, after all, that the mind cannot reach the pure Self,
no, nor even the intellect. Our relative knowledge ends just there.
Then, when the mind is free from activity or functioning, it vanishes,
and the Self is revealed. This state has been described by the
commentator Shankara as अपरोक्षानुभूतिः or supersensuous perception.

Disciple: But, sir, the mind itself is the "I". If that mind is gone,
then the "I" also cannot remain.

Swamiji: Yes, the state that comes then is the real nature of the ego.
The "I" that remains then is omnipresent, all-pervading, the Self of
all. Just as the Ghatâkâsha, when the jar is broken, becomes the
Mahâkâsha,[](#fn3)[3](#fn3) for with the destruction of the jar the
enclosed space is not destroyed. The puny "I" which you were thinking of
as confined in the body, becomes spread out and is thus realised in the
form of the all- pervading "I" or the Self. Hence what matters it to the
real "I" or the Self, whether the mind remains or is destroyed? What I
say you will realise in course of time. "कालेनात्मनि विन्दति — It is
realised within oneself in due time." As you go on with Shravana and
Manana (proper hearing and proper thinking), you will fully understand
it in due time and then you will go beyond mind. Then there will be no
room for any such question.

Hearing all this, the disciple remained quiet on his seat, and Swamiji,
as he gently smoked, continued: "How many Shastras have been written to
explain this simple thing, and yet men fail to understand it! How they
are vesting this precious human life on the fleeting pleasures of some
silver coins and the frail beauty of women! Wonderful is the influence
of Mahâmâyâ (Divine Illusion)! Mother! Oh Mother!"

</div>

1.  [^](#t1)Referring, that is to say, to some steps in the Vedic
    ceremony of a Brahmin's initiation.
2.  [^](#t2)The special gift which a disciple has to make to his Guru as
    the symbol of the mutual relation being consummated.
3.  [^](#t3)Ghatâkâsha and Mahâkâsha are technical terms in Vedanta,
    meaning the space enclosed by the jar and the omnipresent. The two
    are one and the same, only the former is limited by the Upâdhi
    (adjunct) of the Ghata or jar.
