---
title: VI

---
<div>

[←](v_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](vii_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## VI

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_09e6.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Baghbazar, Calcutta*. Year: *1897*.\]

Swamiji has been staying for some days at the house of the late Balaram
Babu. At his wish, a large number of devotees of Shri Ramakrishna have
assembled at the house at 3 p.m. (on May 1, 1897). Swami Yogananda is
amongst those present here. The object of Swamiji is to form an
Association. When all present had taken their seats, Swamiji proceeded
to speak as follows:

"The conviction has grown in my mind after all my travels in various
lands that no great cause can succeed without an organisation. In a
country like ours, however, it does not seem quite practicable to me to
start an organisation at once with a democratic basis or work by general
voting. People in the West are more educated in this respect, and less
jealous of one another than ourselves. They have learnt to respect
merit. Take for instance my case. I was just an insignificant man there,
and yet see how cordially they received and entertained me. When with
the spread of education the masses in our country grow more sympathetic
and liberal, when they learn to have their thoughts expanded beyond the
limits of sect or party, then it will be possible to work; on the
democratic basis of organization. For this reason it is necessary to
have a dictator for this Society. Everybody should obey him, and then in
time we may work on the principle of general voting.

"Let this Association be named after him, in whose name indeed, we have
embraced the monastic life, with whom as your Ideal in life you all toil
on the field of work from your station in family life, within twenty
years of whose passing away a wonderful diffusion of his holy name and
extraordinary life has taken place both in the East and the West. We are
the servants of the Lord. Be you all helpers in this cause."

When Srijut Girish Chandra Ghosh and all other householder disciples
present had approved of the above proposal, the future programme of the
Society of Shri Ramakrishna was taken up for discussion. The Society was
named the Ramakrishna Mission.

Swamiji himself became the general president of the Mission and other
office-bearers also were elected. The rule was laid down that the
Association should hold meetings at the house of Balaram Babu every
Sunday at 4 p.m. Needless to say that Swamiji used to attend these
meetings whenever convenient.

When the meeting had broken up and the members departed, addressing
Swami Yogananda, Swamiji said, "So the work is now begun this way; let
us see how far it succeeds by the will of Shri Ramakrishna."

Swami Yogananda: You are doing these things with Western methods. Should
you say Shri Ramakrishna left us any such instructions?

Swamiji: Well, how do you know that all this is not on Shri
Ramakrishna's lines? He had an infinite breadth of feeling, and dare you
shut him up within your own limited views of life. I will break down
these limits and scatter broadcast over the earth his boundless
inspiration. He never instructed me to introduce any rites of his own
worship. We have to realise the teachings he has left us about religious
practice and devotion, concentration and meditation, and such higher
ideas and truths, and then preach these to all men. The infinite number
of faiths are only so many paths. I haven't been born to found one more
sect in a world already teeming with sects. We have been blessed with
obtaining refuge at the feet of the Master, and we are born to carry his
message to the dwellers of the three worlds.

Swami Yogananda uttered no word of dissent, and so Swamiji continued:
Time and again have I received in this life marks of his grace. He
stands behind and gets all this work done by me. When lying helpless
under a tree in an agony of hunger, when I had not even a scrap of cloth
for Kaupina, when I was resolved on travelling penniless round the
world, even then help came in all ways by the grace of Shri Ramakrishna.
And again when crowds jostled with one another in the streets of Chicago
to have a sight of this Vivekananda, then also, just because I had his
grace, I could digest without difficulty all that honour — a hundredth
part of which would have been enough to turn mad any ordinary man; and
by his will, victory followed everywhere. Now I must conclude by doing
something in this country. So casting all doubt away, please help my
work; and you will find everything fulfilled by his will.

Swami Yogananda: Yes, whatever you will, shall be fulfilled; and are we
not all ever obedient to you? Now and then I do clearly see how Shri
Ramakrishna is getting all these things done through you. And yet, to
speak plainly, some misgiving rises at intervals, for as we saw it, his
was of doing things was different. So I question myself: "Are we sure
that we are not going astray from Shri Ramakrishna's teachings?" And so
I take the opposing attitude and warn you.

Swamiji: You see, the fact is that Shri Ramakrishna is not exactly what
the ordinary followers have comprehended him to be. He had infinite
moods and phases. Even if you might form an idea of the limits of
Brahmajnâna, the knowledge of the Absolute, you could not have any idea
of the unfathomable depths of his mind! Thousands of Vivekanandas may
spring forth through one gracious glance of his eyes! But instead of
doing that, he has chosen to get things done this time through me as his
single instrument, and what can I do in this matter you see?

Saying this, Swamiji left to attend to something else waiting for him,
and Swami Yogananda went on praising Swamiji's versatile gifts.

Meanwhile Swamiji returned and asked the disciple, "Do the people in
your part of the country know much of Shri Ramakrishna?"

Disciple: Only one man, Nâg Mahâshaya, came to Shri Ramakrishna from our
part of Bengal;[1](#fn1) it is from him that many came to hear of him
and had their curiosity excited to know more. But that Shri Ramakrishna
was the Incarnation of God, the people there have not yet come to know
and some would not believe it even if told so.

Swamiji: Do you think it is an easy matter to believe so? We who had
actual dealings with him in every respect we who heard of that fact
again and again from his own lips, we who lived and stayed with him for
twenty-four hours of the day — even we off and on have doubts about it
coming over us! So what to speak of others!

Disciple: Did Shri Ramakrishna, out of his own lips ever say that he was
God, the all-perfect Brahman?

Swamiji: Yes, he did so many times. And he said this to all of us. One
day while was staying at the Cossipore garden, his body in imminent
danger of falling off for ever, by the side of his bed I was saying in
my mind, "Well, now if you can declare that you are God, then only will
I believe you are really God Himself." It was only two days before he
passed away. Immediately, he looked up towards me all on a sudden and
said, "He who was Rama, He who was Krishna, verily is He now Ramakrishna
in this body. And that not merely from the standpoint of your
Vedanta!"[2](#fn2) At this I was struck dumb. Even we haven't had yet
the perfect faith, after hearing it again and again from the holy lips
of our Lord himself — our minds still get disturbed now and then with
doubt and despair — and so, what shall we speak of others being slow to
believe? It is indeed a very difficult matter to be able to declare and
believe a man with a body like ours to be God Himself. We may just go to
the length of declaring him to be a "perfected one", or a "knower of
Brahman". Well, it matters nothing, whatever you may call him or think
of him, a saint, or a knower of Brahman, or anything. But take it from
me, never did come to this earth such an all-perfect man as Shri
Ramakrishna! In the utter darkness of the world, this great man is like
the shining pillar of illumination in this age! And by his light alone
will man now cross the ocean of Samsâra!

Disciple: To me it seems, sir, that true faith comes only after actually
seeing or hearing something. Mathur[3](#fn3) Babu, I have heard,
actually saw so many things about Shri Ramakrishna, and thus he had that
wonderful faith in him.

Swamiji: He who believes not, believes not even after seeing, and thinks
that it is all hallucination, or dream and so on. The great
transfiguration of Krishna — the Vishvarupa (form universal) — was seen
alike by Duryodhana and by Arjuna. But only Arjuna believed, while
Duryodhana took it to be magic! Unless He makes us understand, nothing
can be stated or understood. Somebody comes to the fullest faith even
without seeing or hearing, while somebody else remains plunged in doubt
even after witnessing with his own eyes various extraordinary powers for
twelve years! The secret of it all is His grace! But then one must
persevere, so that the grace may be received.

Disciple: Is there, sir, any law of grace?

Swamiji: Yes and no.

Disciple: How is that?

Swamiji: Those who are pure always in body, mind, and speech, who have
strong devotion, who discriminate between the real and the unreal, who
persevere in meditation and contemplation — upon them alone the grace of
the Lord descends. The Lord, however, is beyond all natural laws — is
not under any rules and regulations, or just as Shri Ramakrishna used to
say, He has the child's nature — and that's why we find some failing to
get any response even after calling on Him for millions of births, while
some one else whom we regard as a sinful or penitent man or a
disbeliever, would have Illumination in a flash! — On the latter the
Lord perhaps lavishes His grace quite unsolicited! You may argue that
this man had good merits stored up from previous life, but the mystery
is really difficult to understand. Shri Ramakrishna used to say
sometimes, "Do rely on Him; be like the dry leaf at the mercy of the
wind"; and again he would say, "The wind of His grace is always blowing,
what you need to do is to unfurl your sail."

Disciple: But, sir, this is a most tremendous statement. No reasoning, I
see, can stand here.

Swamiji: Ah, all reasoning and arguing is within the limit of the realm
of Maya; it lies within the categories of space, time, and causation.
But He is beyond these categories. We speak of His law, still He is
beyond all law. He creates, or becomes, all that we speak of as laws of
nature, and yet He is outside of them all. He on whom His grace
descends, in a moment goes beyond all law. For this reason there is no
condition in grace. It is as His play or sport. And this creation of the
universe is like His play — "लोकवत् लीलाकैवल्यम् — It is the pure
delight of sport, as in the case of men" (*Vedanta-Sutras*, II. i. 33).
Is it not possible for Him who creates and destroys the universe as if
in play to grant salvation by grace to the greatest sinner? But then it
is just His pleasure, His play, to get somebody through the practice of
spiritual discipline and somebody else without it.

Disciple: Sir, I can't understand this.

Swamiji: And you needn't. Only get your mind to cling to Him as far as
you can. For then only the great magic of this world will break of
itself. But then, you must persevere. You must take off your mind from
lust and lucre, must discriminate always between the real and the unreal
— must settle down into the mood of bodilessness with the brooding
thought that you are not this body, and must always have the realisation
that you are the all-pervading Atman. This persevering practice is
called Purushakâra (self-exertion — as distinguished from grace). By
such self-exertion will come true reliance on Him, and that is the goal
of human achievement.

After a pause Swamiji resumed: Had you not been receiving His grace, why
else would you come here at all? Shri Ramakrishna used to say, "Those
who have had the grace of God cannot but come here. Wherever they might
be, whatever they might be doing, they are sure to be affected by words
or sentiments uttered from here."[4](#fn4) Just take your own case — do
you think it is possible without the grace of God to have the blessed
company of Nag Mahashaya, a man who rose to spiritual perfection through
the strength of divine grace and came to know fully what this grace
really means? "अनेकजन्मसंसिद्धस्ततो याति परां गतिम् — One attains the
highest stage after being perfected by the practice of repeated births"
(Gita, VI. 45). It is only by virtue of great religious merit acquired
through many births that one comes across a great soul like him. All the
characteristics of the highest type of Bhakti, spoken of in the
scriptures, have manifested themselves in Nag Mahashaya. It is only in
him that we actually see fulfilled the widely quoted text, "तृणादपि
सुनीचेन". ("Lowlier than the lowly stalk of grass.") Blessed indeed is
your East Bengal to have been hallowed by the touch of Nag Mahashaya's
feet!

While speaking thus, Swamiji rose to pay a visit to the great poet, Babu
Girish Chandra Ghosh. Swami Yogananda and the disciple followed him.
Reaching Girish Babu's place, Swamiji seated himself and said, "You see,
G. C., the impulse is constantly coming nowadays to my mind to do this
and to do that, to scatter broadcast on earth the message of Shri
Ramakrishna and so on. But I pause again to reflect, lest all this give
rise to another sect in India. So I have to work with a good deal of
caution. Sometimes I think, what if a sect does grow up. But then again
the thought comes! 'No. Shri Ramakrishna never disturbed anybody's own
spiritual outlook; he always looked at the inner sameness.' Often do I
restrain myself with this thought. Now, what do you say?"

Girish Babu: What can I say to this? You are the instrument in his hand.
You have to do just what he would have you do. I don't trouble myself
over the detail. But I see that the power of the Lord is getting things
done by you, I see it clear as daylight.

Swamiji: But I think we do things according to our own will. Yet, that
in misfortunes and adversities, in times of want and poverty, he reveals
himself to us and guides us along the true path — this I have been able
to realise. But alas, I still fail to comprehend in any way the
greatness of his power.

Girish Babu: Yes, he said, "If you understand it to the full, everything
will at once vanish. Who will work then or who will be made to work?"

After this the talk drifted on to America. And Swamiji grew warm on his
subject and went on describing the wonderful wealth of the country, the
virtues and defects of men and women there, their luxury and so on.

1.  [^](#t1)This is not quite correct, for at least two more disciples,
    viz Nityagopal Goswami and Pundit Kaliprasad Chakravarty are known
    to have come from Dacca. — Ed.
2.  [^](#t2)In the sense that a knower of Brahman may declare his
    identity with any being, such as Manu and so forth. Vide the
    Vedanta-Sutras I. i. 30.
3.  [^](#t3)Mathura Nath Biswas, son-in-law of Rani Rasmani, the
    foundress of the temple at Dakshineswar.
4.  [^](#t4)With his egoism perfectly merged in the consciousness of the
    Mother, the use of to word "here" by Shri Ramakrishna would often
    stand for the ordinary reference to self. By "here" is evidently
    meant the centre of the Mother's self-revelation.

</div>
