---
title: VII

---
<div>

[←](vi_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](viii_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## VII

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_10e7.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm))

\[Place: *Calcutta*. Year: *1897*.\]

For some days past, Swamiji has been staying at Balaram Bose's house,
Baghbazar. There will be a total eclipse of the sun today. The disciple
is to cook for Swamiji this morning, and on his presenting himself,
Swamiji said, "Well, the cooking must be in the East Bengal style; and
we must finish our dinner before the eclipse starts."

The inner apartments of the house were all unoccupied now. So the
disciple went inside into the kitchen and started his cooking. Swamiji
also was looking in now and then with a word of encouragement and
sometimes with a joke, as, "Take care, the soup (The Bengali expression
has a peculiar pronunciation in East Bengal which gives the point of the
joke.) must be after the East Bengal fashion."

The cooking had been almost completed, when Swamiji came in after his
bath and sat down for dinner, putting up his own seat and plate. "Do
bring in anything finished, quick," he said, "I can't wait, I'm burning
with hunger!" While eating, Swamiji was pleased with the curry with
bitters and remarked, "Never have I enjoyed such a nice thing! But none
of the things is so hot as your soup." "It's just after the style of the
Burdwan District", said Swamiji tasting the sour preparation. He then
brought his dinner to a close and after washing sat on the bedstead
inside the room. While having his after-dinner smoke, Swamiji remarked
to the disciple, "Whoever cannot cook well cannot become a good Sâdhu;
unless the mind is pure, good tasteful cooking is not possible."

Soon after this, the sound of bells and conch-shells, etc., rose from
all quarters, when Swamiji said, "Now that the eclipse has begun, let me
sleep, and you please massage my feet!" Gradually the eclipse covered
the whole of the sun's disc and all around fell the darkness of dusk.

While there were fifteen or twenty minutes left for the eclipse to pass
off, Swamiji rose from his siesta, and after washing, jocosely said
while taking a smoke, "Well, people say that whatever one does during an
eclipse, one gets that millionfold in future; so I thought that the
Mother, Mahâmâyâ, did not ordain that this body might have good sleep,
and if I could get some sleep during the eclipse, I might have plenty of
it in future. But it all failed, for I slept only for fifteen minutes at
the most."

After this, at the behest of Swamiji some short speeches were made.
There was yet an hour left before dusk. When all had assembled in the
parlour, Swamiji told them to put him any question they liked.

Swami Shuddhananda asked, "What is the real nature of meditation, sir?"

Swamiji: Meditation is the focusing of the mind on some object. If the
mind acquires concentration on one object, it can be so concentrated on
any object whatsoever.

Disciple: Mention is made in the scriptures of two kinds of meditation —
one having some object and the other objectless. What is meant by all
that, and which of the two is the higher one?

Swamiji: First, the practice of meditation has to proceed with some one
object before the mind. Once I used to concentrate my mind on some black
point. Ultimately, during those days, I could not see the point any
more, nor notice that the point was before me at all — the mind used to
be no more — no wave of functioning would rise, as if it were all an
ocean without any breath of air. In that state I used to experience
glimpses of supersensuous truth. So I think, the practice of meditation
even with some trifling external object leads to mental concentration.
But it is true that the mind very easily attains calmness when one
practices meditation with anything on which one's mind is most apt to
settle down. This is the reason why we have in this country so much
worship of the images of gods and goddesses. And what wonderful art
developed from such worship! But no more of that now. The fact, however,
is that the objects of meditation can never be the same in the case of
all men. People have proclaimed and preached to others only those
external objects to which they held on to become perfected in
meditation. Oblivious of the fact, later on, that these objects are aids
to the attainment of perfect mental calmness, men have extolled them
beyond everything else. They have wholly concerned themselves with the
means, getting comparatively unmindful of the end. The real aim is to
make the mind functionless, but this cannot be got at unless one becomes
absorbed in some object.

Disciple: But if the mind becomes completely engrossed and identified
with some object, how can it give us the consciousness of Brahman?

Swamiji: Yes, though the mind at first assumes the form of the object,
yet later on the consciousness of that object vanishes. Then only the
experience of pure "isness" remains.

Disciple: Well, sir, how is it that desires rise even after mental
concentration is acquired?

Swamiji: Those are the outcome of previous Samskâras (deep-rooted
impressions or tendencies). When Buddha was on the point of merging in
Samadhi (superconsciousness), Mâra made his appearance. There was really
no Mara extraneous to the mind; it was only the external reflection of
the mind's previous Samskaras.

Disciple: But one hears of various fearful experiences prior to the
attainment of perfection. Are they all mental projections?

Swamiji: What else but that? The aspiring soul, of course, does not make
out at that time that all these are external manifestations of his own
mind. But all the same, there is nothing outside of it. Even what you
see as this world does not exist outside. It is all a mental projection.
When the mind becomes functionless, it reflects the
Brahman-consciousness. Then the vision of all spheres of existence may
supervene, "यं यं लोकं मनसा संविभाति — Whatsoever sphere one may call up
in mind" (Mundaka, III. i. 10). Whatsoever is resolved on becomes
realised at once. He who, even on attaining this state of unfalsified
self-determination, preserves his watchfulness and is free from the
bondage of desire, verily attains to the knowledge of Brahman. But he
who loses his balance after reaching this state gets the manifold
powers, but falls off from the Supreme goal.

So saying, Swamiji began to repeat "Shiva, Shiva", and then continued:
There is no way, none whatsoever, to the solution of the profound
mystery of this life except through renunciation. Renunciation,
renunciation and renunciation — let this be the one motto of your lives.
"सर्वं वस्तु भयान्वितं भुवि नृणां वैराग्यमेवाभयम् — For men, all things
on earth are infected with fear, Vairâgya (renunciation) alone
constitutes fearlessness" (*Vairâgya-Shatakam*).

</div>
