---
title: VIII

---
<div>

[←](vii_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](ix_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## VIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_05e8.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Calcutta*. Year: 1897, *March or April*.\]

Today the disciple came to meet Swamiji at Baghbazar, but found him
ready for a visiting engagement. "Well, come along with me", were the
words with which Swamiji accosted him as he went downstairs, and the
disciple followed. They then put themselves into a hired cab which
proceeded southwards.

Disciple: Sir, where are you going to visit, please?

Swamiji: Well, come with me and you will see.

Thus keeping back the destination from the disciple, Swamiji opened the
following conversation as the carriage reached the Beadon Street: One
does not find any real endeavour in your country to get the women
educated. You, the men are educating yourselves to develop your manhood,
but what are you doing to educate and advance those who share all your
happiness and misery, who lay down their lives to serve you in your
homes?

Disciple: Why, sir, just see how many schools and colleges hare sprung
up nowadays for our women, and how many of them are getting degrees of
B.A. and M.A.

Swamiji: But all that is in the Western style. How many schools have
been started on your own national lines, in the spirit of your own
religious ordinances? But alas, such a system does not obtain even among
the men of your country, what to speak of women! It is seen from the
official statistics that only three or four per cent of the people in
India are educated, and not even one per cent of the women.

Otherwise, how could the country come to such a fallen condition? How
can there be any progress of the country without the spread of
education, the dawning of knowledge? Even no real effort or exertion in
the cause is visible among the few in your country who are the promise
of the future, you who have received the blessings of education. But
know for certain that absolutely nothing can be done to improve the
state of things, unless there is spread of education first among the
women and the masses. And so I have it in my mind to train up some
Brahmachârins and Brahmachârinis, the former of whom will eventually
take the vow of Sannyâsa and try to carry the light of education among
the masses, from village to village, throughout the country, while the
latter will do the same among women. But the whole work must be done in
the style of our own country. Just as centres have to be started for
men, so also centres have to be started for teaching women.
Brahmacharinis of education and character should take up the task of
teaching at these different centres. History and the Purânas,
housekeeping and the arts, the duties of home-life and principles that
make for the development of an ideal character have to be taught with
the help of modern science, and the women students must be trained up in
ethical and spiritual life. We must see to their growing up as ideal
matrons of home in time. The children of such mothers will make further
progress in the virtues that distinguish the mothers. It is only in the
homes of educated and pious mothers that great men are born. And you
have reduced your women to something like manufacturing machines; alas,
for heaven's sake, is this the outcome of your education? The uplift of
the women, the awakening of the masses must come first, and then only
can any real good come about for the country, for India.

Near Chorebagan Swamiji gave it out to the disciple that the foundress
of the Mahâkali Pâthashâlâ, the Tapasvini Mâtâji (ascetic mother), had
invited him to visit her institution. When our carriage stopped at its
destination, three or four gentlemen greeted Swamiji and showed him up
to the first door. There the Tapasvini mother received him standing.
Presently she escorted him into one of the classes, where all the
maidens stood up in greeting. At a word from Mataji all of them
commenced reciting the Sanskrit meditation of Lord Shiva with proper
intonation. Then they demonstrated at the instance of the Mother how
they were taught the ceremonies of worship in their school. After
watching all this with much delight and interest, Swamiji proceeded to
visit the other classes. After this, Mataji sent for some particular
girl and asked her to explain before Swamiji the first verse of the
third canto of Kalidasa's *Raghavamsham*, which she did in Sanskrit.
Swamiji expressed his great appreciation of the measure of success
Mataji had attained by her perseverance and application in the cause of
diffusing education among women. In reply, she said with much humility,
"In my service to my students, I look upon them as the Divine Mother;
well, in starting the school I have neither fame nor any other object in
view."

Being asked by Mataji, Swamiji recorded his opinion about the
institution in the Visitors' Book, the last line of which was: "The
movement is in the right direction."

After saluting Mataji, Swamiji went back to his carriage, which then
proceeded towards Baghbazar, while the following conversation took place
between Swamiji and the disciple.

Swamiji: How far is the birthplace of this venerable lady! She has
renounced everything of her worldly life, and yet how diligent in the
service of humanity! Had she not been a woman, could she ever have
undertaken the teaching of women in the way she is doing? What I saw
here was all good, but that some male householders should be pitchforked
as teachers is a thing I cannot approve of. The duty of teaching in the
school ought to devolve in every respect on educated widows and
Brahmacharinis. It is good to avoid in this country any association of
men with women's schools.

Disciple: But, sir, how would you get now in thin country learned and
virtuous women like Gârgi, Khanâ or Lilâvati?

Swamiji: Do you think women of the type don't exist now in the country?
Still on this sacred soil of India, this land of Sitâ and Sâvitri, among
women may be found such character, such spirit of service, such
affection, compassion, contentment, and reverence, as I could not find
anywhere else in the world! In the West, the women did not very often
seem to me to be women at all, they appeared to be quite the replicas of
men! Driving vehicles, drudging in offices, attending schools, doing
professional duties! In India alone the sight of feminine modesty and
reserve soothes the eye! With such materials of great promise, you could
not, alas, work out their uplift! You did not try to infuse the light of
knowledge into them. If they get the right sort of education, they may
well turn out to be the ideal women in the world.

Disciple: Do you think, sir, the same consummation would be reached
through the way Mataji is educating her students? These students would
soon grow up and get married and would presently shade into the likeness
of all other women of the common run. So I think, if these girls might
be made to adopt Brahmacharya, then only could they devote their lives
to the cause of the country's progress and attain to the high ideals
preached in our sacred books.

Swamiji: Yes, everything will come about in time. Such educated men are
not yet born in this country, who can keep their girls unmarried without
fear of social punishment. Just see how before the girls exceed the age
of twelve or thirteen, people hasten to give them away in marriage out
of this fear of their social equals. Only the other day, when the Age of
Consent Bill was being passed, the leaders of society massed together
millions of men to send up the cry "We don't want the Bill." Had this
been in any other country, far from getting up meetings to send forth a
cry like that, people would have hidden their heads under their roofs in
shame, that such a calumny could yet stain their society.

Disciple: But, sir, I don't think the ancient law-givers supported this
custom of early marriage without any rhyme or reason. There must have
been some secret meaning in this attitude of theirs.

Swamiji: Well, what might have been this secret meaning, please?

Disciple: Take it, for instance, in the first place that if the girls
are married at an early age, they may come over to their husbands' home
to learn the particular ways and usages of the family from the early
years of their life. They may acquire adequate skill in the duties of
the household under the guidance of their parents-in-law. In the homes
of their own parents, on the other hand, there is the likelihood of
grown-up daughters going astray. But married early, they have no chance
of thus going wrong, and over and above this, such feminine virtues as
modesty, reserve, fortitude, and diligence are apt to develop in them.

Swamiji: In favour of the other side of the question, again, it may be
argued that early marriage leads to premature child-bearing, which
accounts for most of our women dying early; their progeny also, being of
low vitality, go to swell the ranks of our country's beggars! For if the
physique of the parents be not strong and healthy, how can strong and
healthy children be born at all? Married a little later and bred in
culture, our mothers will give birth to children who would be able to
achieve the real good of the country. The reason why you have so many
widows in every home lies here, in this custom of early marriage. If the
number of early marriages declines, that of widows is bound to follow
suit.

Disciple: But, sir, it seems to me, if our women are married late in
life, they are apt to be less mindful of their household duties. I have
heard that the mothers-in-law in Calcutta very often do all the cooking,
while the educated daughters-in-law sit idle with red paint round their
feet! But in our East Bengal such a thing is never allowed to take
place.

Swamiji: But everywhere under the sun you find the same blending of the
good and the bad. In my opinion society in every country shapes itself
out of its own initiative. So we need not trouble our heads prematurely
about such reforms as the abolition of early marriage, the remarriage of
widows, and so on. Our part of the duty lies in imparting true education
to all men and women in society. As an outcome of that education, they
will of themselves be able to know what is good for them and what is
bad, and will spontaneously eschew the latter. It will not be then
necessary to pull down or set up anything in society by coercion.

Disciple: What sort of education, do you think, is suited to our women?

Swamiji: Religion, arts, science, housekeeping, cooking, sewing, hygiene
— the simple essential points in these subjects ought to be taught to
our women. It is not good to let them touch novels and fiction. The
Mahakali Pathashala is to a great extent moving in the right direction.
But only teaching rites of worship won't do; their education must be an
eye-opener in all matters. Ideal characters must always be presented
before the view of the girls to imbue them with a devotion to lofty
principles of selflessness. The noble examples of Sita, Savitri,
Damavanti, Lilavati, Khana, and Mirâ should be brought home to their
minds and they should be inspired to mould their own lives in the light
of these.

Our cab now reached the house of the late Babu Balaram Bose at
Baghbazar. Swamiji alighted from it and went upstairs. There he
recounted the whole of his experience at the Mahakali Pathashala to
those who had assembled there to see him.

Then while discussing what the members of the newly formed Ramakrishna
Mission should do, Swamiji proceeded to establish by various arguments
the supreme importance of the "gift of learning" and the "gift of
knowledge". (The allusion here is to the classification of various
gifts, mentioned by Manu.) Turning to the disciple he said, "Educate,
educate, 'नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनाय — Than this there is no other way'."
And referring in banter to the party who do not favour educational
propaganda, he said, "Well, don't go into the party of Prahlâdas!" Asked
as to the meaning of the expression he replied, "Oh, haven't you heard?
Tears rushed out of the eyes of Prahlada at the very sight of the first
letter 'Ka' of the alphabet as it reminded him of Krishna; so how could
any studies be proceeded with? But then the tears in Prahlada's eyes
were tears of love, while your fools affect tears in fright! Many of the
devotees are also like that." All of those present burst out laughing on
hearing this, and Swami Yogananda said to Swamiji, "Well, once you have
the urge within towards anything to be done, you won't have any peace
until you see the utmost done about it. Now what you have a mind to have
done shall be done no doubt."

</div>
