---
title: IX

---
<div>

[←](viii_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](x_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## IX

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_06e9.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Calcutta*. year: *1897*.\]

For the last ten days, the disciple had been studying Sâyana's
commentary on the Rig-Veda with Swamiji, who was staying then at the
house of the late Babu Balaram Bose at Baghbazar. Max Müller's volumes
on the Rig-Veda had been brought from a wealthy friend's private
library. Swamiji was correcting the disciple every now and then and
giving him the true pronunciation or construction as necessary.
Sometimes while explaining the arguments of Sayana to establish the
eternity of the Vedas, Swamiji was praising very highly the
commentator's wonderful ingenuity; sometimes again while arguing out the
deeper significance of the doctrine, he was putting forward a difference
in view and indulging in an innocent squib at Sayana.

While our study had proceeded thus for a while, Swamiji raised the topic
about Max Müller and continued thus: Well, do you know, my impression is
that it is Sayana who is born again as Max Müller to revive his own
commentary on the Vedas? I have had this notion for long. It became
confirmed in my mind, it seems, after I had seen Max Müller. Even here
in this country, you don't find a scholar so persevering, and so firmly
grounded in the Vedas and the Vedanta. Over and above this, what a deep,
unfathomable respect for Shri Ramakrishna! Do you know, he believes in
his Divine Incarnation! And what great hospitality towards me when I was
his guest! Seeing the old man and his lady, it seemed to me that they
were living their home-life like another Vasishtha and Arundhati! At the
time of parting with me, tears came into the eyes of the old man.

Disciple: But, sir, if Sayana himself became Max Müller, then why was he
born as a Mlechchha instead of being born in the sacred land of India?

Swamiji: The feeling and the distinction that I am an Aryan and the
other is a Mlechchha come from ignorance. But what are Varnâshrama and
caste divisions to one who is the commentator of the Vedas, the shining
embodiment of knowledge? To him they are wholly meaningless, and he can
assume human birth wherever he likes for doing good to mankind.
Specially, if he did not choose to be born in a land which excelled both
in learning and wealth, where would he secure the large expenses for
publishing such stupendous volumes? Didn't you hear that the East India
Company paid nine lakhs of rupees in cash to have the Rig-Veda
published? Even this money was not enough. Hundreds of Vedic Pundits had
to be employed in this country on monthly stipends. Has anybody seen in
this age, here in this country, such profound yearning for knowledge,
such prodigious investment of money for the sake of light and learning?
Max Müller himself has written it in his preface, that for twenty-five
years he prepared only the manuscripts. Then the printing took another
twenty years! It is not possible for an ordinary man to drudge for
fortyfive years of his life with one publication. Just think of it! Is
it an idle fancy of mine to say he is Sayana himself?

After this talk about Max Müller the leading of the Vedas was resumed.
Now Swamiji began variously to support the view of Sayana that creation
proceeded out of the Vedas. He said: Veda means the sum total of eternal
truths; the Vedic Rishis experienced those truths; they can be
experienced only by seers of the supersensuous and not by common men
like us. That is why in the Vedas the term Rishi means "the seer of the
truth of the Mantras", and not any Brahmin with the holy thread hanging
down the neck. The division of society into castes came about later on.
Veda is of the nature of Shabda or of idea. It is but the sum total of
ideas. Shabda, according to the old Vedic meaning of the term, is the
subtle idea, which reveals itself by taking the gross form later on. So
owing to the dissolution of the creation the subtle seeds of the future
creation become involved in the Veda. Accordingly, in the Puranas you
find that during the first Divine Incarnation, the Minâvatâra, the Veda
is first made manifest. The Vedas having been first revealed in this
Incarnation, the other creative manifestations followed. Or in other
words, all the created objects began to take concrete shape out of the
Shabdas or ideas in the Veda. For in Shabda or idea, all gross objects
have their subtle forms. Creation had proceeded in the same way in all
previous cycles or Kalpas. This you find in the Sandhyâ Mantra of the
Vedas: "सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ धाता यथापूर्वमकल्पयत् पृथिवीं दिवं चान्तरीक्षमथो
स्वः — The Creator projected the sun, the moon, the earth, the
atmosphere, the heaven, and the upper spheres in the same manner and
process as in previous cycles." Do you understand?

Disciple: But, sir, how in the absence of an actual concrete object can
the Shabda or idea be applied and for what? And how can the names too be
given at all?

Swamiji: Yes. that is what on first thought seems to be the difficulty.
But just think of this. Supposing this jug breaks into pieces; does the
idea of a jug become null and void? No. Because, the jug is the gross
effect, while the idea, "jug", is the subtle state or the Shabda-state
of the jug. In the same way, the Shabda-state of every object is its
subtle state, and the things we see, hear, touch, or perceive in any
manner are the gross manifestations of entities in the subtle or
Shabda-state. Just as we may speak of the effect and its cause. Even
when the whole creation is annihilated, the Shabda, as the consciousness
of the universe or the subtle reality of all concrete things, exists in
Brahman as the cause. At the point of creative manifestation, this sum
total of causal entities vibrates into activity, as it were, and as
being the sonant, material substance of it all, the eternal, primal
sound of "Om" continues to come out of itself. And then from the causal
totality comes out first the subtle image or Shabda-form of each
particular thing and then its gross manifestation. Now that causal
Shabda, or word-consciousness, is Brahman, and it is the Veda. This is
the purport of Sayana. Do you now understand?

Disciple: No, sir, I can't clearly comprehend it.

Swamiji: Well, you understand, I suppose, that even if all the jugs in
the universe were to be destroyed, the idea or Shabda, "jug", would
still exist. So if the universe be destroyed — I mean if all the things
making up the universe be smashed to atoms — why should not the ideas or
Shabdas representing all of them in consciousness, be still existing;
And why cannot a second creation be supposed to come out of them in
time?

Disciple: But, sir, if one cries out "jug", "jug", that does not cause
any jug to be produced!

Swamiji: No, nothing is produced if you or I cry out like that; but a
jug must be revealed if the idea of it rises in Brahman which is perfect
in Its creative determinations. When we see even those established in
the practice of religion (Sâdhakas) bring about by will-power things
otherwise impossible to happen, what to speak of Brahman with perfect
creativeness of will? At the point of creation Brahman becomes manifest
as Shabda (Idea), and then assumes the form of "Nâda" or "Om". At the
next stage, the particular Shabdas or ideas, that variously existed in
former cycles, such as Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, cow, man, etc., begin to come
out of the "Om". As soon as these ideas appear in Brahman endowed with
perfect will, the corresponding concrete things also appear, and
gradually the diversified universe becomes manifest. Do you now
understand how Shabda is the source of creation?

Disciple: Yes, I just form some idea of it, but there is no clear
comprehension in the mind.

Swamiji: Well, clear comprehension, inward realisation, is no small
matter, my son. When the mind proceeds towards self-absorption in
Brahman, it passes through all these stages one by one to reach the
absolute (Nirvikalpa) state at last. In the process of entering into
Samadhi, first the universe appears as one mass of ideas; then the whole
thing loses itself in a profound "Om". Then even that melts away, even
that seems to be between being and non-being. That is the experience of
the eternal Nada. And then the mind becomes lost in the Reality of
Brahman, and then it is done! All is peace!

The disciple sat mute, thinking that none could express and explain it
in the way Swamiji was doing, unless the whole thing were a matter of
one's own experience!

Swamiji then resumed the subject: Great men like Avatâras, in coming
back from Samadhi to the realm of "I" and "mine", first experience the
unmanifest Nada, which by degrees grows distinct and appears as Om, and
then from Omkâra, the subtle form of the universe as a mass of ideas
becomes experienced, and last, the material universe comes into
perception. But ordinary Sadhakas somehow reach beyond Nada through
immense practice, and when once they attain to the direct realisation of
Brahman, they cannot again come back to the lower plane of material
perception. They melt away in Brahman, "क्षीरे नीरवत् — Like water in
milk".

When all this talk on the theory of creation was going on, the great
dramatist, Babu Girish Chandra Ghosh, appeared on the scene. Swamiji
gave him his courteous greetings and continued his lessons to the
disciple.

Shabdas are again divided into two classes, the Vedic Shabdas and those
in common human use. I found this position in the Nyâya book called
*Shabdashaktiprakâshikâ*. There the arguments no doubt indicate great
power of thought; but, oh, the terminology confounds the brain!

Now turning to Girish Babu Swamiji said: What do you say, G. C.? Well,
you do not care to study all this, you pass your days with your
adoration of this and that god, eh?

Girish Babu: What shall I study, brother? I have neither time nor
understanding enough to pry into all that. But this time, with Shri
Ramakrishna's grace, I shall pass by with greetings to your Vedas and
Vedanta, and take one leap to the far beyond! He gets you through all
these studies, because he wants to get many a thing done by you. But we
have no need of them. Saying this, Girish Babu again and again touched
the big Rig-Veda volumes with his head, uttering, "All Victory to
Ramakrishna in the form of Veda!"

Swamiji was now in a sort of deep reverie, when Girish Babu suddenly
called out to him and said: Well, hear me, please. A good deal of study
you have made in the Vedas and Vedanta, but say, did you find anywhere
in them any way for us out of all these profound miseries in the
country, all these wailings of grief, all this starvation, all these
crimes of adultery, and the many horrible sins?

Saying this he painted over and over again the horrid pictures of
society. Swamiji remained perfectly quiet and speechless, while at the
thought of the sorrows and miseries of his fellow men, tears began to
flow out of his eyes, and seemingly to hide his feelings from us, he
rose and left the room.

Meanwhile, addressing the disciple, Girish Babu said: Did you see,
Bângâl? What a great loving heart! I don't honour your Swamiji simply
for being a Pundit versed in the Vedas; but I honour him for that great
heart of his which just made him retire weeping at the sorrows of his
fellow beings.

The disciple and Girish Babu then went on conversing with each other,
the latter proving that knowledge and love were ultimately the same.

In the meantime, Swamiji returned and asked the disciple, "Well, what
was all this talk going on between you?" The disciple said, "Sir, we are
talking about the Vedas, and the wonder of it is that our Girish Babu
has not studied these books but has grasped the ultimate truths with
clean precision!"

Swamiji: All truths reveal themselves to him who has got real devotion
to the Guru; he has hardly any need of studies. But such devotion and
faith are very rare in this world. He who possesses those in the measure
of our friend here need not study the Shastras. But he who rushes
forward to imitate him will only bring about his own ruin. Always follow
his advice, but never attempt to imitate his ways.

Disciple: Yes, sir,

Swamiji: No saying ditto merely! Do grasp clearly the words I say. Don't
nod assent like a fool to everything said. Don't put implicit faith,
even if *I* declare something. First clearly grasp and then accept. Shri
Ramakrishna always used to insist on my accepting every word of his only
after clear comprehension of it. Walk on your path, only with what sound
principle, clear reasoning, and scripture all declare as true. Thus by
constant reflection, the intellect will become dear, and then only can
Brahman be reflected therein. Do you understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir, I do. But the brain gets puzzled with the different
views of different men. This very moment I was being told by Girish
Babu, "What will you do with all this studying?" And then you come and
say, "Reflect on what you hear and read about." So what exactly am I to
do?

Swamiji: Both what he and I have advised you are true. The only
difference is that the advice of both has been given from different
standpoints. There is a stage of spiritual life where all reasonings are
hushed; "मूकास्वादनवत् — Like some delicious taste enjoyed by the dumb".
And there is another mode of spiritual life in which one has to realise
the Truth through the pursuit of scriptural learning, through studying
and teaching. You have to proceed through studies and reflection, that
is *your* way to realisation. Do you see?

Receiving such a mandate from Swamiji, the disciple in his folly took it
to imply Girish Babu's discomfiture, and so turning towards him said:
"Do you hear, sir? Swamiji's advice to me plainly is just to study and
reflect on the Vedas and Vedanta."

Girish Babu: Well, *you* go on doing so; with Swamiji's blessings, you
will, indeed, succeed in that way.

Swami Sadananda arrived there at that moment, and seeing him, Swamiji at
once said, "Do you know, my heart is sorely troubled by the picture of
our country's miseries G. C. was depicting just now; well, can you do
anything for our country?"

Sadananda: Mahârâj, let the mandate once go forth; your slave is ready.

Swamiji: First, on a pretty small scale, start a relief centre, where
the poor and the distressed may obtain relief and the diseased may be
nursed. Helpless people having none to look after them will be relieved
and served there, irrespective of creed or colour, do you see?

Sadananda: Just as you command, sir.

Swamiji: There is no greater Dharma than this service of living beings.
If this Dharma can be practiced in the real spirit, then "मुक्तिः
करफलायते; Liberation comes as a fruit on the very palm of one's hand".

Addressing Girish Babu now, Swamiji said, "Do you know, Girish Babu, it
occurs to me that even if a thousand births have to be taken in order to
relieve the sorrows of the world, surely I will take them. If by my
doing that, even a single soul may have a little bit of his grief
relieved, why, I will do it. Well, what avails it all to have only one's
own liberation? All men should be taken along with oneself on that way.
Can you say why a feeling like this comes up foremost in my mind?

Girish Babu: Ah, otherwise why should Shri Ramakrishna declare you to be
greater than all others in spiritual competence?

Saying this, Girish Babu took leave of us all to go elsewhere on some
business.

</div>
