---
title: XI

---
<div>

[←](x_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](xii_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

## XI

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_11.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *The house of the late Babu Navagopal Ghosh, Ramakrishnapur,
Howrah, 6th February, 1898*.\]

Today the festival of installing the image of Shri Ramakrishna was to
come off at the residence of Babu Navagopal Ghosh of Ramakrishnapur,
Howrah. The Sannyasins of the Math and the householder devotees of Shri
Ramakrishna had all been invited there.

Swamiji with his party reached the bathing ghat at Ramakrishnapur. He
was dressed in the simplest garb of ochre with turban on his head and
was barefooted On both sides of the road were standing multitudes of
people to see him. Swamiji commenced singing the famous Nativity Hymn on
Shri Ramakrishna — "Who art Thou laid on the lap of a poor Brahmin
mother", etc., and headed a procession, himself playing on the Khol. (A
kind of Indian drum elongated and narrows at both ends.) All the
devotees assembled there followed, joining in the; chorus.

Shortly after the procession reached its destination, Swamiji went
upstairs to see the chapel. The chapel was floored with marble. In the
centre was the throne and upon it was the porcelain image of Shri
Ramakrishna. The arrangement of materials was perfect and Swamiji was
much pleased to see this.

The wife of Navagopal Babu prostrated herself before Swamiji with the
other female members of the house and then took to fanning him. Hearing
Swamiji speaking highly of every arrangement, she addressed him and
said, "What have we got to entitle us to the privilege of worshipping
Thâkur (the Master, Lord)? — A poor home and poor means! Do bless us
please by installing him here out of your own kindness!

In reply to this, Swamiji jocosely said, "Your Thakur never had in his
fourteen generations such a marble floored house to live in! He had his
birth in that rural thatched cottage and lived his days on indifferent
means. And if he does not live here so excellently served, where else
should he live?" Swamiji's words made everybody laugh out.

Now, with his body rubbed with ashes and gracing the seat of the priest,
Swamiji himself conducted the worship, with Swami Prakashananda to
assist him. After the worship was over, Swamiji while still in the
worship-room composed extempore this Mantra for prostration before
Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna:

"स्थापकाय च धर्मस्य सर्वधर्मस्वरूपिणे  
अवतारवरिष्ठाय रामकृष्णाय ते नमः॥"

— "I bow down to Ramakrishna, who established *the* religion, embodying
in himself the reality of all religions and being thus the foremost of
divine Incarnations."

All prostrated before Shri Ramakrishna with this Mantra. In the evening
Swamiji returned to Baghbazar.

</div>
