---
title: XII

---
<div>

[←](xi_sharat_chakravarty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](../../volume_7/inspired_talks/01_wednesday_june_19.htm)

  

## XII

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_14e12.pdf)* )

(From the Diary of a Disciple)

(The disciple is Sharatchandra Chakravarty, who published his records in
a Bengali book, *Swami-Shishya-Samvâda*, in two parts. The present
series of "Conversations and Dialogues" is a revised translation from
this book. Five dialogues of this series have already appeared in the
*Complete Works*, [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/conversations_and_dialogues/xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)
)

\[Place: *Balaram Babu's residence, Calcutta*. Year: *1898*.\]

Swamiji had been staying during the last two days at Balaram Babu's
residence at Baghbazar. He was taking a short stroll on the roof of the
house, and the disciple with four or five others was in attendance.
While walking to and fro, Swamiji took up the story of Guru Govind Singh
and with his great eloquence touched upon the various points in his life
— how the revival of the Sikh sect was brought about by his great
renunciation, austerities, fortitude, and life-consecrating labours —
how by his initiation he re-Hinduised Mohammedan converts and took them
back into the Sikh community — and how on the banks of the Narmada he
brought his wonderful life to a close. Speaking of the great power that
used to be infused in those days into the initiates of Guru Govind,
Swamiji recited a popular Dohâ (couplet) of the Sikhs:

"सवा लाख पर एक चढ़ाऊँ।  
जब गुरुगोविन्द नाम सुनाऊँ॥"

The meaning is: "When Guru Govind gives the Name, i.e. the initiation, a
single man becomes strong enough to triumph over a lakh and a quarter of
his foes." Each disciple, deriving from his inspiration a real spiritual
devotion, had his soul filled with such wonderful heroism! While holding
forth thus on the glories of religion, Swamiji's eyes dilating with
enthusiasm seemed to be emitting fire, and his hearers, dumb-stricken
and looking at his face, kept watching the wonderful sight.

After a while the disciple said: "Sir, it was very remarkable that Guru
Govind could unite both Hindus and Mussulmans within the fold of his
religion and lead them both towards the same end. In Indian history, no
other example of this can be found."

Swamiji: Men can never be united unless there is a bond of common
interest. You can never unite people merely by getting up meetings,
societies, and lectures if their interests be not one and the same. Guru
Govind made it understood everywhere that the men of his age, be they
Hindus or Mussulmans, were living under a regime of profound injustice
and oppression. He did not create any common interest, he only pointed
it out to the masses. And so both Hindus and Mussulmans followed him. He
was a great worshipper of Shakti. Yet, in Indian history, such an
example is indeed very rare.

Finding then that it was getting late into the night, Swamiji came down
with others into the parlour on the first floor, where the following
conversation on the subject of miracles took place.

Swamiji said, "It is possible to acquire miraculous powers by some
little degree of mental concentration", and turning to the disciple he
asked, "Well, should you like to learn thought-reading? I can teach that
to you in four or five days."

Disciple: Of what avail will it be to me, sir?

Swamiji: Why, you will be able to know others' minds.

Disciple: Will that help my attainment of the knowledge of Brahman?

Swamiji: Not a bit.

Disciple: Then I have no need to learn that science. But, sir, I would
very much like to hear about what you have yourself seen of the
manifestation of such psychic powers.

Swamiji: Once when travelling in the Himalayas I had to take up my abode
for a night in a village of the hill-people. Hearing the beating of
drums in the village some time after nightfall, I came to know upon
inquiring of my host that one of the villagers had been possessed by a
Devatâ or good spirit. To meet his importunate wishes and to satisfy my
own curiosity, we went out to see what the matter really was. Reaching
the spot, I found a great concourse of people. A tall man with long,
bushy hair was pointed out to me, and I was told that person had got the
Devata on him. I noticed an axe being heated in fire close by the man;
and after a while, I found the red-hot thing being seized and applied to
parts of his body and also to his hair! But wonder of wonders, no part
of his body or hair thus branded with the red-hot axe was found to be
burnt, and there was no expression of any pain in his face! I stood mute
with surprise. The headman of the village, meanwhile, came up to me and
said, "Mahârâj, please exorcise this man out of your mercy." I felt
myself in a nice fix, but moved to do something, I had to go near the
possessed man. Once there, I felt a strong impulse to examine the axe
rather closely, but the instant I touched it, I burnt my fingers,
although the thing had been cooled down to blackness. The smarting made
me restless and all my theories about the axe phenomenon were spirited
away from my mind! However, smarting with the burn, I placed my hand on
the head of the man and repeated for a short while the Japa. It was a
matter of surprise to find that the man came round in ten or twelve
minutes. Then oh, the gushing reverence the villagers showed to me! I
was taken to be some wonderful man! But, all the same, I couldn't make
any head or tail of the whole business. So without a word one way or the
other, I returned with my host to his hut. It was about midnight, and I
went to bed. But what with the smarting burn in the hand and the
impenetrable puzzle of the whole affair, I couldn't have any sleep that
night. Thinking of the burning axe failing to harm living human flesh,
it occurred again and again to my mind, "There are more things in heaven
and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy."

Disciple: But, could you later on ever explain the mystery, sir?

Swamiji: No. The event came back to me in passing just now, and so I
related it to you.

He then resumed: But Shri Ramakrishna used to disparage these
supernatural powers; his teaching was that one cannot attain to the
supreme truth if the mind is diverted to the manifestation of these
powers. The layman mind, however, is so weak that, not to speak of
householders, even ninety per cent of the Sâdhus happen to be votaries
of these powers. In the West, men are lost in wonderment if they come
across such miracles. It is only because Shri Ramakrishna has mercifully
made us understand the evil of these powers as being hindrances to real
spirituality that we are able to take them at their proper value.
Haven't you noticed how for that reason the children of Shri Ramakrishna
pay no heed to them?

Swami Yogananda said to Swamiji at this moment, "Well, why don't you
narrate to our Bângâl (Lit. A man from East Bengal, i.e. the disciple.)
that incident of yours in Madras when you met the famous ghost-tamer?"

At the earnest entreaty of the disciple Swamiji was persuaded to give
the following account of his experience:

Once while I was putting up at Manmatha Babu's (Babu Manmatha Nath
Bhattacharya, M.A., late Accountant General, Madras.) place, I dreamt
one night that my mother had died. My mind became much distracted. Not
to speak of corresponding with anybody at home, I used to send no
letters in those days even to our Math. The dream being disclosed to
Manmatha, he sent a wire to Calcutta to ascertain facts about the
matter. For the dream had made my mind uneasy on the one hand, and on
the other, our Madras friends, with all arrangements ready, were
insisting on my departing for America immediately, and I felt rather
unwilling to leave before getting any news of my mother. So Manmatha who
discerned this state of my mind suggested our repairing to a man living
some way off from town, who having acquired mystic powers over spirits
could tell fortunes and read the past and the future of a man's life. So
at Manmatha's request and to get rid of my mental suspense, I agreed to
go to this man. Covering the distance partly by railway and partly on
foot, we four of us — Manmatha, Alasinga, myself, and another — managed
to reach the place, and what met our eyes there was a man with a
ghoulish, haggard, soot-black appearance, sitting close to a cremation
ground. His attendants used some jargon of South Indian dialect to
explain to us that this was the man with perfect power over the ghosts.
At first the man took absolutely no notice of us; and then, when we were
about to retire from the place, he made a request for us to wait. Our
Alasinga was acting as the interpreter, and he explained the requests to
us. Next, the man commenced drawing some figures with a pencil, and
presently I found him getting perfectly still in mental concentration.
Then he began to give out my name, my genealogy, the history of my long
line of forefathers and said that Shri Ramakrishna was keeping close to
me all through my wanderings, intimating also to me good news about my
mother. He also foretold that I would have to go very soon to far-off
lands for preaching religion. Getting good news thus about my mother, we
all travelled back to town, and after arrival received by wire from
Calcutta the assurance of mother's doing well.

Turning to Swami Yogananda, Swamiji remarked, "Everything that the man
had foretold came to be fulfilled to the letter, call it some fortuitous
concurrence or anything you will."

Swami Yogananda said in reply, "It was because you would not believe all
this before that this experience was necessary for you."

Swamiji: Well, I am not a fool to believe anything and everything
without direct proof. And coming into this realm of Mahâmâya, oh, the
many magic mysteries I have come across alongside this bigger magic
conjuration of a universe! Maya, it is all Maya! Goodness! What rubbish
we have been talking so long this day! By thinking constantly of ghosts,
men become ghosts themselves, while whoever repeats day and night,
knowingly or unknowingly, "I am the eternal, pure, free, self-illumined
Atman", verily becomes the knower of Brahman.

Saying this, Swamiji affectionately turned to the disciple and said,
"Don't allow all that worthless nonsense to occupy your mind. Always
discriminate between the real and the unreal, and devote yourself heart
and soul to the attempt to realise the Atman. There is nothing higher
than this knowledge of the Atman; all else is Maya, mere jugglery. The
Atman is the one unchangeable Truth. This I have come to understand, and
that is why I try to bring it home to you all. "एकमेवाद्वयं ब्रह्म",
"नेह नानास्ति किञ्चन्" — "One Brahman there is without a second", "There
is nothing manifold in existence" (Brihadâranyaka, IV. iv. 19)

All this conversation continued up to eleven o'clock at highs. After
that, his meal being finished, Swamiji retired for rest. The disciple
bowed down at his feet to bid him good-bye. Swamiji asked, "Are you not
coming tomorrow?"

Disciple: Yes, sir, I am coming, to be sure. The mind longs so much to
meet you at least once before the day is out.

Swamiji: So good night now, it is getting very late.

 

</div>
