+++
title = "Of the past"

+++
It was relatively late when we were sort of startled by R’s call. She
said we had a visitor from really ancient times- Igul. One forgets most
males, at such a distance in time, but then some women are much harder
to forget (the male brain seems to be wired so). I must be careful of
what I say here for yudhiShThira cursed women that they will not keep
their mouth shut. Anyhow I do not want to make it private as we do want
to our pakSha and the jAnashruteya pakShI-s to see it. Anyhow, we say so
little of the rest. We had great fun picking on R for calling us “native
Indians”, a term she can never give up. Our collective memories somehow
wandered to that day when there was a certain competition in school
where R was defending the varNa system. Igul was supposed to be her
partner but she was clueless of everything and after all the debate was
supposed to be about the evils of varNa. But now as all of us grow old
and are no longer the youths we were the pratikriya changes one’s
perspectives. Igul we were pleased to note was consciously Hindu than
ever before. Igul wondered, why me and R tend to yarn so much about the
past — school and college days as though neither of us ever grew up to
be adults (in some cases even parents). This view of our juvenile freeze
is shared with Igul by strI, but our one other friend yarns like us
endlessly on these days. I realized something really remarkably
paradoxical at that point.  
Igul: School and college were great nice days, a faint nice blur to be
forgotten now.  
strI: Same  
R: They were bad days but should be talked about endlessly.  
Marc: Same  
Me: Same  
amAvasu: same  
The said women diagnosed us as suffering from a disease “juvenile
freezure”…
