+++
title = "Some more observations on the saura mata"

+++
We had earlier compiled incomplete accounts of both the [saura
mata](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/11/21/saura-mata/) and
its offshoots like the worship of
[revanta](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/08/31/the-deva-revanta-mythology-iconography-history-and-ritualism/).

We initially wanted to work on the final part of the incomplete revanta
essay dealing with the specific point of the evolution of shAstA from
revanta and the relationship between their tantric prayogas. Then we
realized we never put together the additional material from the various
purANas on the core saura mata that we originally intended. Since a few
interlocutors had brought up saura issues and the original essay was too
old we decided to put this part separately. This as such is common
knowledge amongst Hindus educated in purANa-s.

***Why did sAMba build sUrya temples?***  
This tale is a bit scandalous and often kept away from narratives (As a
child I recall elders scrupulously avoiding this). As per the varAha
purANa (VhP 117 ) and bhaviShya purANa (bhvP 1.129) sAmba was said to be
a paragon of good looks and attracted women. nArada, arrived at
devakI-putraâ€™s abode and mentioned that some of his many wives were
flirting with his son sAMba. After an enquiry kR^iShNa laid a spell on
sAMba that he get a dreadful skin disease as a result of which the women
would lose interest in him. sAmba invoked sUrya, who cured him of the
disease, and told him that he would find an idol of sUrya for his
worship. sAMba found this idol that was apparently crafted by
vishvakarman from the kalpataru while he was having a bath in
chandrabhAga. sAMba installed it in the forest of mitra at mUlasthAna.

These purANas also mention two other places where sAMba installed saura
temples. One of these is said to be kAlapriya on the south bank of the
yamuna and the other is said to be sutira or muNDIra. The location of
sutira as per tradition is in the eastern coast and is the same as the
site where now the koNArka temple stands (in utkala). 

The site of
muNDIra is generally believed to be the great [Modhera
temple](http://ignca.nic.in/nl002206.htm) in lATa-pradesha. Both muNDIra
and mUlasthAna were ravaged by the Mohammedan vandals on multiple
occassions, but the former survives to date. There is a stand-alone
purANa by the name sAMba purANa that exists in manuscript and
corroborates the tales given the mahApurANas.
