+++
title = "Revisiting the synapsids"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/320/tetraceratops.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/1600/tetraceratops.png)

The evolution of early synapsids was a topic that fascinated me beyond
words during the age of 8-14. It still remains an enormous fascinating
topic though hardly my primary focus. Revisiting is done just for fun to
see some still puzzling problems (at least to me). When we came face to
face with the yakSiNI of ullAsa, we started to talk about this.

The first clear forms make their appears in the Pennsylvanian interlude
just before 310 million years ago with really primitive skull retaining
the basal ammniote pattern. This is most prominently illustrated in the
primitive lower jaw with the 7 bones. The skull retained a foramen at
the junction between the parietals through which the pineal emerged as
the “3rd eye” on the skull roof. The exact function of these rather
large pineals in the early synapsids is a point of interest. Where they
used for vision or entirely as dark/light receptors ? Another question
that emerges is whether we can link the synapsids to any specific
pre-ammniote or early ammniote-clade.

The earliest branching clade of the synapsids is comprised of the so
called herbivorous Caseomorphs like Casea, Cotylorynchus and
Ennatosaurus that group in turn with the small carnivores like Oedaleops
and Eothyris (probably ate insects). This is followed by the Varanopseid
clade with Varanops and Varanodon forming on lineage, while the other
typified by Mesenosaurus. The next clade that is closer to mammals is
the Varanosaurid clade with Varanosaurus and Ophiacodon as prominent
members. These included prominent predators of the time, with large
specimens seen in Ophiacodon. This was followed by the Edaphosaurs,
typified by Edaphosaurus and Lanthasaurus, which were mainly herbivores
and insectivores. This was the first major synapsid clade with large
neural spines. This was followed by the sphenacodontids, which is not a
strongly supported clade. But the crown group excluding the more
primitive Haptodus is strongly supported and the majority of these
genera are typified by large neural spines- Sphenacodon, Dimetrodon and
Secodontosaurus. All of these are large predators with huge incisors and
notable elongated canines. This is the second major lineage of primitive
synapsids in which such enlarged neural spines are observed. These
neural spines appear to have convergently elongated in at least 2
lineages of early synapsids and possible a third suggested by the
primitive fragmentary synapsid of uncertain affinity, Lupeosaurus. Such
enlarged neural spines were seen elsewhere in amniotes only in the
dinosaurs, such as Acrocanthosaurus, Ouranosaurus, Spinosaurus and
Suchomimus. It is not clear if they were functionally equivalent.
However, it must be noted that the large neural spines are lost for good
in therapsid clade of the synapsids. This suggests that at least in the
early synapids the long spines may have had a predominant temperature
regulatory function that became superfluous with the emergence of
mammal-type endothermy in the later synapsids.

The gap between these primitive synapsids and the later therapsids is
pretty pronounced. It is unclear how the transition occurred, but for a
single dramatic form that was described by Laurin and Reisz in 1990-
Tetraceratops. In Tetraceratops we see the beginnings of many of those
remarkable features that characterize mammals. It shows that several
primitive features like the presence of vomerine and large palatine
teeth were present even at the base of the therapsids. One only hopes
that there are several more finds of such early transitional forms in
the future.

There are several questions that have puzzled me regarding the evolution
of post-Tetraceratops therapsids: 1) Was there any reason why the
anomodonts and therocephalians survived the greatest of mass
extinctions- the Permian extinction? 2) How did the use of venom evolve
in therocephalians like Euchambersia? 3) What is the significance for
the apparent repeated evolution of mammal-like features such as a
complete secondary palate, crown-crown precision occlusion of teeth,
phalange organization and simplification of skull roof amongst the
therapsid lineages ?
