+++
title = "The bhR^igu-s, the country and the national epic"

+++
The imprint of the bhR^igu-s is not just all over the literature of
bhAratavarSha but also dotting the very expanses of the land of the
bhArata-s. While being a bhR^igu, I may be biased to see this imprint
more than others, the fact has been observed by many others. The
following is a purely parochial view of history seen through the lens of
my ancestry, yet I believe there are elements of real significance for
the history of the Hindu nation. 

Shrines of the bhArgava hero, the son
of jamadagni are seen throughout the country. The most hallowed and the
oldest to which we trace our antecedents \[real or mythical\] is the
shrine in Kangra with the inscription mentioning the members of the
bhArgava clan involved in the study of the paippalAda shAkha of the
atharva veda. These bhArgavas performed not only the shrauta rites as
but also the peculiarly atharvanic later day rites like the skanda yAga,
the saucer of nirR^iti, the making of the cake called the Aditya maNDaka
to indra and viShNu and yearly invocation of the terrifying kR^ityA of
the bhArgava-s, that first emerged from the fire of bhR^igu and then
from that of chyavAna, also worshiped as the goddess pratya\~NgirA. The
muni visited this primal shrine and offered the sacraments for the
gotra-kR^it-s.

There are other shrines of the great bhArgava and some of jamadagni or
his wife that are considered places of pilgrimage throughout
bhAratavarSha. Foremost of these is the tirtha associated with the five
lakes of blood that were created from the slaughter of the vItahavyas by
the bhArgava hero and his warriors. In the middle of this circle of
lakes, the samanta pa\~nchaka or the rAmahrada, was the sacrificial
altar of rAmo bhArgava, where he performed the final sacrifice to the
great indra and offered tarapaNaM to the dead bhArgavas. On this
sacrifice of rAma to indra, we model all our sacrifices to the devas.
Then one goes to the shrine of reNukA near modern day Nahan. It was in
the sylvan setting the bhArgava-s are supposed to have had their
ancestral hermitages. From there one performs the pilgrimage of the
shrine of jamadagni in Batahar in the cold Kullu valley. His shrine is
even to this date maintained vigorously by the locals. From there one
may move eastwards towards the Ganga and the Ghaghara stream and in
between the two visit the shrine of the founding father bhR^igu himself.

Then one may do the circuit of tIrthas starting with Markundia in
Rajasthan and Kanyakumari where rAma is supposed to have bathed to
purify himself of the sins of slaughtering the vItahavyas. In the middle
of the above journey one arrives at the great temple of the founder
bhR^igu in bhR^igupura in the lATa pradesha. From Kanyakumari one
finally goes to Lakshmipur in the east in Assam to visit the tank where
rAma gave up his axe after the destruction of the kShatriyas. Before
that, there are other shrines in the Chera country that may be visited
if one has the opportunity. On route to the eastern outpost one sees the
temple of the axe in Kunjaragiri in Karnataka. The jamadagni hill is the
next destination near Kolhapur and then one visits the reNukA temple
near Chandreshvari. From there one proceeds to the vidarbha country, to
the shrine famous shrine of the eternal bhArgava mArkaNDeya (Near
Nagpur). This shrine is best visited on shivarAtri, for it was the day
that mArkaNDeya was saved by rudra from the clutches of vaivasvata.
There is one further shrine beyond Lakshmipur in Arunachal Pradesh that
combines rAma, reNukA and jamadagni. Only one member of our clan
successfully reached it, but performed the rites on all our behalf.

Beyond these shrines to the bhR^igu-s themselves, they appear in the
sthala-purANas of various shrines with great regularity. The
sthala-purANa of the most famous temple in the country, venkaTAdrI,
begins with the conflict of bhR^igu with the gods. Next most famous
shrine in the country, that of shAstA on the shabari hill, has ramo
bhArgava as a prominent protagonist. Soothsaying quacks all over the
country claim to forecast the future for all and sundry in the name of
bhR^igu and ushanA kAvya. Thus, the imprint of the bhR^igus is seen
throughout the land of bhAratavarSha.

While being archetypal brahmins, rAmo-bhArgava as well as other great
early bhArgava-s like bhR^igu, kAvya, jamadagni and mArkaNDeya inspire
awe and reverence from all varNa-s and jAti-s across the land. Why are
the bhArgavas a part of this pan-national memory of bhAratavarSha? The
answer to this lies in one of the subtle but important contributions of
bhArgava-s to the making of the Hindu nation. At first sight this
contribution is skipped over and seen more of an aberration by many, but
careful analysis reveals its importance. As we have seen before the
bhArgavas have been a prominent clan with respect to orthopraxy, ritual
and proto-science of the Hindus right from the days of the
[R^igveda](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/05/21/the-bhrigu-s-of-the-rigveda/ "The bhR^igu-s of the R^igveda").

But the most important activity of the bhR^igus was the drastic
remodeling of the national epic the vijaya or the bhArata to generate
what today has come to us as the mahAbhArata. After their conquest of
the kuru realm the pANDu-putras, appear to have sanctioned a new
national epic, that either re-modeled an ancestral epic of the kurus or
created a it entirely new (I suspect there was an element of the
former). This epic remained in the hands of the classical sUta bArds
sung during sacrificial sattras to the people. It was this epic that the
bhArgava-s took over and made into the great national epic. At first
sight the activities of the bhArgava vis-a-vis the creation of the
bhArata are seen as mere action of self-glorification — repeated
insertion of the family tales of the bhArgavas with gross exaggerations
and even egotistic irreverance. At one point the bhArgava-s are
presented as greater than the gods and great kings. In the ShoDasha
rAjika they deface the narrative of the haihaya arjuna and insert their
own hero rAma jAmadagnya. In the bhagavad-gItA they appear as
manifestations of nArAyaNa, as bhhR^igu amongst the maharShis, rAma
amongst the weapon-wielders, and shukra amongst the kavi-s. An element
of such remodelling is seen even in the rAmAyaNa.

However, what is over-looked is that the bhArgava-s were primarily
encyclopaedists who were generators, collectors and systematizers of
Hindu knowledge. They were deep into mythical lore, different lines of
philosophical and proto-scientific speculation, and in more practical
terms nIti and dharma (their role in redacting the manu smR^iti has been
examined in the past). As a result in taking up the vijaya/bhArata and
making it the mahAbhArata they inserted elaborate AkyAnas covering these
topics. These insertions were veritable repositories of Hindu folklore
and myth (e.g. the mArkaNDeya samasyA parvan), Hindu philosophy and
protoscience (the lecture of the hunter to the vaishvamitra, the bhR^igu
smR^iti, the lectures of the kShatriya woman sulabhA), dharma and nIti
(the manusmR^iti and numerous other AkhyAna-s), folk religion (e.g.
narratives of the deities and their worship, such as those of shiva,
viShNu and skanda). In the process they created one encyclopaedia, where
one will find, everything ranging from apparent diameters of bodies of
solar systems, to early hindu Atomic theory, to early Hindu embryology,
to the varNAshrama dharma, duties of a king, statecraft, gifts of
sandals and umbrellas, expansion of new philosophical constructs like
sAMkhya etc… Thus, all brahminical knowledge was being provided in one
place – the first Hindu encyclopaedia, albeit a very peculiar one.

But the consequence of this went way beyond just creating an
encyclopaedia. The resulting text that emerged was actually a relatively
well-crafted one that actually held together despite all the bloating
and digressions. As archetypal brahmins the bhR^igu-s were not going to
give up their private collective ancestral knowledge- the shruti to all
and sundry. Yet, in creating the mahAbhArata they generated a text that
was by definition available to all varNa-s, providing Hindu knowledge
for the education of the public. This was a text that was going to be
heard through wandering storytellers of all types and with it was going
to travel a package of all Hindu knowledge available to that point.
There was a core storyline to capture the audience and spark an
extraordinary interest, and with it came the AkhyAna-s imparting,
dharma, nIti, philosophy and science from brAhmaNa to shUdra. We hence
argue that when the fabric of the mahAbhArata left the loom of the
bhArgava it was a vehicle of education and cultural unification
unparalleled in world history. This epic with the absorbing story-line
as the base spread on unifiying the country and firmly securing everyone
in the Hindu dharma. It is not without reason that buddhaghosha the
nAstIka pAShaNDa, called upon followers of the nAstIka-mata not to
attend narrations of the itihAsa-s lest they fall back to the eternal
dharma.

It was the spread of the national epic that embedded the bhArgava-s in
national memory — in a sense a reward for their work on the creation of
national identity. This is the very parochial dimension of why the Hindu
national identity matters to me.
