+++
title = "Westerners and ourxa0traditions"
date = "2016-12-19"

+++
The question on how to interact with Westerners or even those who are
deeply influenced by post-enlightenment,Christianized ideals is an
important one to deal with. How should they be accepted in
sampradAyas/institutions belonging to sampradAyas?

From my brief survey of some institutions,the institutions that have
heavily accepted westerners have had massive degradations that have
negatively affected the sampradAyas overall. Like ISKCON and the
insiduous Abrahamic strains(like suggesting that jIvas fall from
vaikunTha,despite baladeva’s bhASya on the last sutra of the
brahma-sutras,and too many other things that can’t be spoken about here
now and the other splinter groups. Or Yogananda
[distorting](https://www.reddit.com/r/hinduism/comments/5iu581/issue_yoganandas_distortion_of_the_g%C4%ABt%C4%81/dbc319v/)
the Kriya Yoga paramparA.

From these examples(one may also refer to the mass influx of Jatts
within Sikhi or briefly the post Banda Bahadur period to note that mass
influx of people who haven’t had a perparatory period isn’t really a
helpful thing). On the other hand,we also have to contend that we really
can’t stay shut up in cocoons in the West all the time. Still,we have to
deal with its secularizing tendencies while we are there. We’re losing
both our men to its secularism and our women to both secularism and
marriage to other traditions,which very frequently result in a much
reduced ability to pass down our traditions to our children.

This is a problem,which doesn’t seem to have any easy solution,frankly.
The most successful and orthodox orgs in the West seem to have been
those related with the Saiva Siddhanta Church(not that I am recommending
or pushing for them,anyway). A few disciples of Swami Dayananda maybe
also? Maybe one or two students of Lakshman joo? We don’t even have the
fire of Sridhar Ketkar who married a Jewish wife,bringing her into the
Hindu fold.

Rupa Goswami’s advice : saGga-tyAgo vidUreNa bhagavad-vimukhaira
janaiH/ziSyAdy ananuvandhitvaM mahArambhAdy anudyamauH (One should keep
a distance from those who are averse to the Lord, *avoid accepting too
many disciples*(emphasis mine) and not be overly enthusiastic about
initiating great projects) seems to ring truer than ever.
