+++
title = "Worshipping Sai Baba and otherxa0Siddhas"
date = "2016-12-13"

+++
SV: bANAmati(by the Telugu author Viswanatha Satyanarayana) is a story
of a guy possessed by a piSAca. There is a dead saint who is worshiped
in that region and the guy uses pUja flowers from that place to rid
himself and eventually help the piSAca rid of its piSAci state.

Me: How does this work?Reverence for a dead Siddha?

SV: There are many regions where a local siddha is not cremated but
buried, and around that place some effect is felt in times to come.

Me: Elaborate please.

SV: In those places it is not uncommon to have kids named after those
siddhas, promises and offerings made in their name etc.

SV: In case of infections, infant deaths etc they pray and name after
the siddha for the newborns to survive. Or in cases where kids see “air”
or frequent ill-health. But most of this is very specific to those
regions, because there is no formalized mantra or devata associated with
siddha.

Me: So… Apart from the no formalized procedure,the difference is…?

SV: Besides, devata has several layers whereas dead siddha effect is
limited to lower layers of consciousness.Like a ghost, the siddha effect
will also be possible at the outermost sheath of subtle body (the
vital). Trying to elevate a dead siddha to devata is not going to fly
because there is no drashTa given mantra or procedure for worship. Nor
is such devotion going to melt the mind’s deeper sheaths.

Me: So… In the case of Sai they are trying to retrofit a Dēvatās role?

SV: Yes and and which is why it is not going to work.

S: SV – something similar.
<http://www.srireddammathalli.com/history.html> .I personally have very
close family who have had kids after going to Reddemma Konda. and as is
the norm they are named Reddamma / Reddappa and no particular mantra or
anything for her worship.

SV: Instead of “rAjA rAm candra ki jai” or “har har mahAdev” if you
shout “jai sai nAth” it is not likely to produce anything in a battle or
anything of civilizational purpose.

S: SV – agree,and many sai temples do Rudrakbhishekam to Sai Baba.It is
their wish but i find it odd.

SV: No its not their wish it is dogma and rowdyism – neither is rudra
mantra their property (it belongs to the vedAgama tradition) nor is the
procedure of worship.That anything in the land belongs to my and i have
the freedom to use it the way i want is quite dushTa 🙂

S: I understand. my point was/is that – just because they do
rudrabhishkeam to Sai, it ain’t gonna give any benefit.

SV: Many Sai cultists also know the limitations of the effect, and hence
try to bring into sai temples, along with bhajan, the vedAgama worship
so that the “charge” is maintained. It might – after all regardless of
where you pour it, the mantra has its effect. Which is attributed to
Sai and not the greatness of Rudra mantra. Which is the main problem.

Me: \>and many sai temples do Rudrakbhishekam to Sai Baba

WHAT

SV: Like rAma jaya there is a “sai jaya” mantra that all Sai cultists
chant 🙂

S: Replace Shiva with Sai is how it is there. I am not kidding.4 times
aartis. Abhishekams with Rudram. Dhuni for Vibhuti.Tulasi Brindavan.

Me: Most I’ve been to is Lokenath Baba shrines

SV: “brahma vishNu SivAtmakAya namaH” one among the sai ashTottara
mantra-s if I remember 🙂 Majority of devata mantras are plagiarized and
perverted by inserting sai name.

S: There is a Sai Satyavrata poja,and I’m not kidding.

SV: Plagiarized satya nArayaNa vrata 🙂
