+++
title = "The mahAsAvitrI and the mahAnArAyana upaniShad of the atharvan-s."

+++
The mahAnAryAnopaniShad is a text of considerable importance because it
provides the shruti pramANa for several basic rituals of dvija-s like
the saMdhyopAsana, trisuparNa ritual, shivopAsana using the
pa\~nchabrahma mantra-s, shaucha rites, kamorkArShIt ityAdi japa,
prANAgnihotra, pariseShaNa, the daily vaishvadeva offerings and the
final virajA homa with the teaching of renunciation. It is the only
genuine vedic upaniShad that is peculiar in belonging to two veda-s –
the taittirIya kR^iShNa yajurveda as the final section of the taittirIya
AraNyaka (TA 10) and to the atharvaveda. The family tradition amongst
the atharvan-s holds that it belongs to the lost AraNyaka of the
atharvaveda that was cited by sha\~Nkara bhagavatpAda, the famed
advaitAcharya. This lost AraNyaka was most probably associated with
either the paippalAda shAkha or the original shaunaka as some mantra-s
in it resemble the paippalAda text as against the vulgate which is
commonly known as the shaunaka. The AV recension, while similar to the
TA 10 version, has several differences that help in establishing the
archaic core of this text. I have a handwritten transcript with
intonations, while an intonation-less version, with some errors, was
published by Colonel George Jacob with nArAyaNa’s notes (Jacob was an
interesting guy, who lived not far my childhood home. Though he was an
English warrior who fought our armies during the great struggle, and the
son and son-in-law of accursed Isaist subversionists, he turned
pro-Hindu and started pressing on the English government to preserve the
literary traditions of “the old shAstrI’s – those living encyclopedias
of learning”.).

One important mantra used by the atharvan-s, called the mahAsAvitrI, is
the mantra with the oblations are made during the first upAkarma and in
subsequent recitation during brahmayaj\~na. The source for this mantra
is the atharvavedIya MNU:  
* OM bhUH | OM bhuvaH | OM svaH | OM mahaH | OM janaH | OM tapaH | OM
satyam | OM tat-savitur vareNyaM bhargo devasya dhImahI | dhiyo yo naH
prachodayAt | omApo-jyotI-raso.amR^itaM brahma bhUr-bhuvas-svarom | OM
bhUr-bhuvaH-suvar-mahar-janas-tapaH satyaM madhu kSharanti | tad-brahma
tad-Apa Apo jyotI-raso. amR^itaM brahma bhUr-bhuvas-svaroM| OM
tad-brahma | OM tad-vAyuH | OM tad-AtmA | OM tat-sarvam | OM tat-puroM
namaH ||*

The AV version of the upaniShad also contains the nArAyaNa sUkta which
gives the text its name. The AV form of this chant clarifies a few
otherwise minor points that are constant topics of debate amongst south
Indian brAhmaNa-s: 1) The sUkta in the AV form also ends with the mantra
“R^itaM satyaM…”, which suggests that this mantra was present in the
ancestral form of the text. This corresponds to the oral taittirIya text
of the brAhmaNa-s from the Andhra and drAviDa countries as against the
printed MNU from the TA, which often elides this mantra. Thus, the oral
text is most probably preserving the original form. Secondly, in the
final part of the chant there is a version prevalent in South India that
lists the trinity brahma, shiva and hari and then indra (sa brahma sa
shivaH sa hariH sendra …). It has been alleged that this inclusion of
hari is a recent interpolation by shaiva-s who want to establish the
nArAyaNa here as the puruSha, rather than viShNu. It is countered that
the vaiShNava-s do not include sa hariH in their version of the
recitation and that the inclusion of sa hariH breaks the otherwise
perfect anuShTubh meter. The AV version of the MNU lacks sa hariH
strongly suggesting that it is indeed a shaiva-inspired late
interpolation into the TA version of the text. As an example of how the
upaniShad is recited by the atharvan-s I provide a MP3 version of this
sUkta:  
[atharvavedIya nArAyaNa sUkta
MP3](https://app.box.com/s/65xmbh2ojgiexd0ldnxb)

Finally, we will discuss some aspects of textual evolution and some
parallels with molecular evolution using the two MNUs as a case study.  
Continued …
