+++
title = "On Vyasatirtha’s interpretations of tattvamasi—part I (w/lakshana on ‘tat’)"
date = "2016-11-03"

+++
Before I begin this work,I offer my pra.naamas to that lion amongst
scholars of Madhva Vedanta,Dr. BNK Sharma.

Points to be noted while arguing

\* tattvamasi to be interpreted in line of a lak.sa.na(a secondary
signification),which advaitins do too.

vyaasatiirtha‘s explanations based on lak.sa.na on the term tat are
noted here.

\(1\) Identity based on association:(saahacaryaat taacchabdam…). It’s
referred to by paata\~njali,the author of the mahaabhaa.sya. The example
“vasanta adhyayanam” under paa.nini(iv.2.63) is cited where it is
justified thus ”  
sahacaryat tacchabdyam bhavisyati vasantasahacaritamadhyayanam vasanta
iti\|“.The close association between the jiiva and brahman is justified
by the “sruti “dvaa supar.naa sayujaa sakhaa…”

\(2\) Identity based by virtue of basic relationship with
another(tadaa”sritatvaat taditi vyapade”sa.h…)this too is accepted by
paata\~njali in his interpretation of paa.nini‘s sutra “samartha
padavidhi.h…” . Such an identity in the form of  
aa”srayaa”srayiibhava is implied in the passage from śruti “sarvaa.h
prajaa.h sadaayatanaa.h satprati.s.thaa” in uddaalaka’s discourse.

\(3\) Language of identity being employed when one thing is the source
of another.(tato jaatatvaat taditi vyapade…). An example given is
“braahma.no’sya mukhamaasiit“(the Brahmin was His face) by which it was
meant that the Brahmin was born from the face of the viraa.tapuru.sa. It
is explained the the mahaabhaa.sya on the sutra “imya.na.h
sa.mprasaara.nam” where sa.mprasaara.nam is explained in the
mahaabhaa.sya as vowels resulting from a specific kind of
vowel-gradation known as sa.mprasaara.nam….just as in ordinary
parlance,a crow born of another crow or a hawk born of another hawk is
spoken of by the same name(yathaa kaakaajjaata.h kaaka.h,
“syenaajjaata.h “syena.h, eva.m sa.mprasaara.naajjaato var.na.h
sa.mprasaara.na.h). Here,the statement “sanmuulaa.h sobhyemaa.h sarva.h
prajaa.h” is used. In this sense,they might be spoken as
Brahman(tat),born as they are,of Brahman.

\(4\) Identity by reason of dependence(tadasiinatvaat taditi
vyapade”sa.h…) is an idiom in mimaa.msaka usage. An example is
dhaanyamasi,dhinuhi devaan where rice is referred to as
“dhaanyam“(grain) by lak.sa.na because it is produced from
grains(dhaanyaadhiinotpattike ta.n.dule dhaanya”sabdaprayoha.h) The
dependence of jiiva on brahman is brought out int he chaandogya and
other places “praa.nabandhana.m hi somya mana.h\| yathaasmin aakaa”so
“syeno…”,so the declaration is taken in the figurative sense of
“tadadhiina.h tvamasi” through the same kinda of lak.sa”na as in
“dhaanyamasi“. Such usages are frequently found in braahma.na and
upani.sadic literature.

\(5\) Identity in virtue of resemblance:Used in paata\~njali‘s
interpretation of the sutra of paa.nini “bahuga.navatu.dati sa.mkhyaa”
where he notes the elision of a suffix like vat/vatup,etc. So,tattvamasi
should be understood to mean “tadvattvamasi“(Thou art like it). Such
usages also have precedence in the mimaa.msa suutra of jaimini
(saarupyaat) and have been illustrated there.
