+++
title = "The peculiar mythology behind the mAyAvAmana mantras"

+++
The hAdi mata votaries from the North also preserved a range of kramas,
now largely reduced to auxilliary rites associated as AvarNa invocations
of their primary rite of tripurasundarI. This follows the basic pattern
seen in the shrIvidyArNava’s procedures. Many of these are strikingly
interesting such as the invocation of the terrific graveyard-ranging
bahurUpa bhairava and his wife, a special mantra of the supreme
Anandabhairava, the 8-handed amR^itasUrya invocation and the formulae
derived from the kaTha yajurveda. Here, however I briefly allude to a
remarkable “left-handed” form of viShNu and his mythology.

On the dark 14th day, the terrifying kAla bhairava wanted a sacrifice.
The 8 yoginis, who had emanated from the 8 mAtR^ikA-s realizing that
they would reign supreme if the sacrifice is made, decided to do so.
They extracted ambikA from the cave within sadAshiva, where she resides
and made umA herself the sacrificial pashu for the bhairava. shiva
realized that his heart had become empty without pArvatI, and they say
shiva without shaktI is but a shava\! viShNu was observing what had come
to pass and acted rapidly. From viShNu emanated the terrible
saMkarShaNa. From him emerged the emanation of nArAyaNa known as
mAyAvAmana. He had eight arms and was of yellow complexion. He wore a
red robe and a golden headgear. He held the halAyudha, daNDa, sunanda
and other terrible weapons. From garuDa emanated a ram, which became the
vAhana of mAyAvAmana. He was of the form of a youth. His mAyA shakti
manifested as 4 beautiful space-clad goddesses, karpUrI, kastUrI,
ku\~nkumI and chandanI, who were mahAmohinI-s, from whose delusion no
one was spared. From the right of viShNu the manifestation pertaining to
the great anuShTubh mantra (of the avyakta), nR^isiMha emerged with a
loud roar. mAyAvAmana and his retinue and nR^isiMha rushed at the
yogini-s and challenged them to a fight. They destroyed the mighty
weapons of the yogini-s with their astras, but their bodies were
impregnable to strikes with any weapon. At this point they generated a
terrifying goddess shivadUtI, who devoured the yogini-s and asked shiva
to remember his true nature. As soon as shiva thought of his true self
ever-conjoint with the hidden shaktI, from mAyAvAmana emerged another
terrifying goddess known as kAlasaMkarShaNI, who then retrieved pArvatI
from the yogini-s and restored her to sadashiva. Thus, kAlasaMkarShaNI
and shivadUtI became the guardians of pArvatI. parvatI in honour of
nArAyaNa’s serviced wore the images of mAyAvAmana and nR^isiMha as her
earrings.

mAyAvAmana sporting with his 4 space-clad goddess are worshipped along
with nR^isiMha in the mAyAvAmana rite which can achieve vashikaraNa and
total delusion of foes. The goddesses can draw yakShiNI-s and rAkShasI-s
of diverse kinds to the sAdhaka. The pA\~NcharAtric tantra mAyAvAmanikA
is devoted to this emanation of nArAyaNa.
