+++
title = "From parIkShitâ€™s window"

+++
From the top of the fort, from the window we watched the desolate
landscape cloaked in the moist haze of indra sprinklings. The last cry
of the bird had been heard for the day. The amAtya and the shachiva were
caught in their own troubles due the passing of the vR^iddha. On the
shore Jx sat still unable to come to terms with the fact that he was
free. His mantri-s were also caught in the same troubles as our
mantri-s. The muni had retreated into his cave. We reminisced of our
brief conversation with him on the eve of the tragedy. The muni shared
my concerns at that point and our minds went back to the fateful clear
night when the PM was rattling under a ghorAbhichAra. He saw how that
very day we had taken the worst turn with respect to the issue of
khANDava. Having sized the situation we knew it was alright for us to
die, but the muni had to escape to continue the fight. We spoke then of
that step into the kAlaChidra. We did not know what was happening to our
arrows in the great raNa; we knew then knew what had befallen the brave
ikShvAku of ayodhya, when he stood before the fierce bharadvAja warrior
who was raging on that fateful day.

We looked again from the window. We saw that our yauvana senAni had
conquered indra jAla I and II completely and paid us a tribute from
those raids after placing our flags. The other yoddha along with
Hayastanika were still being needled without stop by the single duShTa
shatru. Our senAni decided to tackle the sutrAnta front where one fierce
vairi and another mild one had come up against us. He skillfully
re-organized the troops to strengthen our front. But then our time of
reckoning had come. We watched; the feeling was like how kR^iShnadeva
might felt before Kovilkonda or rAma rAya before Talikota or hammIra
mahApatra behind Kondavidu. Many shatru-s had combined forces against
us. We were weakened like the AchArya struck by navagupta; the dhUmavatI
agents continued to assail us non-stop and follow us like a shadow. But
we were born with the karma of the warrior and had to fight, even if
like the sUtaputra without the armor and earrings. We hoped to smite the
dasyu in that great battle.
