+++
title = "The pathetic state of Hindus"

+++
The Hindus are under the smug belief that they are no longer under the
tyrannical Moslem despot or a despicable Christian Whiteman. Despite
this not being really true and the sad part is so few Hindus realize
that. Firstly, Hindus do not realize that India is a secular and not a
Hindu state where Non-Hindus wield enormous clout. Moslem, Christian and
socialist predators terrorize many parts of the country reducing them to
a lawless mess. The only Hindu kingdom Nepal, the home to many of the
great shrines of the Hindus, is in a lamentable state. So in general,
one might conclude that the servility has degraded the Hindu so much
that he is just a little better than his unrelated namesake who owned
the Americas before the Whiteman. The case of the brahmin is
particularly deplorable, and most worthless brahmins do not even seem to
realize this. The best looking brahmin women are selling themselves as
puMshchali-s or are being targetted by mlechChas (I know I am offending
some people here), turuShkas and other dasyus, thus leading to
kula-kShaya.

The brahmin at home is fast becoming a secondary citizen in many states.
A variety of avarNas and those of the 4th varNa are seizing his means of
livelihood due to the policies of the secular Indian state. Some jAti-s
of the 4th varNa enjoy the best of all worlds: They have long been in
occupations that have made them economically stable; the occupations of
this subset of shUdras generally selected for decent IQ, and they are
accordingly of decent general intelligence; and now they have
reservations on top of it \! Their numbers are also vastly more than the
brahmins. Thus, in some states they have over-run the brahmin. The
brahmins losing their domain in India have often turned to the West,
especially the madhyama mlechCha desha in krau\~ncha dvIpa. But what is
the fate of the brahmins in this land of adharma? Outwardly due to the
ease of living relative to bhArata they think they have attained a good
life here. They also do not outwardly notice any reservation raj
constricting them as in the desh. Yet, the truth of the fact is that
they are typically slaves of the mlechCha-s. As the muni commented, the
new handcuff is that of the paNa. He works much harder than the
mlechChas, is treated worse and is paid much worse in comparison with a
mlechCha or even a chIna of comparable intellectual abilities. How can
he really be anything other than a secondary citizen in the land of the
dasyus. Even when his temples are vandalized by Christians (as it
recently happened yet again) he simply has to shut up and put up because
he has no power of any kind. He does not even know his mantras to have
the mantra bala of the past.

Being reduced to such a state of indignity is one thing, but the
majority not knowing about it is another thing. The need of the hour is
an overwhelming sense of ethnic consciousness, the raw sense of us
against them, before any remedial steps can be taken. Remember the crows
and owlsâ€“ those who know this understand what we speak.
