+++
title = "A note on a line in the harivaMsha after the greats ofxa0trika"
date = "2017-05-12"

+++
<http://mahabharata-resources.org/harivamsa/vishnuparva/hv_2_003.html>

tvayA vyAptamidaM sarvaM jagatsthAvaraja\~Ngamam \|

\[The entire world of non-moving and moving entities is pervaded by
you.\]

With my praNAms to the greats in the lineages of abhinavagupta,Lakshman
Joo,etc(and begging forgiveness for my mistakes and impertinence) I will
make a note:This can be explained by the sequence of 13 kAlI-s
sRRiShTI-kAlI–>raktA-kAlI–>sthiti-kAlI–>yama-kAlI–>saMhAra-kAlI–>mRRityu-kAlI–>rudra-kAlI–>mArtaNDa-kAlI–>paramArka-kAlI–>kAlAgnirudra-kAlI–>mahAkAlI–>mahAbhairavachaNDaghoraghorakAlI–>sukAlI(the
sequence in the devIpa\~ncashatikA cited by rAjAnaka jayaratha)

One may ask as to what basis that I am equating ekAnAMshA with kAlI. It
is on the basis on the kAlikA purANA ,where in the 5th chapter,brahmA is
shown invoking devI as viShNumAyA,hence she is the same continuous
deity.

As sRRiShTI-kAlI,She is the First impulse of creation. As raktA-kAlI,She
is direct perception. As sthiti-kAlI,She is the appeased state where the
curiosity of perception has ended. As yama-kAlI,She winds up the state
of thinking and perceiving and again resides in her own nature.As
saMhAra-kAlI,impressions of the objective world appear as faint clouds
in a clear blue sky.As mRRityu-kAlI,these clouds disappear and one
begins to feels oneness. As rudra-kAlI,She destroys all remaining doubts
and suspicions that hold one back.As mArtaNDa-kAlI,She absorbs the
energies of cognition into Herself. At the level of
paramArka-kAlI,ahaMkAra dissolves. At the level of kAlAgnirudra-kAlI,
just time alone exists. As mahAbhairavachaNDaghoraghorakAlI,effulgent
light of supreme consciousness, responsible for manifesting the
subjective, objective and cognitive worlds is held in a state of
oneness. sukAlI or kAlasaMkarshiNi is is the thread of ‘supreme
awareness’ that runs through the twelve beads of perception, or states
of consciousness which span from the grossest to the subtlest level of
creation.

This is how She pervades the entire creation.

