+++
title = "Abraham and his sons(also the secularized ones and others bearing that imprint)-a skeleton of some aspects of their modusxa0operandi"
date = "2017-05-22"

+++
Their religions is the perfect means-and this is the most important-the
perfect means of making certain they will suffer persecution. *To some
extent,their success depends on their cunning on having themselves seen
as persecuted,to the extend to being martyred.* Hideyoshi understood
this.

By perpetually whining that they are a poor,helpless,persecuted
minority,they effectively disguise their real power and their success in
wrapping their tentacles around their victims,and by exciting the pity
of the soft-headed and soft-hearted heathen/\<insert other functional
equivalent>,they can use them as weapons against the others.

By establishing a reputation for being persecuted for their religion by
those awfully wicked pagans(tm),they can make it seem that they,poor
innocents,are suffering for their piety(secular:virtue/whatever value is
in fashion) whenever their depradations and malvolence have so
exasperated their victims that the latter try by legislation or violence
to free themselves from the aliens who are persecuting and oppressing
them.

Their religion,as presented to us heathens/\<insert functional
equivalent>,seems to validate their arrogant claims/boasts of a certain
peculiar righteousness/\<insert secular versions>,make possible their
subversion of us and our eventual destructions possible. A lot of them
operate also by discovering and exploiting causes of dissent within
societies,inciting classes and comparable groups within the societies to
reciprocal antagonism,and excaberating the rivalries to civil-war
tier,until the nation is paralyzed and reduced to masses of individuals
who no longer feel they have anything in common except the geographical
territory they inhibit. A large part of this,as explained by Herbert
Aptheker consists in finding sections of heathens who can be isolated
from the rest of the society on the basis of some
economic,occupational,regional,cultural,sexual,or even jāti interest
they have in common,persuading them that they are ‘oppressed’ by the
wicked society,inciding them to hatred of their ‘oppressors’,and making
them greedy for the profits they think they can gain by ‘demanding their
rights’,and them setting each group against all others until the nation
is paralyzed by pseudo-legal contentions that may end in civil
wars,massacres,and a decline to utter barbarism. These Abrahamists love
to wail they are a ‘persecuted minority’,with a passion for ‘justice'(or
virtue,or education,etc etc),and are thus ideally prepared to incite the
‘underprivileged’ to outbreaks for ‘social justice’. These instruments
work by educational means,by means of various NGOs and foundations,and
often receive money openly from them,though they get some hired or
light-headed members of each group they are inciting to
what,ultimately,will be their self-destruction.


