---
title: HINDUS AT THE FAIR

---
<div>

[←](india_her_religion_and_customs.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](at_the_parliament_of_religions.htm)

  

## HINDUS AT THE FAIR

(*Boston Evening Transcript*, September 30, 1893)

Chicago, Sept. 23:

There is a room at the left of the entrance to the Art Palace marked
"No. 1 — keep out." To this the speakers at the Congress of Religions
all repair sooner or later, either to talk with one another or with
President Bonney, whose private office is in one corner of the
apartment. The folding doors are jealously guarded from the general
public, usually standing far enough apart to allow peeping in. Only
delegates are supposed to penetrate the sacred precincts, but it is not
impossible to obtain an "open sesame", and thus to enjoy a brief
opportunity of closer relations with the distinguished guests than the
platform in the Hall of Columbus affords.

The most striking figure one meets in this anteroom is Swami
Vivekananda, the Brahmin monk. He is a large, well-built man, with the
superb carriage of the Hindustanis, his face clean shaven, squarely
moulded regular features, white teeth, and with well-chiselled lips that
are usually parted in a benevolent smile while he is conversing. His
finely poised head is crowned with either a lemon colored or a red
turban, and his cassock (not the technical name for this garment),
belted in at the waist and falling below the knees, alternates in a
bright orange and rich crimson. He speaks excellent English and replied
readily to any questions asked in sincerity.

Along with his simplicity of manner there is a touch of personal reserve
when speaking to ladies, which suggests his chosen vocation. When
questioned about the laws of his order, he has said, "I can do as I
please, I am independent. Sometimes I live in the Himalaya Mountains,
and sometimes in the streets of cities. I never know where I will get my
next meal, I never keep money with me I come here by subscription." Then
looking round at one or two of his fellow-countrymen who chanced to be
standing near he added, "They will take care of me," giving the
inference that his board bill in Chicago is attended to by others. When
asked if he was wearing his usual monk's costume, he said, "This is a
good dress; when I am home I am in rags, and I go barefooted. Do I
believe in caste? Caste is a social custom; religion has nothing to do
with it; all castes will associate with me."

It is quite apparent, however, from the deportment, the general
appearance of Mr. Vivekananda that he was born among high castes — years
of voluntary poverty and homeless wanderings have not robbed him of his
birth­right of gentleman; even his family name is unknown; he took that
of Vivekananda in embracing a religious career, and "Swami" is merely
the title of reverend accorded to him. He cannot be far along in the
thirties, and looks as if made for this life and its fruition, as well
as for meditation on the life beyond. One cannot help wondering what
could have been the turning point with him.

"Why should I marry," was his abrupt response to a comment on all he had
renounced in becoming a monk, "when I see in every woman only the divine
Mother? Why do I make all these sacrifices? To emancipate myself from
earthly ties and attachments so that there will be no re-birth for me.
When I die I want to become at once absorbed in the divine, one with
God. I would be a Buddha."

Vivekananda does not mean by this that he is a Buddhist. No name or sect
can label him. He is an outcome of the higher Brahminism, a product of
the Hindu spirit, which is vast, dreamy, self-extinguishing, a Sanyasi
or holy man.

He has some pamphlets that he distributes, relating to his master,
Paramhansa Ramakrishna, a Hindu devotee, who so impressed his hearers
and pupils that many of them became ascetics after his death. Mozoomdar
also looked upon this saint as his master, but Mozoomdar works for
holiness in the world, in it but not of it, as Jesus taught.

Vivekananda's address before the parliament was broad as the heavens
above us, embracing the best in all religions, as the ultimate universal
religion — charity to all mankind, good works for the love of God, not
for fear of punishment or hope of reward. He is a great favorite at the
parliament, from the grandeur of his sentiments and his appearance as
well. If he merely crosses the platform he is applauded, and this marked
approval of thousands he accepts in a childlike spirit of gratification,
without a trace of conceit. It must be a strange experience too for this
humble young Brahmin monk, this sudden transition from poverty and
self-effacement to affluence and aggrandizement. When asked if he knew
anything of those brothers in the Himalayas so firmly believed in by the
Theosophists, he answered with the simple statement, "I have never met
one of them," as much as to imply, "There may be such persons, but
though I am at home in the Himalayas, I have yet to come across them."

</div>
