---
title: REINCARNATION

---
<div>

[←](personal_traits.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](hindu_civilisation.htm)

  

## REINCARNATION

(*Evanston Index*, October 7, 1893)

At the Congregational Church, during the past week, there have been
given a course of lectures which in nature much resembled the Religious
Parliament which has just been completed. The lecturers were Dr. Carl
van Bergen of Sweden, and Suami Vivekananda, the Hindu monk. ... Suami
Vivekananda is a representative from India to the Parliament of
Religions. He has attracted a great deal of attention on account of his
unique attire in Mandarin colors, by his magnetic presence and by his
brilliant oratory and wonderful exposition of Hindu philosophy. His stay
in Chicago has been a continual ovation. The course of lectures was
arranged to cover three evenings.

\[The lectures of Saturday and Tuesday evenings are listed without
Comment; then the article continues:\]

On Thursday evening Oct. 5, Dr. von Bergen spoke on "Huldine Beamish,
the Founder of the King's Daughters of Sweden," and "Reincarnation" was
the subject treated by the Hindu monk. The latter was very interesting;
the views being those that are not often heard in this part of the
world. The doctrine of reincarnation of the soul, while comparatively
new and little understood in this country, is well-known in the east,
being the foundation of nearly all the religions of those people. Those
that do not use it as dogma, do not say anything against it. The main
point to be decided in regard to the doctrine is, as to whether we have
had a past. We know that we have a present and feel sure of a future.
Yet how can there be a present without a past? Modern science has proved
that matter exists and continues to exist. Creation is merely a change
in appearance. We are not sprung out of nothing. Some regard God as the
common cause of everything and judge this a sufficient reason for
existence. But in everything we must consider the phenomena; whence and
from what matter springs. The same arguments that prove there is a
future prove that there is a past. It is necessary that there should be
causes other than God's will. Heredity is not able to give sufficient
cause. Some say that we are not conscious of a former existence. Many
cases have been found where there are distinct reminiscences of a past.
And here lies the germ of the theory. Because the Hindu is kind to dumb
animals many believe that we believe in the reincarnation of souls in
lower orders. They are not able to conceive of kindness to dumb animals
being other than the result of superstition. An ancient Hindu priest
defines religion as anything that lifts one up. Brutality is driven out,
humanity gives way to divinity. The theory of incarnation does not
confine man to this small earth. His soul can go to other, higher earths
where he will be a loftier being, possessing, instead of five senses,
eight, and continuing in this way he will at length approach the acme of
perfection, divinity, and will be allowed to drink deep of oblivion in
the "Islands of the Blest".

</div>
