---
title: HINDU CIVILISATION

---
<div>

[←](reincarnation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](an_interesting_lecture.htm)

  

## HINDU CIVILISATION

\[Although the lecture at Streator on October 9 was well attended, the
*Streator Daily Free Press* of October 9 ran the following somewhat
dreary review:\]

The lecture of this celebrated Hindoo at the Opera House, Saturday
night, was very interesting. By comparative philology, he sought to
establish the long admitted relationship between the Aryan races and
their descendants in the new world. He mildly defended the caste system
of India which keeps three-fourths of the people in utter and
humiliating subjection, and boasted that the India of today was the same
India that had watched for centuries the meteoric nations of the world
flash across the horizon and sink into oblivion. In common with the
people, he loves the past. He lives not for self, but for God. In his
country a premium is placed on beggary and tramps, though not so
distinguished in his lecture. When the meal is prepared, they wait for
some man to come along who is first served, then the animals, the
servants, the man of the house and lastly the woman of the household.
Boys are taken at 10 years of age and are kept by professors for a
period of ten to twenty years, educated and sent forth to resume their
former occupations or to engage in a life of endless wandering,
preaching, and praying, taking along only that which is given them to
eat and wear, but never touching money. Vivekananda is of the latter
class. Men approaching old age withdraw from the world, and after a
period of study and prayer, when they feel themselves sanctified, they
also go forward spreading the gospel. He observed that leisure was
necessary for intellectual development and scored Americans for not
educating the Indians whom Columbus found in a state of savagery. In
this he exhibited a lack of knowledge of conditions. His talk was
lamentably short and much was left unsaid of seeming greater importance
than much that was said.

(It is clear from the above report that the American Press, for one
reason or another, did not always give Swamiji an enthusiastic
reception.)

</div>
