---
title: THE HINDOO MONK

---
<div>

[←](the_hindoo_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](plea_for_tolerance.htm)

  

## THE HINDOO MONK

(*Appeal-Avalanche*, January 16, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda, the Hindoo monk, who is to lecture at the Auditorium
\[Memphis\] tonight, is one of the most eloquent men who has ever
appeared on the religious or lecture platform in this country. His
matchless oratory, deep penetration into things occult, his cleverness
in debate, and great earnestness captured the closest attention of the
world's thinking men at the World's Fair Parliament of Religion, and the
admiration of thousands of people who have since heard him during his
lecture tour through many of the states of the Union.

In conversation he is a most pleasant gentleman; his choice of words are
the gems of the English language, and his general bearing ranks him with
the most cultured people of Western etiquette and custom. As a companion
he is a most charming man, and as a conversationalist he is, perhaps,
not surpassed in the drawing-rooms of any city in the Western World. He
speaks English not only distinctly, but fluently, and his ideas, as new
as sparkling, drop from his tongue in a perfectly bewildering overflow
of ornamental language.

Swami Vive Kananda, by his inherited religion or early teachings, grew
up a Brahmin, but becoming converted to the Hindoo religion he
sacrificed his rank and became a Hindoo priest, or as known in the
country of oriental ideality, a sanyasin. He had always been a close
student of the wonderful and mysterious works of nature as drawn from
God's high conception, and with years spent as both a student and
teacher in the higher colleges of that eastern country, he acquired a
knowledge that has given him a worldwide reputation as one of the most
thoughtful scholars of the age.

His wonderful first address before the members of the World's Fair
Parliament stamped him at once as a leader in that great body of
religious thinkers. During the session he was frequently heard in
defence of his religion, and some of the most beautiful and
philosophical gems that grace the English language rolled from his lips
there in picturing the higher duties that man owed to man and to his
Creator. He is an artist in thought, an idealist in belief and a
dramatist on the platform.

Since his arrival in Memphis he has been guest of Mr. Hu L. Brinkley,
where he has received calls day and evening from many in Memphis who
desired to pay their respects to him. He is also an informal guest at
the Tennessee Club and was a guest at the reception given by Mrs. S. R.
Shepherd, Saturday evening. Col. R. B. Snowden gave a dinner at his home
at Annesdale in honor of the distinguished visitor on Sunday, where he
met Assistant Bishop Thomas F. Gailor, Rev. Dr. George Patterson and a
number of other clergymen.

Yesterday afternoon he lectured before a large and fashionable audience
composed of the members of the Nineteenth Century Club in the rooms of
the club in the Randolph Building. Tonight he will be heard at the
Auditorium on "Hindooism".

</div>
