---
title: MANNERS AND CUSTOMS IN INDIA

---
<div>

[←](plea_for_tolerance.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](hindoo_philosophy.htm)

  

## MANNERS AND CUSTOMS IN INDIA

(*Appeal-Avalanche*, January 21, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda, the Hindoo monk, delivered a lecture at La Salette
Academy \[Memphis\] yesterday afternoon. Owing to the pouring rain, a
very small audience was present.

The subject discussed was "Manners and Customs in India." Vive Kananda
is advancing theories of religious thought which find ready lodgment in
the minds of some of the most advanced thinkers of this as well as other
cities of America.

His theory is fatal to the orthodox belief, as taught by the Christian
teachers. It has been the supreme effort of Christian America to
enlighten the beclouded minds of heathen India, but it seems that the
oriental splendor of Kananda's religion has eclipsed the beauty of the
old-time Christianity, as taught by our parents, and will find a rich
field in which to thrive in the minds of some of the better educated of
America.

This is a day of "fads," and Kananda seems to be filling a "long felt
want." He is, perhaps, one of the most learned men of his country, and
possesses a wonderful amount of personal magnetism, and his hearers are
charmed by his eloquence. While he is liberal in his views, he sees very
little to admire in the orthodox Christianity. Kananda has received more
marked attention in Memphis than almost any lecturer or minister that
has ever visited the city.

If a missionary to India was as cordially received as the Hindoo monk is
here the work of spreading the gospel of Christ in heathen lands would
be well advanced. His lecture yesterday afternoon was an interesting one
from a historic point of view. He is thoroughly familiar with the
history and traditions of his native country, from very ancient history
up to the present, and can describe the various places and objects of
interest there with grace and ease.

During his lecture he was frequently interrupted by questions propounded
by the ladies in the audience, and he answered all queries without the
least hesitancy, except when one of the ladies asked a question with the
purpose of drawing him out into a religious discussion. He refused to be
led from the original subject of his discourse and informed the
interrogator that at another time he would give his views on the
"transmigration of the soul," etc.

In the course of his remarks he said that his grandfather was married
when he was 3 years old and his father married at 18, but he had never
married at all. A monk is not forbidden to marry, but if he takes a wife
she becomes a monk with the same powers and privileges and occupies the
same social position as her husband.[1](#fn1)

In answer to a question, he said there were no divorces in India for any
cause, but if, after 14 years of married life, there were no children in
the family, the husband was allowed to marry another with the wife's
consent, but if she objected he could not marry again. His description
of the ancient mausoleums and temples were beautiful beyond comparison,
and goes to show that the ancients possessed scientific knowledge far
superior to the most expert artisans of the present day.

Swami Vivi Kananda will appear at the Y. M. H. A. Hall to-night for the
last time in this city. He is under contract with the "Slayton Lyceum
Bureau," of Chicago, to fill a three-years' engagement in this country.
He will leave tomorrow for Chicago, where he has an engagement for the
night of the 25th.

(*Detroit Tribune*, February 15, 1894)

Last evening a good sized audience had the privilege of seeing and
listening to the famous Hindu Monk of the Brahmo Samaj, Swami Vive
Kananda, as he lectured at the Unitarian Church under the auspices of
the Unity Club. He appeared in native costume and made with his handsome
face and stalwart figure a distinguished appearance. His eloquence held
the audience in rapt attention and brought out applause at frequent
intervals. He spoke of the "Manners and Customs of India" and presented
the subject in the most perfect English. He said they did not call their
country India nor themselves Hindus. Hindostan was the name of the
country and they were Brahmans. In ancient times they spoke Sanscrit. In
that language the reason and meaning of a word was explained and made
quite evident but now that is all gone. Jupiter in Sanscrit meant
"Father in Heaven." All the languages of northern India were now
practically the same, but if he should go into the southern part of that
country he could not converse with the people. In the words father,
mother, sister, brother, etc.; the Sanscrit gave very similar
pronunciations. This and other facts lead him to think we all come from
the common stock, Aryans. Nearly all branches of this race have lost
their identity

There were four castes, the priests, the landlords and military people,
the trades people and the artisans, laborers and servants. In the first
three castes the boys as the ages of ten, eleven and thirteen
respectively are placed in the hands of professors of universities and
remain with them until thirty, twenty-five and twenty years old,
respectively. ... In ancient times both boys and girls were instructed,
but now only the boys are favored. An effort, however, is being made to
rectify the long-existing wrong. A good share of the philosophy and laws
of the land is the work of women during the ancient times, before
barbarians started to rule the land. In the eyes of the Hindu the woman
now has her rights. She holds her own and has the law on her side.

When the student returns from college he is allowed to marry and have a
household. Husband and wife must bear the work and both have their
rights. In the military caste the daughters oftentimes can choose their
husbands, but in all other cases all arrangements are made by the
parents. There is a constant effort now being made to remedy infant
marriage. The marriage ceremony is very beautiful, each touches the
heart of the other and they swear before God and the assemblage that
they will prove faithful to each other. No man can be a priest until he
marries. When a man attends public worship he is always attended by his
wife. In his worship the Hindu performs five ceremonies, worship of his
God, of his forefathers, of the poor, of the dumb animals, and of
learning. As long as a Hindu has anything in the house a guest must
never want. When he is satisfied then the children, then father and
mother partake. They are the poorest nation in the world, yet except in
times of famine no one dies of hunger. Civilization is a great work. But
in comparison the statement is made that in England one in every 400 is
a drunkard, while in India the proportion is one to every million. A
description was given of the ceremony of burning the dead. No publicity
is made except in the case of some great nobleman. After a fifteen days'
fast gifts are given by the relatives in behalf of the forefathers to
the poor or for the formation of some institution. On moral matters they
stand head and shoulders above all other nations.

1.  [^](#txt1)It is quite unlikely that Swamiji made the remark
    attributed to him regarding the marriage of monks. This must have
    been an aberration on the part of the reporter, for, as is well
    known, if a Sannyasin takes a wife he is considered by the Hindu
    society to be a fallen person and beyond the pale.

</div>
