---
title: THE LOVE OF GOD

---
<div>

[←](the_divinity_of_man.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_women_of_india.htm)

  

## THE LOVE OF GOD

(The *Detroit Free Press* report of this lecture is printed in Vol. VIII
of the *[Complete
Works](../../volume_8/notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures/the_love_of_god_ii.htm)*.)

(*Detroit Tribune*, February 21, 1894)

The First Unitarian Church was crowded last night to hear Vive Kananda.
The audience was composed of people who came from Jefferson Avenue and
the upper part of Woodward Avenue. Most of it was ladies who seemed
deeply interested in the address and applauded several remarks of the
Brahman with much enthusiasm.

The love that was dwelt upon by the speaker was not the love that goes
with passion, but a pure and holy love that one in India feels for his
God. As Vive Kananda stated at the commencement of his address the
subject was "The Love the Indian Feels for His God." But he did not
preach to his text. The major portion of his address was an attack on
the Christian religion. The religion of the Indian and the love of his
God was the minor portion. The points in his address were illustrated
with several applicable anecdotes of famous people in the history. The
subjects of the anecdotes were renowned Mogul emperors of his native
land and not of the native Hindu kings.

The professors of religion were divided into two classes by the
lecturer, the followers of knowledge and the followers of devotion. The
end in the life of the followers of knowledge was experience. The end in
the life of the devotee was love.

Love, he said, was a sacrifice. It never takes, but it always gives. The
Hindu never asks anything of his God, never prayed for salvation and a
happy hereafter, but instead lets his whole soul go out to his God in an
entrancing love. That beautiful state of existence could only be gained
when a person felt an overwhelming want of God. Then God came in all of
His fullness.

There were three different ways of looking at God. One was to look upon
Him as a mighty personage and fall down and worship His might. Another
was to worship Him as a father. In India the father always punished the
children and an element of fear was mixed with the regard and love for a
father. Still another way to think of God was as a mother. In India a
mother was always truly loved and reverenced. That was the Indian's way
of looking at their God.

Kananda said that a true lover of God would be so wrapt up in his love
that he would have no time to stop and tell members of another sect that
they were following the wrong road to secure the God, and strive to
bring him to his way of thinking.

\*          \*          \*

(*Detroit Journal*)

If Vive Kananda, the Brahmin monk, who is delivering a lecture course in
this city could be induced to remain for a week longer, the largest hall
in Detroit would not hold the crowds which would be anxious to hear him.
He has become a veritable fad, as last evening every seat in the
Unitarian church was occupied, and many were compelled to stand
throughout the entire lecture.

The speaker's subject was, "The Love of God". His definition of love was
"something absolutely unselfish; that which has no thought beyond the
glorification and adoration of the object upon which our affections are
bestowed." Love, he said, is a quality which bows down And worships and
asks nothing in return. Love of God, he thought, was different. God is
not accepted, he said, because we really need him, except for selfish
purposes. His lecture was replete with story and anecdote, all going to
show the selfish motive underlying the motive of love for God. The Songs
of Solomon were cited by the lecturer as the most beautiful portion of
the Christian Bible and yet he had heard with deep regret that there was
a possibility of their being removed. "In fact," he declared, as a sort
clinching argument at the close, "the love of God appears to be based
upon a theory of 'What can I get out of it?' Christians are so selfish
in their love that they are continually asking God to give them
something, including all manner of selfish things. Modern religion is,
therefore, nothing but a mere hobby and fashion and people flock to
church like a lot of sheep."

</div>
