---
title: A BENGALI SADHU1

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](../part_ii_european_newspaper_reports/light_oct_28_1896.htm)

## A BENGALI SADHU[1](#fn1)

\[*Madura Mail*, January 28, 1893\]

A BENGALI SADHU ON HINDU RELIGION AND SOCIOLOGY

A young Bengalee Sanyashi \[Sannyâsin\] of about thirty-two years of
age, and a Master of Arts of the Calcutta University was last week
interviewed at the Triplicane Literary Society by about a hundred
educated Indians among whom was Dewan Bahadur Raghunatha Rao. A summary
of what was stated by the Sadhu is published by the *Indian Social
Reformer*, from which we make the following extracts:[2](#fn2)

The Vedic Religion

The perfect religion is the Vedic religion. The Vedas have two parts,
mandatory and optional. The mandatory injunctions are eternally binding
on us. They constitute the Hindu religion. The optional ones are not so.
These have been changing and been changed by the Rishis to suit the
times. The Brahmins at one time ate beef and married Sudras. \[A\] calf
was killed to please a guest. Sudras cooked for Brahmins. The food
cooked by a male Brahmin was regarded as polluted food. But we have
changed our habits to suit the present yug\[a\]. Although our caste
rules have so far changed from the time of Manu, still if he should come
to us now, he would still call us Hindus. Caste is a social organization
and not a religious one. It was the outcome of the natural evolution of
our society. It was found necessary and convenient at one time. It has
served its purpose. But for it, we would long ago have become Mahomedans
\[sic\]. It is useless now. It may be dispensed with. Hindu religion no
longer requires the prop of the caste system. A Brahmin may interdine
with anybody, even a Pariah. He won't thereby lose his spirituality. A
degree of spirituality that is destroyed by the touch of a Pariah, is a
very poor quantity. It is almost at the zero point. Spirituality of a
Brahmin must overflow, blaze and burn \[so\] as to warm into spiritual
life not one Pariah but thousands of Pariahs who may touch him. The old
Rishis observed no distinctions or restrictions as regards food. A man
who feels that his own spirituality is so flimsy that the sight of a low
caste man annihilates it need not approach a Pariah and must keep his
precious little to himself.

The Hindu Ideal of Life

The Hindu Ideal of life is "Nivarti" \[Nivritti\]. (Nivritti and
Parvritti are key concepts in Hindu philosophy, and Swami Vivekananda
has frequently interpreted and elaborated on them (e.g., see
*[Karma-Yoga, Ch.
VI](../../../volume_1/karma-yoga/non-attachment.htm#V9IndNews)* ) in
their traditional connotations. But the interpretation of the terms here
ascribed to him by the Indian Social Reformer's reporter is not in
accord with what the Swami has said elsewhere.) Nivarti means
subjugation and conquest of evil passions, of *Tamasa* nature of lust,
revenge and avarice. It does not mean conquest of all desire. It means
only the annihilation of gross desires. Every man is bound to love and
sympathize with his fellow-creatures. \[A\] Sanyasi is one who has
vanquished all his selfish passions and vowed to devote his life for the
good of others. He loves all. "Pravirti" \[Pravritti\] means love of God
and all his creatures. Sanyasis ought to be fed. They are not like the
Christian bishops and Archbishops who must be paid to do their work with
thousands of pounds per annum; all whose earnings are spent upon their
own luxury — their wife and children. \[The\] Sanyasi wants only a
morsel of food, and then he places all his knowledge and services at the
disposal of the public. He is a wandering missionary. Individuals and
society have to work themselves up from "brute through man, into
divine". Even the lowest of the Hindus, the Pariah, has less of the
brute in him than a Briton in a similar social status. This is the
result of an old and excellent religious civilization. This evolution to
a higher spiritual state is possible only through discipline and
education.

The Shradh \[Shrâddha\] Ceremony[3](#fn3)

Every institution, caste, early marriage etc., that stands in the way of
education, ought at once to be knocked on the head. Even "Shradh" may be
given up, if the performance of it involves waste of time which might be
better used for self-education. But "Shradh" should not be given up. The
meaning of the Mantras is very edifying. The Mantras depict the
suffering and care undergone by our parents on our behalf. The
performance of it is an honour paid to the memory of the sum total of
the spirit of our forefathers, whose virtues we inherit. Shradh has
nothing to do with one's salvation. Yet no Hindu who loves his religion,
his country and his past great men should give up Shradh. The outward
formalities and the feeding of the Brahmins are not essential. We have
no Brahmins in these days worthy of being fed on Shradh days. The
Brahmins fed ought not to be professional eaters, but Brahmins who feed
disciples *gratis*, and teach them true Vedic doctrines. In these days,
Shradh may be performed mentally.

Education of Women

The jealous guardianship of our women shows that we Hindus have declined
in our national virtues, that we reverted to the "brutal state". Every
man must so discipline his mind as to bring himself to regard all women
as his sis ters or mothers. Women must have freedom to read, to receive
as good an education as men. Individual development is impossible with
ignorance and slavery.

Emancipation of the Hindus

Through the slavery of a thousand years, Hindus have at present
degenerated. They have forgotten their own self-respect. Every English
boy is taught to feel his importance, he thinks that he is a member of a
great race, the conquerors of the Earth. The Hindu feels from his
boyhood just the reverse that he is born to slave. We can't become a
great nation unless we love our religion and try to respect ourselves,
and respect our country men and society. The Hindus of modern times are
generally hypocrites. They must rise, and combine the faith in the true
Vedic religion, with a knowledge of the political and scientific truths
of the Europeans. The evils of caste seem to be more prevalent in the
South than in Bengal. In Bengal a Brahmin uses the water touched by the
Sudras, but here the Sudra is kept at a great distance by the Brahmin.
There are no Brahmins in \[the\] Kali Yug\[a\]. The Pariahs, our fellow
beings, ought to be educated by the higher castes, must \[ . . . \]
truths of Hindu religion and be \[ . . . \] Brahmins. The first duty of
a Brahmin is to love all. There must first be an amalgamation of the
Brahmins, then of all the Dwijas,[4](#fn4) and then of the Dwijas and
Sudras.

[→](02_the_indian_mirror_nov_28_1893.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Basu, Sri Sankari Prasad, "Swami Vivekananda in Madras:
    1892-1893 — Some New Findings", Prabuddha Bharata, 1974, pp. 296-98.
     
2.  [^](#fn2_1)The only verbatim report of Swami Vivekananda's ideas at
    this period in his life.   Though this extract does not mention
    Swami Vivekananda by name, refers to an M.A. which the Swami never
    received, and describes him as two years older than his actual age —
    still there is indubitable internal evidence that the Bengali Sâdhu
    was Swami Vivekananda. Furthermore, the date coincides accurately
    with the Swami's stay in Madras, and back-reference to this event
    published in the Indian Social Reformer, on July 13, 1902 is added
    confirmation. Incidentally, no copy of the Indian Social Reformer of
    1892-1893 is available today.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)A religious ceremony in which food and drink are offered
    to deceased relatives or ancestors.  
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Lit., "twice born" — applicable to the three higher
    castes in Hindu society by virtue of the investiture of the sacred
    thread, signifying spiritual rebirth.
