---
title: PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS IN CHICAGO

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](02_the_indian_mirror_nov_28_1893.htm)

## PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS IN CHICAGO

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 5-6.)

\[*The Indian Mirror*, December 7, 1893\]

———

HINDU CRITICISES CHRISTIANITY

———

MR.VIVEKANUNDA SAYS RELIGION OF THE VEDAS

IS RELIGION OF LOVE

———

VIVEKANUNDA SAYS CHRISTIANITY IS INTOLERANT

Dr. Noble presided at the afternoon session. The Hall of Colombus
\[Columbus\] was badly crowded. . . . Dr. Noble then presented Swami
Vivekananda, the Hindu monk, who was applauded loudly as he stepped
forward to the centre of the platform. He wore an orange robe, bound
with a scarlet sash, and a pale yellow turban. The customary smile was
on his handsome face and his eyes shown with animation. Said he:

We who come from the East have sat here on the platform day after day,
and have been told in a patronizing way that we ought to accept
Christianity because Christian nations are the most prosperous. We look
about us, and we see England, the most prosperous Christian nation in
the world, with her foot on the neck of 250,000,000 of Asiatics. We look
back into history, and see that the prosperity of Christian Europe began
with Spain. Spain's prosperity began with the invasion of Mexico.
Christianity wins its prosperity by cutting the throats of its
fellowmen. At such a price the Hindu will not have prosperity. (*Vide*
["Cantakerous
Remarks"](../../../volume_3/reports_in_american_newspapers/at_the_parliament_of_religions.htm#v9_indnews),
*Complete Works*, III: 474.)  
I have sat here to-day, and I have heard the height of intolerance. I
have heard the creed of the Moslem applauded, when to-day the Moslem
sword is carrying destruction into India. Blood and the sword are not
for the Hindu, whose religion is based on the law of love. (This last
paragraph is a heretofore unpublished extract.)

When the applause had ceased, Mr. Vivekananda went \[on\] to read his
paper, a summary of which follows: \[*Vide* ["Paper on
Hinduism"](../../../volume_1/addresses_at_the_parliament/v1_c1_paper_on_hinduism.htm),
*Complete Works*, I: 6-20\]. . . .

[→](04_the_indian_mirror_jun_14_1894.htm)

</div>
