---
title: "SWAMI VIVEKANANDA ON THE SEA-VOYAGE\n MOVEMENT"

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](05_the_indian_mirror_jul_20_1894.htm)

## SWAMI VIVEKANANDA ON THE SEA-VOYAGE MOVEMENT

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 260-62.)

\[*The Bengalee*, May 18, 1895\]

There is not a Hindoo who is not proud of Vivekananda Swami — who would
not honor him and his teachings. He has done honor to himself, to his
race and his religion. If we are right in this view, it follows that the
opinions of Vivekananda are entitled to the highest consideration. This
is what he says with regard to the sea-voyage movement: —

Expansion is life; contraction is death. Love is life, hatred is death.
We began to die the day we began to contract — to hate other races — and
nothing can prevent our death, until we come back to life, to expansion.
We must mix, therefore, with all the races of the earth and every Hindoo
that goes out to travel in foreign parts, does more benefit to his
country than hundreds of those bundles of superstition and selfishness
whose one aim in life is to be the dog in the manger. Those wonderful
structures of national life which the Western nations have raised are
supported by pillars of character — and until we can produce such by the
hundred, it is useless to fret and fume against this power or that
power. Does anyone deserve liberty who is not ready to give it to
others? Let us calmly and in manly fashion go to work — instead of
dissipating our energies in unnecessary frettings and fumings and I, for
one, thoroughly believe that no power in the universe can withhold from
anyone anything he really deserves. The past was great no doubt, but I
sincerely believe that the future in store is glorious still. (*Vide
[Complete
Works](../../../volume_4/writings_prose/reply_to_the_calcutta_address.htm#v9_indnews)*
, IV: 366.)

We must mix with other nations and take from them whatever good they
have to give us. It is our exclusiveness, our unwillingness to learn
from foreign nations which is mainly responsible for our present
degradation. We considered ourselves to be the elect of heaven, and
superior to the nations of the earth in all respects. We regarded them
as barbarians, their touch as pollution, their knowledge as worse than
ignorance. We lived in a world of our own creation. We would teach the
foreigner nothing — we would learn nothing from the foreigner. At last
the disillusion came. The foreigner became our master — the arbiter of
our destinies. We eagerly took to his learning. We found that there was
much in it that was novel, much that was highly useful. We found that so
far as the material comforts of life were concerned the foreigner vastly
out-distanced us — that his control over the powers of nature was far
greater than any we had dreamt of. He had annihilated time and space,
and had subordinated the powers of nature to the convenience of man. He
had many wonderful things to teach us. We learnt them eagerly. But still
we don't visit his country. If we do, we lose caste. We are under a
foreign Government. We eagerly study a foreign language and literature
and admire all that is good and beautiful in it. We use foreign articles
for dress and consumption. But still we dare not visit the country of
our rulers, for fear of excommunication. Against this unmeaning
prejudice, the great Swami, who is a Hindoo of Hindoos, indignantly
raises his voice of protest. The objectors, in his expressive language,
are like the dog in the manger. They will not travel to foreign
countries, — they will not allow others to travel. Yet the fact remains,
says the Swami, that these travelled Hindoos do more benefit to their
country than

hundreds of those bundles of superstition and selfishness, whose one aim
in life is to be like the dog in the manger. (*Vide [Complete
Works](../../../volume_4/writings_prose/reply_to_the_calcutta_address.htm#v9_indnews)*
, IV: 366.)

. . . . . .

If we had our *Rishis* in this age, as we had them in the ages that are
gone by, we are sure they would have withdrawn the interdiction to
sea-voyage, if indeed any such interdiction has been laid in the past.
Society is an organism which obeys the immutable law of progress; and
change, judicious and cautious change, is necessary for the well-being,
and indeed the preservation of the social system. However that may be,
it is something to know that so high an authority and so good a Hindoo
as Swami Vivekananda supports travel to foreign countries. . . .

[→](07_the_indian_mirror_jun_29_1895.htm)

</div>
