---
title: ON EDUCATION

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](09_the_indian_mirror_mar_25_1896.htm)

## ON EDUCATION

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, p. 101.)

\[*The Indian Mirror*, June 19, 1896\]

Swami Saradananda in a letter from London written to the Editor of the
*Brahmavadin* says: —

Swami Vivekananda has made a very good beginning here. A large number of
the people attend his classes regularly, and the lectures are most
interesting. Canon Haweis, one of the leaders of the Anglican Church,
came the other day, and was much interested. He saw the Swami before, in
the Chicago fairs, and loved him from that time. On Tuesday last, the
Swami lectured on "Education" at the Sesame Club. It is a respectable
club got up by women for diffusing female education. In this he dealt
with the old educational system of India, pointed out clearly and
impressively that, the sole aim of the system was "man-making" and not
cramming and compared it with the present system. He held that, the mind
of the man is an infinite reservoir of knowledge, and all knowledge,
present, past or future, is within man, manifested or non-manifested,
and the object of every system of education should be to help the mind
to manifest it. For instance, the law of gravitation was within man, and
the fall of the apple helped Newton to think upon it, and bring it out
from within his mind. His class days have been arranged as follows: —

Tuesdays, morning and evening; Thursdays, morning and evening; Friday,
evening question classes. So the Swami has to do four lectures, and one
class on questions every week. In the class lecture, he has begun with
Gnan \[Jnâna-\]Yoga. A short-hand report of these lectures is being
taken down by Mr. Goodwin, who is a great admirer of the Swami, and
these lectures will be published later on.

[→](11_the_brahmavadin_jul_18_1896.htm)

</div>
