---
title: OUR MISSION IN AMERICA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](17_the_indian_mirror_feb_24_1898.htm)

## OUR MISSION IN AMERICA

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, p. 208.)

\[*The Indian Mirror*, April 24, 1898\]

Swami Vivekananda, in introducing the lecturer Swami Saradananda, said:

Ladies and Gentlemen, — The speaker of tonight just comes from America.
As you all know here that America is for your country, although our
countrymen, specially Swami Dayananda Saraswati, used to call this
country as *Patal*, inhabited by Laplands, Rakshas and Asurs, &c.
(Laughter and loud cheers). Well, Gentlemen, whether it is *Patal* or
not you ought to decide that by seeing those few ladiespresent here, who
have come from the country of your so-called *Patal*, whether they are
*Naga Kanyas* or not. (Cheers). Now, America is perfectly a new country.
It was discovered by Columbus, the Italian, and before that a prior
claim is put forward by the Norwegians who say, that they have
discovered the northern part of it, and then before that there is
another prior claim of the Chinese, who at one time preached the noble
doctrine of Buddhism in all parts of the world, and it is said that
Buddhist Missionaries were also sent from India to America, and
specially in Washington, where some sort\[s\] of records are still to be
traced by any traveller going there. Well, the table has now been turned
at last for a century or more and instead of America being discovered,
she discovers persons that go over to her. (Loud applause). It is a
phenomenon that we observe every day there, multitudes of persons coming
over from every part of the country \[world?\] and getting themselves
discovered in the United States. It is a fact, well-known to you here
all that several of our own countrymen have been discovered in that way.
(Cheers). To-day, here I present before you one of your Calcutta boys,
that has been similarly discovered by the Americans. (Cheers).

[→](19_the_indian_mirror_feb_15_1901.htm)

</div>
