---
title: HINDU WIDOWS

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](19_the_indian_mirror_feb_15_1901.htm)

## HINDU WIDOWS

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, p. 458.)

\[*The Indian Social Reformer*, June 16, 1901\]

A question having arisen in America as to the Swami Vivekananda's
attitude towards social questions, a lady writes to an American paper as
follows: "In one of his lectures at the Pouch Mansion, (Probably
“India’s Gift to the World”, delivered February 25, 1895, of which there
is no verbatim transcript available. Cf. two American newspaper articles
published in *[Complete
Works](../../../volume_2/reports_in_american_newspapers/indias_gift_to_the_world.htm)*
, II: 510-14 for somewhat different reports of this issue.) he spoke of
the Hindu widows, declaring it unjust to state that they were generally
subjected to cruelty or oppression in the Indians \[*sic*\] homes. He
admitted that the prejudice against remarriage, and the custom which
makes the widow a member of the husband's family instead of that of her
own parents inflicted some hardships upon widows in India, and favoured
wise efforts for their education which would render them self-supporting
and in this way alleviate their condition. He emphasised his desire for
the education and elevation of the women of his country, including the
widows, by volunteering to give the entire proceeds of one of his
lectures in support of the school of Babu Sasipada Banerjee, at
Baranagar, near Calcutta, the institution of which preceded that of the
Pandita Ramabai, at Poona, and where, if I am not mistaken, the Pandita
herself obtained the first inspiration of her work. This lecture was
given, and the proceeds were forwarded to Babu Sasipada Banerjee, and
duly acknowledged."

[→](../../../unpublished/unpublished_contents.htm)

</div>
