+++
title = "siddhAnta tantrics and the mainstream brahminical path"

+++
I have yarned a lot on this topic from different angles: [1) The
shaivas: the
pAshupata-s](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/05/shaivas-pashupata-s.html)
  
3\) [dvijas and non-dvijas in the shaiva
cults](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/03/dvijas-and-non-dvijas-in-shaiva-cults.html)
2) [The
kAlAmukhas-I](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/02/kalamukhas-i.html)
[](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/02/kalamukhas-i.html)4)
[kAlAmukhas-II](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/03/kalamukhas-ii.html)

But I was brought back to it because ST happened to introduce me to a
confused brahmin woman who declared that her Dravidian guru had told her
that the siddhanta shaivas had dispensed with the “brahminical
strictures” and made their mata “more accessible” to all. This is not an
isolated opinion because we see precisely this view in the opinions of
several modern Dravidians who claim affiliation with the siddhAnta
tantric tradition, apparently without really understanding the tradition
too well. In fact nothing is farther from the truth in this regard when
one approaches the original siddhAnta school. While shUdras like
mUrtigaNa the successor of varmashiva and teacher of brahmin ishAnashiva
held prominent places in the siddhAnta tradition, it did not mean that
there was anykind of revolt against brahminical tradition, even if it
was somewhat atypical.

In fact it must be pointed out that the siddhAnta shaivas repeatedly
cite the authority of the now apparently lost uttara saMhitA of bhArgava
thus:  
iti varNAshramAchArAn manasApi na la\~nghayet | yo yasminn Ashrame
tiShThan dIkShitaH shivashAsane | sa tasminn eva samtiShThech
ChivadharmaM ca pAlayet ||  
“He should not even think of transgressing the varNAshrama practices. He
should stand within (maintain) the order he was in when he attained
shaiva initiation and at the same time maintain the practices of the
shaiva path.”

So the siddhAnta shaiva did not forsake his Ashrama or varNa when he
attained dIkSha into the shaiva path and was not a means of “revolting
against” or “escaping” the ordinances of the Aryas. The important point
to note was that the classical siddhAnta shaivas did not force a
sectarian shaiva path on their general audience of followers. An
examination of what survives of their extensively codified “dharma
shAstra” the shivadharma and shivadharmottara (alluded in the above
quoted from the bhArgavottara as shivadharmam), which have not been
edited and studied unlike the viShNu dharmottara shows that the general
followers were encouraged to maintain their existing
life-style/profession and varNa-related observances, while accomodating
the shaiva observances with that framework. In fact the basic
dharma-shAstric injunctions are relating to other nitya issues are
reiterated by the shiva-dharma. Secondly the siddhAnta tantric tradition
did retain the paurANic hindu pantheon despite being sectarian shaiva-s.
In fact their maintained a set of manuals termed the pratiShTha tantras
for the installation and temple worship of the remaining Hindu patheon
including kumAra, vinAyaka, viShNu, brahma, shaktIs of various gods,
mAtR^ikAs, vedic gods reduced to lokapAla-s, planets and gaNas. These
texts include the obscure manuscripts of pi\~Ngalamata, devyAmata, the
collection of the demon maya and the kiraNa Agama. The atharvavedic
shaivas also performed the whole series of abhichAra and counter
abhichAra rites for rulers as per vedic injunctions. Thus, there is no
evidence that the classical siddhAnta tantras were ever set up as a
counter-current to the mainstream brahminical path.
