+++
title = "The aspirants"

+++
RM had a charismatic appearance and could present a himself as an
intellectual. He was not a svayaM prakAsha but picked up knowledge from
different generally reticent sources and presented to his circle of
largely ignorant friends. He widely lectured to youngsters about the
Hindu ways of mythology, philosophy, exercise and ritual performance.
Most of his crowd was bored and clueless, forced to attend RM’s earnest
lectures at their equally clueless parents behest. N ran a similar show
of teaching the veda, more as a socializing process, also participated
in the above sessions. But RM disapproved of his teaching the veda in
such a non-serious way but still enjoyed the social intercourse N
generated through his activities. I kept out of all of this despite
several requests because I dwelt in the middle of the rasArNava as the
sAkShi but not the kartA. The one linked to me gave me input to the
outer social world, these were sthUla, or mundane links. But R was the
link to the sUkShma or the tattvas that we sought to witness as the
sAkShi.

RM noticed that in his vast flotsam mass, even as the mass with which we
travelled on the nadI on the boat, there were two peculiar ones. Knowing
that they were beyond the crowd, and that they might benefit from a more
advanced course, RM sent them to R. R in turn sent one of them to me
under peculiar circumstances. We waited at the square where we had
deluded many with the moha conferred on us by mahAgaNapati. There were
saw our accquaintence kanduka-netra of the second varNa, who was a
practical master of the madana-shAstra with that rasping accent like a
stick rattling on a railing. He went around us 5 times without seeing us
and finally converged on us. We talked to kanduka-netra as though we
were an unmatta — he still saw through to see me behind all that. There
were two others with us during this meeting. One only saw us as the
unmatta, while the second one saw through us. I said to that second one,
three words one in the dramiDa bhASha, one in the mahAraTTi language and
one in deva bhASha. The second one replied in deva bhASha. We had gotten
the data we wanted and bade them good bye to eat their abhojya food. We
promptly reported this to R, who said: “Wait till the mouse comes to the
trap, and let not the cat go after the mouse”. The lock and key had
fitted.
