+++
title = "mid-night thoughts on Pauranic testimony"

+++
“Hindus have no historical sense”; “India is a cul de sac”; “upaniShads
and the buddha were contemporaneous and had Greek influence”. I heard
all this gibberish and more from my school textbooks and leftist
colleagues. I had long back silently noticed the precision with which
Hindus recorded dates on their stone and copper plate inscriptions, be
it Sanskrit or a regional dialect. This immediately brought home to me
in a flash that the white scholars and their fellow-travellers were
looking for Hindu historicity in the wrong places. In fact, the texts
which were believed to contain historical records were dismissed as
being full of balony by the white scholars and their apers. I always had
a certain respect for the purANa-s and noticed that their genealogical
testimonies were indeed surviving, even if corrupt fragments of hoary
Hindu history, that actually recorded rulers of jamdbudvIpa. Obviously
there were many hoary kShatriya-s who were famous, like mandhAtA,
trasadasyu, kArtavIrya, bhagIratha, bharata, raghu, rAmachandra,
hiraNyanAbha, yuddhiShThira, kR^iShNa etc. But then there were also many
who were only names– yet the purANas faithfully preserved them and
despite the corruptions in texts had a largely consistent flow. Why
should these be preserved — especially in certain cases like the
bArhadrathas with some numerical figures with each king even if his only
mention was in these dynastic lists. It immediately struck me that the
paurANic testimony is real hindu history of a hoary time. In course of
my deep investigations of these genealogies I noticed that two white
scholars had independently appreciated the importance of the purANas as
historical tradition and had paid most careful attention to their
genealogies- Pargiter and Morton Smith. Still they had their biases- and
got some key sheet anchors wrong. But much of their work is still useful
and confirmed by my own studies. Ishwa Mishra is an internet raconteur
who has also invested a lot of effort on this matter but many of his
speculative forays are seriously misplaced despite the useful mass of
information he collects.

The main point I emphasize is that the purANas and not Pargiter, Smith,
Mishra, Kak or for that matter Witzel or Parpola should be taken as
standards for the genealogical testimony and dates. Most purANas state
that a gap of 1000, 1015, 1050, 1115 or 1150 years had elapsed between
the nanda period and the mahAbhArata war. A figure of 1000-1100 years
indeed likely to be correct figure for the core mahAbhArata event of the
great war.
