+++
title = "The death of Hambirrao"

+++
By 1687 the Mogol tyrant from Dilli, had fulfilled the dream cherished
by his ancestors since the days of the tyrant Akbar, namely to conquest
of the Deccan Sultanates. In a whirl wind campaign Awrangzeeb had
conquered the Adil Shahi kingdom, founded by the prince Adil Khan the
brother of the Ottoman sultan Mehmet II Fathi of Turkey and the Qutb
Shahi kingdom which was bravely defended to the very end by the Turk,
Abdur Razzak. Awrangzeeb had accused the two Islamic principalities of
being to lenient with the infidels and not prosecuting Jihad with
sufficient vigor. Now only his arch enemy the Maratha kingdom remained
independent in the Deccan.

Shivaji’s prodigal son Sambhaji was given to women and drink in the
company of a brave but lazy Kanyakubja brahmin poet Kalash. Sambhaji was
adviced by his commander-in-chief Hambirrao Mohite and brahmin adviser
Raghunath Hanmante to take the Islamic threat seriously and take steps
against Awrangzeeb. However, Sambhaji remained lazy and missed a golden
opportunity even as Awrangzeeb pressed home his fierce attacks on
Bijapur and Golconda. Hambirrao Mohite realizing the seriousness of the
situation tried to attack the Mogol army and whittle it down while it
was engaged against Golconda. However Sambhaji was not very keen on
pursuing this line of action. However, before long he realized to his
horror that Awrangzeeb had finished off the two Deccani sultans and
turned his attention towards his ultimate goal- Jihad against Kafrs and
bringing the whole of Hind under the cresent banner.

Hambirrao, the chief of the Maharatta army, had been appointed to this
post by Shivaji due his great deeds on the field. In the battle of
Bankapur in Karnataka he killed Hussain Khan Miana and led the
Maharattas to a great victory in which 5000 Afghans were slain. Then he
had conducted the great Maharatta counter-attack in late 1674 when with
a mobile cavalry division of 8000 men he began by attacking the Mogol
outposts in Khandesh and then rapidly moved into Baglana slipping past
the Mogol army. Then he forded the Narmada and invaded Gujarat,
attacking Mogol outposts at Ahmadabad, Burhanpur, Berar and Mahur. They
beat the Mogol army and returned to Maharashtra after outflanking them
with a rapid charge. Then he moved on to conquer the fort of Kelanja.
After these deeds in battle, Shivaji conferred on him the title of
c-‘n-c in the grand review of troops (vacant due to the death of the
earlier c-‘n-c Prataprao in the battle against Bahlol Khan). Hambirrao
had continued as the commander under Sambhaji after the Raje’s death in
1680. He was a man of considerable intelligence and strategy in addition
to his valor on the field.

Hambirrao seeing that the Mogol destruction of the Deccan Sultans could
profit the Marathas, started a series of campaigns to capture the
territory of the Deccan Sultanates. As soon as their capitals fell to
Awrangzeeb the Mogols failed to occupy all the territory of these
sultanates and Hambirrao moved in rapidly to annex these regions to the
Maharatta fold. Awrangzeeb then vowed that he would not return to Dilli
unless he had the bleeding head of Sambhaji placed on his foot. He found
that the Maharattas had gained rather than lost by his giant
out-flanking operations to clear Bijapur and Golconda. So the Awrangzeeb
decided to lead a two-fold attack- 1) He sent a mighty arm of his forces
to plunder south India and destroy the Maharatta base in Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu. 2) A second division was sent under Sarja Khan to pin the
Maharattas in Maharashtra by driving them westwards.  
To meet the first division Sambhaji despatched the Brahmana warrior
Keshav Pingle (brother of Shivaji’s late prime minister, Moro Tryambak
Pingle) with the talented Santaji Ghorpade, a relative of Shivaji, to
save Bangalore from the Mogols. While he sent his c-‘n-c Hambirrao to
ward off the thrust of Sarja Khan.

Sarja Khan was marching menacingly towards the West along the Krishna
with a mighty Mogol force that was destroying all in its wake. As the
Moslems made a deep thrust into Wai, Hambirrao realized that there was
no way of stopping this march unless he lured them into the forests of
Mahabaleshwar. Hambirrao personally led a small wing of commandos to
attack the great Mogol army while placing his troops all around the
hilly tracks of Mahabaleshwar. The Mogols fell upon him but with great
ferocity he staved off the attack and started retreating leading the
Mogol army into the hills. The Maharattas immediately fell upon it from
all sides and started shooting from their hideouts on the clueless
Mogols with their muskets and arrows. However, Sarja kept surging ahead
continously sending reinforcements to press on the Maharattas and try to
surround Hambirrao. Then the Mogol mined two of the hill slopes leading
up to Mahabaleshwar plateau where the Maharattas were stationed and
filling them with explosives, detonated it. Shaken by these two
explosions the Maharattas began to flee helter-skelter. The Mogols soon
rolled their heavy artillery and opened heavy fire on Hambirrao’s army.
Hambirrao realized that his men would not hold out much longer and a
defeat more or less guaranteed the end the Maharatta resistance to the
Mogols in Maharashtra. Unless he turned the tide right there there was
no hope stopping the Mogols from marching right through. With a chosen
group of 100 ace commandos he rushed straight at Sarja Khan with the aim
of killing him. This Maharatta band fought with unbelievable fury
leaving a lane of blood and severed heads through the Mogol army. The
swordsmanship of Mohite was unrivalled as he cut deep into the Mogol
troops bringing down all before him and reaching the artillery line. His
men fell upon the Mogol heavy artillery and destroyed the operators and
wetted the powder. Seeing the tables turning, the fleeing rank and file
of the Maharatta army recovered and fell upon the Mogols with renewed
fury. The Mogols were completely swept away by the attack destroyed.
However, in the midst of this Sarja Khan surrounded Hambirrao. The
Mohite’s horse was shot down under him, but he continued fighting on
foot and struck Sarja with his sword killing him. He was attacked on all
sides and his strength was ebbing from the cuts he received. But leaning
against a tree Hambirrao continued fighting keeping the Moslem assilants
at bay till head was finally cut off. However, the surge of the
Maharatta army was so great that the Mogol army was completely
destroyed.

But the cost of this last great victory of the Maharatta army in
Sambhaji’s reign was most expensive. In intelligent leadership,
knowledge of the terrain and strategy, Hambirrao had been unmatched.
Further, he was the only one who had dared to challenge Kalash and
mitigate his negative effect on Sambhaji. As Kincaid the British
commentator states, had the brave Hambirrao lived he had all the skill
and resources to repulse the Mogol offensive. But with his death the
Maharatta army in Maharashtra became rudderless. This was followed soon
after by [Sambhaji’s capture and execution by the
Mogols](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/13/the-end-of-sambhaji/).
