+++
title = "The conquest of Nagor"

+++
Nagor had been occupied by the Mohammedans after Khalji’s dreaded acts
and it passed into the hands of the Khans of Gujarat related to the
Turkic Qara U’nas tribe \[To which the great Amirs of the Southern
alliance like Qazaghan and Mir Hussain belonged\]. The Khan of Nagor was
the fierce Firoz Khan, a terror of Hindus, who died in 1454. On the
death of Firoz, his son Shams Khan ascended the gaddi. But he was
shortly thereafter thrown out by his brother Mujahid, who tried to
assasinate him. Maharana Kumbha saw the opportunity to liberate Nagor.
He provided refuge to Shams and with his army attacked Mujahid. Mujahid
narrowly escaped death and retreated to his cousins in Gujarat. Shams
was placed on Nagor and Kumbha asked him to treat Hindus with full
rights and dismantle all the fortification and defences he had built for
himself. The Turks roared to Shams in this court “Had you had a daughter
instead of a son, she would have rebuked you for demolishing your fort
at the behest of a Kaffr”. Shams humbly told the Rana that his officers
may murder him if he immediately demolished the fort and he would do so
in the near future. The Rana agreed to give him some time. Instead, he
found that Shams was strengthening the fortications of Nagor. The
Sisodia army immediately marched out the headed by the Rana himself to
take on Shams. He was crushed in the battle and all the Turkic officers
of the fierce Qara U’nas tribe were slaughtered on the field. Shams did
not even attempt to fight and escaped with life to his cousins in
Gujarat. Kumbha’s army rounded up all the Mohammedan fighters who
remained in the city and mercilessly beheaded them. The Turkic women
were spared their life but imprisoned. The wealth that the Turks had
seized from the Hindus was recovered by Kumbha and redistributed to the
Hindus. Cows, which where penned for slaughter were released and all the
mosques in the province were demolished and burnt down. Thus, having rid
the city of the vestiges of Mohammedanism, Kumbha brought the city back
to the Hindu fold. The Sultan of Gujarat furious over the defeat of the
Turks sent his army of around 40,000 under Maliq Kuddhay to destroy the
Rajputs. But Maharana Kumbha ambushed them near Nagor and led them
through narrow paths. Here they were enveloped by the Rajput forces and
the entire Islamic army along with its Maliq was destroyed.

The Ekalinga Mahatmaya states:

The king defeated the Mujahideen from Shakastan and slew all their
heroes at Nagapura (Nagor). He destroyed their fort completely, captured
the elephants and having slain the Mussalman hordes, destroyed the
Masjids erected by them and liberated the brahmins from bondage.

The Kirtistambha inscription states:

The great masjid built by Sultan Firoz, which showed the Mohammedans the
way to Nagor was reduced to rubble by the great Rana along with the
defenses and moats built by them.

Ferishta lies by stating that the Khan left Nagor and went to Gujarat
and then the Sultan of Gujarat tried to take the Rana but returned after
sometime. Clearly, Ferishta is lying- he does not tell us what happened
with his characteristic detail when he is narrating a Hindu rout.
Clearly the Sultans were kicked hard and routed. This point illustrates
that Ferishta consistently covers up all Moslem routs and creates and
grand narrative of the triumphant march of Islam into Hind ever since
Mhd. Ghaznavi. This is the narrative that the secularists have chosen to
peddle, by declaring the Hindu sources like Ekalinga Mahatmaya and the
Vira Vinoda as “unreliable” or “Hindus have no history”. Hindu kings
were on occasions been severe on the invaders and this point shows that
some regions were completely liberated only because they shelved their
usual liberality and ruthlessly chastised the enemy.
