+++
title = "We are zombies?"

+++
Marc, R and I had a strange philosophical discussion this week end, when
perhaps we could have spent time in more practical but rewarding things.

R and I have for long been what may be termed bhUta chaitanya vAdins in
the old Hindu parlance. We essentially believed that consciousness arose
from the neural material. Marc though somewhat closer to electron
orbitals than either of us in his daily existence made a strange
statement: I seem to accept the reality of consciousness much more than
you two, despite you all being born Hindus. We hastily clarified that we
do not deny the existence of consciousness like most other Hindus, we
merely *believe* that it has a neural origin. There is a certain
philosopher, if we can call him that, named Dan Dennett, who almost
argues that there is no such thing as consciousness. Unlike him we do
not deny it but realize that it exists. So we decided to make sure that
we meant the same thing as Marc in the term “consciousness”.

We agreed that consciousness is the “first person experience”- that is
when I see a saffron flag, I have an experience of saffron. Now this is
to be distinguished from the basic underlying neurobiological processes:
1) Light from the saffron cloth impinges on my retina. 2) Some retinals
buried in the 7-TM cylinders formed by rhodopsin molecules flip. 3) The
7TM protein undergoes a conformational change. 4) This change activates
a hetero-trimeric G-protein. 5) The G-protein signal cascade ultimately
results in a cascade via an ion channel. 6) This channel opening
transmits a neural impulse that ultimately propagates with the
intermediaries of synapses and neurotransmitters to the brain…… 7) There
the signal is compared with some internal RGB or CMYK color grid and
recorded as a color. Some such sequence of steps are involved in color
reception and recognition. We are certainly interested in knowing all
about the every protein involved in this process and this is the biology
if signal recognition. Dan Dennett claims that *this is* consciousness\!
We admit that this is not really consciousness, this a functional
description of signal reception and recognition process; it is the first
person experience of saffron that constitutes consciousness.

So what is explanation that first person experience? I being a
philosopher of a certain kind (and also R being influenced by my
philosophical trends, before she started to orbit Marc) argued, that it
is indeed something hard and we are not in a position to explain first
person experience in an easy way. But we clearly see a selective
advantage for it and hence believe has been fixed by natural selection.
Hence, it has to have a neural origin. Marc retorted that a system
without the presence for first person experience by all the requisite
signal reception/recognition apparatus that generates should be enough
to provide the necessary stuff for the action of natural selection.
Thus, he said we could be philosophical Zombies lacking the first person
experience but still function efficiently if the functional apparatus
were working (as David Chlamers, another philosopher, cogently posited).
So indeed the functional apparatus is a product of natural selection,
but the first person experience is not necessiated by it. To put in
another way the bio-machine can whirr and chug, as seen by the third
person biologist, but why does that produce a first person experience.

Marc in a very Chalmersian way believed in the existance of a
extra-physical consciousness, that is somehow direct property of
existence like mass-energy or charge: that is he feels it to be an axiom
in a theory that cannot be explained on the basis of pre-existing axioms
like mass-energy, charge or spin. At that point we realized we were
reliving the discussions of the great sAmkhyan seers of yore. Many
thoughts were flowing and we all felt the need to meditate upon them.
