+++
title = "Jalal-ud-din"

+++
One branch of the Chahamanas, after the death and defeat of king
Prithiviraja Chahamana and the fall of their capital Dilika (Old Delhi),
continued the struggle against Islam from Ranthambhor.

\-In 1209 the Rajputs stoutly defended this great fortress against
Qutub-ud-din, who was dispatched by Ghori to sack it, and routed him.

\-In 1226 Il-tut-mish attacked the fort with renewed vigor and bought
off a Hindu traitor who enabled him to take the fort.

\-During the reign of female Sultan Razziya and her lover, the Rajputs
crushed the Turkish garrison and recaptured the fort.

\-In 1249 the Moslems made another attempt to sack the fort under the
terrible Mamluq Sultan Balban but he was completely defeated by the
Rajputs and fled back to Delhi.

\-In 1282 Rana Hammira ascended the throne of Ranthambore and restored
the glory of the Rajputs by annexing Ujjaini, Ajayamerupura, Pushkara
and the Gond territory. The expanding Hammira Deva hoped to evict the
Turks from India but this was not be.

His expansion shook the Turkish ruler of Delhi, Jalal-ud-din Khalji, who
decided to punish the Kaffir and set out with a large force of horsemen
under the command of Maliq Qutlugh Tegin and Abaji Akhur Beg. He reached
the outskirts of the Hindu territory after a march of 14 days with
absolutely no forward action taken by the Hindus. While he sent spies to
investigate the Rajput positions, he decided to raid the surroundings of
Jhain. Here, the Moslems drove the Hindus out of their villages and shot
them down with poisoned arrows and plundered the area. Then they
attacked the city of Jhain, when Rana Hammira reacted and sent his
successful commander, called “Gurdan Saini” (by the Moslems). He
proceeded with a force of elite Rajput force mainly of infantry fighters
to aid the governor of Jhain to parry the Moslem assault. While the
Rajputs had a good fighting force the main problem in this conflict was
the reliance on infantry against an entirely horse-borne mobile Turkish
force. They formed a battle formation and waited for the cavalry charge
but the Turks first only kept shooting poisoned and fire-tipped arrows
by rapidly moving. This mobility made the Hindu long bow archer, despite
his far greater bow-draw fairly ineffective. As they tired from a long
stand off with little forward movement Qutlugh Tegin then made a sudden
charge at the Rajput center and slew Saini after a pitched battle. The
Hindus shaken by fall of their commander fell into disarray, as the
governer of Jhain fled to the Ranthambhor fort, and were defeated by the
Moslems. Jalal entered the palace of the Raja and the Hindu temples in
the city and having admired their great beauty completely destroyed
them. Two bronze idols of Brahma (? that is what the Moslem historians
claim) each weighing more than 1000 Man were broken into pieces and
given to the amirs and sipahsalars to throw them at the gates of the
Jama Masjid in Delhi so that Moslems would trample over them while
entering. In the words of Ziaudin Barani he made a hell out of what was
paradise.

The Rajputs decided to go into defensive and started assembling their
troops to and defences around Ranthambhor. Jalal seeing this saw the
opportunity of plunder and sent a mobile squadron under the Mahmud
Sarjandar, a Turk from Konduz, to attack Malva. They rapidly crossed to
Chambal and Kuwari by evading the infantry Hindu forward guard without
an encounter. In Malva they plundered the towns and slew the inhabitants
by rounding them up in herds and shooting them down. Ferishta and Barani
record that they smashed several temples and returned after collecting
the loot. Jalal then arrived before Ranthambhor but the Rajput force
gathered hurled rocks and ballistas from the fort. Repulsed by them
Jalal lost heart and returned to Delhi.

[Continue
here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/20/hammira-devas-last-stand/)
