+++
title = "Implements of the shrauta ritual … continued"

+++
**ulUkhala-musala**: The mortar and pestle used for pounding grains to
separate husk. They are made of khadira wood. The ulUkhala may also use
palasha wood, and be about knee heigth. The musala may have a metal
base.

**dR^ishad-upala**: The grinding stone for grinding the grains into the
flour for various preparations such as the puroDAsha. They are fashioned
from stone.

**kapAla**: The circular potsherd on which the puroDAsha cakes are baked
and offered. They may be by default the width of 2 angulas or 1/4th of
the palm. Larger ones are scaled according the default but should be no
bigger than the palm. The apUpas may also be baked on a puroDAsha in
certain rites to indra.

**rauhiNa** **kapAla**: These are specialized kapAlas always used as a
pair. They are circular in shape the diameter of a palm, and mounted on
ceramic horses. They are specifically used in baking the specialized
pravargya offerings to the ashvins.

**rauhiNa havaNi**: There are pair of specialized sruch like ladles with
flat terminals (that is lacking a cup, but a flat plate of the same
outline instead) with a downward drooping protuberance. They are used
for offering the rauhiNa cakes in the pravargya.

**iDA pAtrI**: The shape of the outline should be ovoid, broad at the
ends and constricted in the middle like a non-intersecting “8” figure or
an hour-glass. It is one araTni in length, depth of 3 angulas and has a
clyindrical handle of 4 angulas. The various oblations may be mixed in
it before offering. Made from bronze or vAraNa wood.

**puroDAsha pAtri**: A square outline vessel with each side a pradesha
and a depth of upto 6 angulas. A handle of 4 angulas. Used to make
offerings of whole puroDAshas. Material is same as above.

**piShTa pAtri**: The length is 20 angulas, depth 6 angulas and breadth
6 1/2 angulas. vaikhAnasas alone specify their vessel to have a circular
rim at the end away from the handle. Same type of handle as above. May
be made from vAraNa or clay. Used to offer piShTa or mix the flour with
water to make the puroDAsha dough.

**ShaDvatta pAtraM**: The outline is shaped like two peepal leaves fused
together at the base. On each broad leaf shaped part there is one cavity
each. In each cavity goat cheese or goat butter is placed. Then the part
of the puroDAsha to be offered is cut into two equal parts and placed in
each cavity on the cheese/butter. On top of the puroDAsha a second layer
of cheese or butter is added. Thus the offering is six fold is prepared
when ever indicated. The agnIdhra priest may eat these offerings if so
directed in the ritual.

**prashitra haraNa**: It is a special set of spoons of the brahmA
priest. They are made shaped as a cow’s ear, a peepal leaf, a lotus bud
and a square. The puroDAshas offered to agni and soma are cut to remove
a small piece that is placed on these spoons and brought to the brahmA,
covered by a wooden lid. He eats from these spoons.

**dogdhre patre**: They are a pair of vessels which are shaped like a
sruch without a handle but have beaks shaped like the tip of an
elephants trunk. The two are used to mix the milk of the ewe and the cow
in the pravargya ritual.

**vasordhArA**: special device with a large receptacle at one end into
which ghee is poured. The receptacle drains out through a groove passing
though a staff a vyAyAma in length and ends in a beak. The offering in
constantly streamed into the fire through this device. Made of audumbara
wood.  

**antardhAna kaTa**: semicircular wooden plate twelve angulas in length.
It may have a handle of 3 angulas on either side at the diameter or
along a 60 degree radius. The plate has to shield the dIkShitAni or the
patni from the sight of the AhavanIya when the offerings to the
goddesses are made.

**vighana**: A wooden hammer with one head flat and the other head
conical and ending a ball like protuberance. It is used to break earth
clods at the sacrificial ground and ramming the earth for the site of
the vedi.

**rAjAsandi**: A high four legged stool made of audumbara wood. It is
covered with the kR^ishNajina or the black-buck skin and the base of the
seat is woven from the munja grass cords. The seat should be the height
of the navel of the dIkShita and leg bars should extend an araTni beyond
the seat. The soma plant is placed on it

**saMrADAsandi**: it is a seat similar to the rAjAsandi but is higher
than it at the seat level. The mahAvIra pots are placed on top of it.

**adhiShavaNa**: These are the soma pressing boards. Audumbara or
palasha wood is used for them. They are covered with antelope leather
and their front parts are semi-circular. The soma is crushed on them
with 5 stones.

**droNa kalasha**: A reservoir for the soma juice. vAraNa wood is
preffered for it. It is outline is like a peepal leaf, or a boat or
square. It is deep to hold enough soma and has a handle of 4 angulas.  

**dasha pavitra**: The soma filter. It has a cloth rim and a central
filter section woven from the wool of a white sheep by the dIkShitAni.
It is shaped as to fit over the droNa kalasha.

**pariplu**: a small wooden vessel made from the vika\~NtI wood. It is
like a sruch without a handle. It is used to draw soma from the droNa
kalasha for AghAra pourings.
