+++
title = "indivara and vAravantikA"

+++
**“Those who want to know the real story will know it.”**

Beyond the world of the Falcon, stationed in eternal time, were the
great atharvans. udvanta AtharvaNa amongst them held a soma cup. He
descended to the sattra of the 3 seers. He asked preNin the son of
somAhita, madhucchandas the vaishvAmitra and asita the kAshyapa to make
their wishes. preNin wished that he should have the best goat and that
which ever woman he calls unto him should desire him.

….  
  
preNin saumAhita got his wish but could not look at the soma cup.  
  
….

preNin’s spell that issued from him fell in the village girt by the high
mountains. Amongst the mountains was a resting place where vaNijas and
grAmaNyas rested and drank surA, rAghakhAnDava, maireya and other
durmadas. indIvara one day, after a long journey, in course of which he
was nearly eaten by a tiger, arrived at the rest house. He scrupulously
avoided the mada, the matsya and the mAMsa that was being plied and fed
himself strictly on food that was fit for a brAhmaNa. When preNin had
died the deadly spell, charged with the might of the AtharvaNa’s boon,
had issued from him and entered a stone placed on his smashAna. indIvara
taking his food, sat on a tripod to consume it, some distance from the
smashAna. varAvantikA, the great grand-daughter of upamA was passing by.
She looked just like her great-grandmother in her prime. She happened to
step on the smashAna, which was concealed under moss. A gandharva
emerged from it an entered her, even as the gandharva that entered the
daughter pata\~njala kApya in the land of the mAdras. She called out to
indIvara as she proceded to obtain a leather bladder filled with the
maireya brew. vAravantikA stated that she had not forgotten indIvara for
the rites he had performed for her and thanked him for that. indIvara
asked her if need any further rites to be done. She claimed that she was
capable of everything with her own rituals. But at some point she said
that she was not sure if they helped her to cross the great mystery
depicted by the code: Da kshaa Da ha ha Ta 654123 indIvara excitedly
said he had the means to cross that. Just then kaumbhya and shammad
arrived and asked vAravantikA to share her bladder of durmada with them.
indIvara had earlier cast a deadly spell on the false-mouthed shammad,
which had burned down his house and cattle-shed. So indIvara withdrew
wanting to avoid any further run in shammad. vAravanitkA too knowing of
shammad’s odd ways avoided him and moved away with kaumbhya and they
were soon joined by gara and gAndama with whom they savored the durmada
from the bladder, until late at night. indIvara proceeded with his
wanderings and after visiting the groves of The God returned to
rest-house the village. After finishing his lunch there he was about to
retire for some rest before going to examine the booty that gara and
gAndama had brought in their car. Just then, he caught sight of the
beautiful vAravantikA pass by. For some he asked her if she would like
to know the secret of Da kshaa Da ha ha Ta 654123.  
  
vAravantikA: “There are two
[shiro-veSTa](http://www.uni-koeln.de/cgi-bin/SFgate?language=english&verbose=0&listenv=DL&application=%2fphil-fak%2findologie%2ftamil%2fmwd&convert=Tabelle&waisurl=%2Fvol%2Finfo%2Fwais%2Fdb%2Ftamil2%2Fmwd/HTML/92/1=local;2=/vol/info/wais/db/tamil2/mwd;3=20237782%2020237874%20/vol/info/wais/data/.wais-data/tamil2/mwd.txt;4=local;5=/vol/info/wais/db/tamil2/mwd;6=20237782%2020237874%20/vol/info/wais/data/.wais-data/tamil2/mwd.txt;7=%00;)s;
one is placed after Ta, after 1, after that comes a ka; the second is
placed before the last Da Da kShaa kShaa Ta.”  
  
indIvara: “I know how one can trace the thorny path to the shiro-veSTas
and the and the anya vastras to see the great rahasya of vAravantikA’s
astyaANu-bhuk.  
  
vAravantikA: “indIvara, I verily know that you are the one who saw the
rahasya of these astyaANu-bhuks when I was pounding grain for gara and
gAndama. It was because of this rahasya that I got back the wealth of
upamA and regained my regal status.”  
  
indIvara: “I can take you to the deepest rahasyas of this world of the
astyaANu-bhuks.”  
  
vAravantikA: “Meet me tonight at the room near the madhu shAlA. Let us
talk about this”  
  
indIvara: “Sure”

indIvara then went to look at the booty of gara and gAndama. indIvara
found their collection ordinary, because he had seen and possessed all
that before. But two kept claiming that they were the only ones who
possessed them and that the king of the gandharas was always in praise
of them for their wonderful possessions. indIvara rued the fact that the
chief of sthUlArma hardly bothered about the same things that he used to
show him from time to time. After chatting with gara and gAndama,
indIvara proceeded to have dinner and then walked silent to the room
near the madhu shAlA to meet with vAravantikA. After a while vAravantikA
arrived and kaumbhya, gara, gAndama, gojihva, ukShamukha, babluja\~Ngha,
kapotagrIva, ajadADhika and bIDAlasmashru followed her thickly trying to
get a glimpse or a word of attention from her. She fooled them by saying
that she would shortly join them with a bladder of kautsasya surA and
slipped into the nearby room.
