+++
title = "The brahmin brain-drain"

+++
For particular unstated reasons, I shall concentrate on the brahmins of
the southern state of Tamil Nad for a case study. We have earlier
discussed how the brahmins might face number of problems in the
immediate future, which may destroy them and in the process damage
India. We shall now look into the problem of the brahmin brain-drain.

The brahmins of Tamil Nad are a diverse group. Their earliest migrations
from North India seem to have started after bAvari, the early colonizer
of dakShiNA patha. Their presence in attested in the form of their role
in formalizing the Dravidian language Tamil along the lines of Sanskrit
in the Tolkappiyam and as composers of early Tamil poetry (eg. Kapilar).
Subsequently several great waves of brahmin immigrants moved into the
southern state from North India, during the Pallava period, the imperial
Chola period and the Vijayanagara-Maharatta period. Specimens of the
earliest wave of brahmins entering Tamil Nad appear to now be restricted
within the groups of the Cholians and the Dikshitars of Chidambharam.
They are closest to the Nambuthiris of the Chera country and like them
maintain an frontal shikha (in contrast to the rear shikha of the later
brahmin groups). The Nambuthiris through their selective mating
practices retained a considerable degree of closeness to the ancestral
Indo-Aryan stock from the north within the brahmin fold. In contrast
many of the brahmin migrant groups of TN appear to have taken up the
Dravidian inheritence into the brahmin fold (probably by mating with
Dravidian women in the late Pallava and imperial Chola period- within
the realm of anuloma). This is clearly reflected in the presence of
certain Dravidian physical features amongst several Brahmins of TN. The
somewhat later immigrants amongst the TN brahmins appear to retain a
greater frequency of Northern features.

Right from their early days in TN we find the brahmin intellectuals
leaving their ancestral fold and move out to other folds. In the
earliest stages there was some drain into the bauddha sanga. For
example, the famous buddhist acharya bodhidharma who taught the Chinese
the martial arts (like the Nambuthiri Kalari payattu and Ayyar Marma
Ati) was a brahmin from Kanchipuram. Then there was a massive drain of
brahmin intellectuals towards the Jaina fold-Some of the great early
south Indian jaina acharyas were brahmins, including the guy who built
the massive stone image of bahubali. While there was this brain drain
from their ancestral vedic fold, the activities of the jaina and bauddha
brahmins helped to tether these heterodox streams to the mainstream.
They also greatly contributed to the Aryanization of Tamil, Kannada and
Telugu and their integration with the Indo-Aryan cultural core of the
sub-continent. Then came the wave of sectarian bhakti cults in South
India in the form of Krishnaism, Shaivism and Kaumarism. These movements
too attracted elopement from the core elite brahmin stock. Over and
beyond these religious distractions the brahminical stock also pursued a
variety of secular activities that were generally within their ancestral
job descriptions as administrators in various capacities.

However, in contrast to these historical brain drains of brahmins, the
modern phenomenon appears to more pernicious. As I described before, the
brahmins are cashing their cheque and making no attempt to rebuild their
historical resource. To elaborate further: In the past when the brahmin
invaded a new territory or entered a new movement such as Jainism or
Buddhism he did not lose his ancestral lore. He instead transmitted this
to the host cults and movements. When he took up a secular job, he still
retained his ritual practices and used his earnings to sponsor more
rituals and furthering the practice of his core Indo-Aryan cultural
practices. The need to excel in complex rituals kept his brain sharp and
active and he could contribute this acumen to his secular pursuits. In
contrast, in the modern brain drain is of a different kind. The modern
brahmins of TN were initially broken by the Dravidian supremacists.
After this they started shifting to secular jobs and in the process
gained English education, but lost their Sanskrit education unlike their
predecessors serving in the mideaval courts. With the loss of Sanskrit
education there was a massive brain-drain of Brahmins from the sphere of
orthodox Indo-Aryan ritualism, creating a fertile ground for god-men
purveying diverse Babaisms to grow. Thus, the intellectual brahminical
orthodoxy made way in the mind of the plebians for the Babas peddling
their outrageously simplistic solutions for most of their ills.

In the mean time the brahmin’s loss of Sanskrit education resulted in
him no longer understanding or being able to carry out his rituals. The
lack of the rigorous strictures imposed by the need to learn extensive
Sanskrit texts and rituals would soon have its effects on the mental
faculties and make the Brahmin merge with the rest of the mass in this
department. Finally the loss of the Brahmin’s knowledge has made him
turn to those very same Babaisms that have filled up his vacant turf for
religious succour. Thus, we shockingly find Brahmins thronging to this
Baba or that or even the Hare Krishnas in search of religious teachings.
The net effect of all this is the denudation of the bed-rock of the
Indian state, namely the unity supported by the Indo-Aryan
religio-cultural practices. This in my opinion makes the Indic state
more vulnerable to implosion under the Abrahamic viruses of the Mind.
