+++
title = "The roguish Karttikeya and the wives of the gods"

+++
**We worship the roguish deity kumAra with offerings as ordained by the
school of the great sage gopatha.**

Due to the efficiency of the law enforcement and strictures of the
dharma shAstra the rogues and thieves of the land were no longer able
achieving their aims. So the rogues and thieves decided to worship the
great spear-wielding deity who is known to some as son of agni, to
others as the first born son of the fierce rudra and to yet other as the
son of the kR^ittikA-s. The chief of the taskara-s accordingly set up a
well decorated maNDapa and invoked kumAra with the great formulae ending
in the refrain “**dhurtaM AvAhayAmyahaM**“. Pleased by the worship the
six-headed god promised the rogues that their trouble will come to an
end.

Accordingly the fowl-bannered deity incarnated as the sage
kanaka-shakti-hastin. kanaka-shakti-hastin became the great sage of the
rogues and robbers and composed the text on taskaravidya for their
benefit. Armed with this the thieves regained their ways and accordingly
offered worship to the great ShaNmukha.

After slaughtering tAraka, the lord of the dAnavas, the commander of the
deva army, who is endowed with good looks and great prowess, took to
amorous and erotic sports. On account of his looks he started flirting
with all the goddesses in svarga and engaged in dalliance with the wives
of other great deities. On account of his charms the goddesses were
unable to keep away from the six-headed god and constantly milled around
him and were lost in his embraces and passionate plays. In great
consternation, the deva-s rushed to the great daughter of the mountains
and asked umA to save their wives from her son. umA called her fiery son
and upbraided him about his ways. But the great deity ignored her and
continued dallying with the goddesses. Finally to save the devas from
this situation, umA decided to manifest in every goddess. Thus, to which
ever wife of the god kumAra went, he only saw his mother umA. Utterly
disgusted he renounced his amorous sports and vanished to the seclusion
of kumAra parvata.

**oM vacadbhuve namaH**
