+++
title = "The saiddhAntika-s and the kaumara-s"

+++
I was examining a kaumAra manual used by priests from Kilmangalam (a
village near the town of Periyakulam) for the worship at the aruLmigu
bAlAsubrahmaNya temple. The temple is itself was built around 1020 CE by
one of the greatest Indian emperors, choLa rAjendra-I. The temple has an
apocryphal legend associated with it: rAjendra was hunting boars and at
this spot killed a boar sow which was feeding its piglets. He had a
vision of kumAra feeding the orphaned piglets and keeping them alive.
Struck by the vision rAjendra built a temple to honor kumAra. The
kaumAra manual used by the Kilmangalam priests to conduct rituals at
this temple is from the 1500s of CE composed by a certain hAlAsya. In
its opening it has a salutation to great saiddhAntika tantriks of yore.
It names durvAsa as the founder of the lineage and then lists the
following historical tantriks:  
1\) sadyojyotis son of kheTaka 2) bR^ihaspati 3) nArAyaNakaNTha 4) his
son rAmakaNTha-II 5) aghora-shiva deshika.

The South Indian Urdhvasrotas (saiddhAntika ) commentarial tradition
remembers many great prior Acharya-s and siddha-s, but like its
Kashmirian counterpart its memory starts with sadyojyotis and
bR^ihaspati, both of whom are termed siddha-s. After this it shifts to
the great Kashmirian lineage which opens with bhaTTa rAmakaNTha-I:  
rAmakaNTha-I -\> vidyAkaNTha-I -\> nArAyaNakaNTha -\>rAmakaNTha-II -\>
vidyAkaNTha-II and shrikaNTha (probably).

Then it remembers the Tantrik-s of the mattamayUra lineage and its great
patron, the Rajput king bhoja, from northern and central India (outside
of Kashmir): brahmashambhu, mahArAja bhojadeva paramAra, somashambhu and
ishAna-shiva.

In south India itself it remembers the great Tantriks-s of the greater
Tamil country like:  
aghora-shiva, his student vaktra-shambhu, j\~nAna-shiva and
trilochana-shiva associated with Chidambaram and Mysore.

An even earlier lineage of saiddhAntika Tantrik teachers in the south is
recorded in the inscriptions of the chAlukya king vikramAditya-I of
bAdAmI. The rAja himself was initiated into the Urdhvasrotas mantras by
sudarshanAchArya and his school included the shaiva brAhmaNa scholars:
rudra-shiva, gAyatrI-shiva and parama-shiva. Similarly, the pallava king
narasimhavarman-II also mentions attaining dIkSha into the saiddhAntika
mantras in an inscription on the rAjasimheshvara temple in Kanchi (\~700
CE), but we know little of his lineage beyond this. No scholarly works
on the tantras from any these early South Indian lineages are currently
known.

There is no evidence that the earlier saiddhAntika-s from the pallava
and chAlukya courts contributed directly to the medieval siddhAnta
tradition. The illustrious South Indian Acharya aghora-shiva deshika of
Chidambaram carried out a major synthesis with the saiddhAntika
tradition by unifying the ritual prescriptions of mahArAja bhoja and
somashambhu, with the Kashmirian commentaries of bhaTTa nArAyaNakaNTha
and bhaTTa rAmakaNTha on the core tantra-s of the Urdhvasrotas. It is
fairly reliably known that aghorashiva was active around 1150 CE and he
expresses tremendous veneration for his Kashmirian predecessors. This
suggests that there was a new influx of the siddhAnta traditions from
Kashmir and Malava (e.g. king bhoja’s work) to the Tamil country prior
to aghora-shiva. After he wrote his synthetic paddhati this became the
standard tradition in the Tamil country with the Kashmirian Acharya-s
providing theoretical base. One notable late change was the subtle
transformation of the saiddhanta tradition with vedantic elements by the
smArta appayya dIkShita.

In the Kashmirian tradition bhaTTa vidyAkaNTha-II was a contemporary of
abhinavagupta, while rAmakaNTha-I was possibly closer to utpaladeva or
just before him. sadyojyotis and bR^ihaspati might have also been from
Kashmir but we have little information about their lives. sadyojyotis
was definitely pre-sha\~nkara. In his polemics against advaitin-s he
clearly attacks the pre-sha\~nkara advaita like that of
bhartR^i-prapa\~ncha who expounds pariNati-vedAnta in his
bR^ihadAraNyakopaniShad commentary. One can imagine how sha\~nkara
having transformed vedAnta into mAyAvAda must have retaliated against
these shaiva-s and demolished them in the debates that are supposed to
have occurred in Kashmir and other places. The fightback against the
mAyAvAda form of advaita is seen only later amongst the saiddhAntika-s
in the works of rAmakaNTha-II.

\-The main works of sadyojyotis that survive are : 1) the triad of works
comprising the commentary on the raurava-sutra-saMgraha, namely the
bhoga-kArikA, mokSha-kArikA and paramokShanirAsa-kArikA: collectively
the raurava-vR^itti. 2) The commentary on the svAyambhuva-sUtra saMgraha
named svAyambhuva-vR^itti. 3) Two works on the nature of existence
according to these two sUtra collections: tattva-saMgraha and the
tattva-traya-nirNaya. 4) nareshvara-parIkShA- a polemical work laying
the siddhAnta shaiva position in contradistinction to the AstIka
darshana-s, earlier pAshupata shaiva-s and pA\~ncharAtric vaiShNava.  
\-The siddhAnta Tantrik bR^ihaspati-s works are poorly known and are :1)
the raurava vArtika on the raurava-sutra saMgraha and 2) the
shiva-tanu.  
\-bhaTTa nArAyaNa-kaNTha wrote the once famous sharan-nishA that is
supposed to have clarified the tattva saMgraha of sadyojyotis like the
moon shining on an autumn night. This work is remembered in both
Kashmirian and Tamil tradition but does not seem to survive. He also
composed new commentaries on the mR^igendra tantra.  
\-His son rAmakaNTha-II not only commented on the works of sadyojyotis
but also on the mata\~NgapArameshvara tantra.  
\-aghora-shiva in Tamil Nad composed commentaries building precisely on
the works of nArAyaNa-kaNTha and rAmakaNTha and appears to follow their
conservative path. This is quite clear from his epitome of the siddhAnta
worship presented in the 100 verse stotra known as the
pa\~nchAvarNa-stava. Similarly, his student vaktra-shambhu also from TN
seems to build on nArAyaNa-kaNTha’s work on the mR^igendra.

rAmakaNTha-II makes an interesting statement in the beginning of his
commentary on the mata\~NgapArameshvara that the siddhAnta tantras have
been interpreted according to the theories of the nyAya atomists,
vedantins and kaula Tantriks. rAmakaNTha-II then seeks to restore what
he calls the correct saiddhAntika interpretation as per the path
originally laid by sadyojyotis. Even the non-siddhAnta trika-kaula
tantrics like abhinavagupta and the shrIvidyA tantric jayaratha cite
these siddhAnta tantra-s and use them as authoritative works. They also
try to accommodate bR^ihaspati and sadyojyotis within their scholarly
framework. This shows that the siddhAnta tantra (and other such Agamic
scriptures) had an independent position of respect (even if not on par
with the shruti). This was probably in no small part due the prominent
role they played in the domain of sthApana (=temple establishment),
prayoga (=goal-oriented tantric rites) and yoga. In general other
streams of AstIka thought and nAstIkas too in a subversive sense sought
seem to have a priori accepted the praxis and mantra-shAstra of these
tantras, though within their own established contexts. Thus, well before
appayya dIkShita there were multiple attempts to treat the siddhAnta
tantra-s from the stand point of other AstIka theoretical frameworks,
including non-siddhAnta tantric models, rather than the one preferred by
the shaiva tantriks.

As we have seen above the works of vaktra-shambhu and aghora-shiva
suggests that the medieval South Indian authorities returned to the
conservative path of interpretation of the Kashmirian shaivas by
adopting rAmAkaNTha and nArAyaNakaNTha as the standard. But what about
their association with the kaumAra path? As we know the temple of
aruLmigu bAlAsubrahmaNya was in place before aghora-shiva and kaumara
temples were present in TN even before that. The kaumAra path in TN is a
much earlier transmission from North India — it is possible that it was
associated with the early pre-aghorashiva saiddhAntika-s like those
associated with the earlier chAlukya and pallava kings. However, we have
no evidence for that. In fact the chAlukyas, pallava-s and kadamba-s who
began as feudatories of the pallava-s were [kumara
worshipers](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/10/28/royal-kumara-worshippers/)
even before their kings started acquiring shaiva dIkSha. The kaumAra
path also has no notable role in the siddhAnta works of Kashmirian
lineage or that of bhoja. Hence, it becomes likely that the siddhAnta
shaivas actually invaded the domain of the preexisting and took over
their activities especially in the domain of sthApana and prAsAda utsava
vidhi. In terms of the mantra-shAstra we clearly notice this imprint in
the kaumAra tradition of TN — the pa\~ncha brahma mantra (a very key
aspect of saiddhAntika worship) has been exapted for kaumAra worship.
The installation of tridents and spears (trishula/shakti sthApanaM) in
kaumAra temples also follows a saiddhAntika model. However, much of the
other rites relating to subrahmaNya yAga, and kumAra mantroddhAra follow
the actual kaumAra tradition. This take over by saiddhAntika-s is not
surprising given that they already possessed [sthApana tantra-s for
parivara devatA-s including
kumAra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/06/23/siddhanta-tantrics-and-the-mainstream-brahminical-path/).
However, it should be noted that it is erroneous to believe that the
kaumAra was an offshoot of the saiddhAntika stream.

The technically educated kaumAra-s are a vanishing group: they seem to
be extinct in the North in
[Rajasthan](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/paschimaugha-of-manavaugha-of-kaumaras.html)
(where again there was an association with the shaiva stream), and are
present in small clusters in Tamil Nad, and the Kanada and Tulu
countries (where a pristine secretive subrahmaNya maTha lineage
survives). Their texts have rarely been published if at all and most lie
as unedited and in some cases lacunose manuscripts from these regions.
We are one remnant of this path. We have too much of a personal
connection with this deva, but we know not what the roguish deva has in
store for us.
