+++
title = "Gregory Paul’s prescience"

+++
The previous snippets on related topics:  
\* [The big and small of
theropods](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2007/06/big-and-small-of-theropods.html)  
\* [Organ and Edwards on dinosaur
genomes](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2007/03/organ-and-edwards-on-dinosaur-genomes.html)  
\* [Microraptor as a
biplane](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2007/01/microraptor-as-biplane.html)  
\* [Jurapterxy- wrong
inferences?](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/03/jurapterxy-wrong-inferences.html)  
\* [Tyrannosaurs and morphological evolution in
coelurosaurs](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/02/tyrannosaurs-and-morphological.html)  
\* [The rise of
tyrannosaurs](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/02/rise-of-tyrannosaurs.html)  
\*
[Buitreraptor](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/10/buitreraptor.html)  
\* [The adaptive radiation of avian and para-avian
clades](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/02/adaptive-radiation-of-avian-and-para.html)

\* [Neuquenraptor argentinus and the
deinonychosaurs](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/02/neuquenraptor-argentinus-and.html)

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RvX8XEaSUdI/AAAAAAAAAOk/dJkgPiar3Gk/s320/thermopolis_archie.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RvX8XEaSUdI/AAAAAAAAAOk/dJkgPiar3Gk/s1600-h/thermopolis_archie.jpg)

Thermopolis Archaeopteryx

Gregory Paul, the artist and maverick paleontologist published a
remarkable book in 1988 “The predatory dinosaurs of the world”. For its
era it was a masterpiece of scientific art. At that point in time, other
than Archaeopteryx, feathered dinosaur fossils were hardly known from
the Mesozoic. But Paul restored his theropods with feathers. What was
striking was that his dromaeosaur and oviraptorosaur representations
might be as good as those made after the “Chinese revolution” from
Liaoning. He also predicted the hyperextendible claw in Archaeopteryx,
which was proved after the publication of the Thermopolis specimen in
2005. However, what was even more striking was the theory presented
first in that book that the dromaeosaurs were actually secondarily
flightless dinosaurs that had reverted to terrestriality from an
ancestor that resembled a flighted form like Archaeopteryx. In a
subsequent book, “The Dinosaurs of the Air”, another artistic
masterpiece, Paul went on build the case for the possibility of
secondary flightlessness in the dromaeosaur, troodontid, oviraptorosaur
and therizinosaurid clades. However, Gregory Paul is not one who uses
phylogenetic methods to construct evolutionary trees and lay out his
theories in the framework of a phylogenetic tree. Instead he builds his
case based on mechanistic and anatomical arguments. As a result dinosaur
evolutionists have tended not to cite his work. This sad in a sense
because I believe that phylogenetic frameworks are not only vindicating
his prescience but also adding details that were not accessible to him.

The latest in this line of finds is that of the dromaeosaur Mahakala
omnogovae from Mongolia reported by Turner et al. Also authors on the
paper are two of the most noted American paleontologists of the modern
era, Norell and Clarke (famous for numerous evolutionary studies on
avian and non-avian dinosaurs). Mahakala is from the Djadokhta formation
in Mongolia from the Campanian age (i.e. the second last epoch of the
Cretaceous). The remains are relatively scrappy but covering a good part
of the skeleton — a partial skull with brain case, sacrum, partial
pelvis, several vertebra, femur, foot with sickle claw, and ulna.
Despite its relatively young age it is clearly a primitive dromaeosaur
showing that primitive members of this clade were around even in the
penultimate epoch of the Cretaceous. Its size was estimated at around 70
cm.

A phylogenetic analysis of the avian-paravian clade including Mahakala
produced striking results. The basal most division was into birds and
deinonychosaurs. The birds have as their basal most branch Archaeopteryx
and Shenzhouraptor uniting as a monophyletic lineage of primitive
long-tailed toothed birds. The next most basal lineage of birds that are
a sister group to all other birds are the Omnivoropterygids which
include the extremely enigmatic oviraptorosaur-like Sapeornis and
Omnivoropteryx. The deinonychosaurs split up into troodontids and
dromaeosaurs. The basal-most lineage of troodontids are the Chinese
forms Mei and Sinovenator, with a crown group formed of Byronosaurus,
Saurornithoides and Troodon. The basal-most dromaeosaur is Mahakala with
3 major radiations including: 1) The unenlagines- Unenlagia
(\>Nequenraptor?), Buitreraptor, Rahonavis and Shanag. Of these, all
except Shanag are from the Gondwanan fragments. 2) The Chinese radiation
comprised of Microraptor, Graciliraptor and Sinornithosaurus.
Bambiraptor might also belong to this clade, but the prudish
paleontologists, due to some weird dispute regarding specimen ownership
or something like that tend to ignore this magnificent specimen. 3) The
velociraptorine clade comprised of Velociraptor, Deinonychus,
Saurornitholestes, Tsaagan, Adasaurus, Dromeosaurus and the large
Utahraptor and Achillobator.

This tree suggests that flighted forms were potentially present on all
the 3 major clades- Aves, dromaeosaurids and troodontid. Amongst the
deinonychosaurs, Rahonavis from the unenlagine clade was initially
described as a bird and was definitely flighted. Microraptor from the
basal “Chinese clade” is also definitely flighted with the potential
“biplane morphology”. Among the troodontids Mei and Jingfengopteryx
might have had limited flight capabilities. Using the tree, Turner et al
also reconstruct the common ancestor of deinonychosauria as well as the
paravian clade (aves+deinonychosauria+Scansoriopterygids) as being
around 70 cm and \~700 g which is consistent with them being fliers.
Turner et al do not include the enigmatic and poorly preserved
scansoriopterygids, which could further destabilize their clades in
different ways. There are other fragmentary forms like Pedopenna, which
might unify with one of the known clades or form yet other poorly known
lineages within paraves. It is more likely that actually the flighted
ancestor amongst coelurosaurs goes back further in time as Paul
suggested, including the oviraptorosaurs and therizinosaurs, and perhaps
even the alvarezsaurids (initially believed to be birds).

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RvX790aSUcI/AAAAAAAAAOc/1Isczus6mQk/s320/sapeornis.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RvX790aSUcI/AAAAAAAAAOc/1Isczus6mQk/s1600-h/sapeornis.jpg)  
Sapeornis

This proposal has an important implication (which is in line with Paul’s
original suggestion): Could our current cladistic analysis be artificial
grouping flighted forms together into a monophyletic aves merely because
they retain several flight adaptations? Is it possible that just like
Rahonavis moved inside dromaeosaurs, other lineages currently grouped
inside aves might actually group with other coelurosaur groups. One
immediate candidate for this Archaeopteryx itself. Could it be that it
is actually close to the ancestor of the entire paravian clade. Being
the earliest representative of the clade from the Tithonian epoch of the
Jurassic it is well-placed to occupy this position. Another more unclear
case is the omnivoropterygid clade within Aves. Both Sapeornis and
Omnivoropteryx share a general cranial similarity with oviraptorosaurs,
in which some semi-pygostylic forms like Nomingia have been described.
Is it possible that these represent the early-branching flighted
representatives of the oviraptorosaurid clade ? More fossils, if and
when they become available, might resolve these issues.

More recently, in another paper Turner et al present the discovery of
quill knobs on the ulna of Velociraptor, just as those reported in
Rahonavis. This establishes beyond doubt that even the flightless larger
forms retained their secondary feathers This also shows how flightless
derived forms with unmodified clawed hands proceeded in directions other
than that seen Patagopteryx or the Ratites. Flightlessness in the
deinonychosaurs and possibly oviraptorosaurs was often accompanied by
retention of the flight feathers of the arm suggesting that that the
feathers had an adaptive value beyond flight. Many possibilities exist
but limited volancy in juveniles, and wing-assisted incline running are
the ones I favor most.

Whatever the case it is becoming increasingly clear that as Paul had
suggested flight emerged much before the avian crown group amongst
theropods and might have been repeatedly lost in the early stages of its
evolution and coexisted with precursors and derivatives like
wing-assisted incline running, gliding from trees, and biplane volancy.
It also appears likely that feathers (or the homologous dino-down)
evolved before flight, most possibly as the functional equivalent of
mammalian hair. When did this dino-down first emerge in archosaurs? We
know most likely this emerged after the crocodile line branched off, by
the exact point of emergence is the big question still in need of an
answer.
