+++
title = "The Indo-European Man – Sons of the Sun [Part III]: Zoroastrian Yima – The Death ofxa0Manu"
date = "June 9, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/6347b3a97bcb031de1b5abc89df443e8.jpg?w=512)

Now, heading immediately to the west of Aryavarta, and quite likely some
time later – we encounter the first ‘degenerated’ (or, perhaps more
kindly, ‘differently-emphatic’) iteration of the above mythic typology.
Amongst the Zoroastrians, they too have a ‘Vivanhat’, and a ‘Yima’.
Although the arrangement of facts is, in a number of particulars quite
different. For example, while there may be a “Yima” – there is no
“Manu”. And while this ‘Yima’ does indeed come to preside over what is,
effectively, a ‘deathless’ kindgom (as well as an ‘underworld’ … in the
sense of an apocalypse-proof underground ‘ark’ bunker against a
catastrophic winter) – he does so not by dying and charting the path to
the undying afterlife, but instead by rulership in *this* world, of a
prior and more (but still imperfectly) righteous age; where aging and
death are, effectively foreign creatures. Which precipitates a
Malthusian crisis (due to the absence of death leading to significant
population growth relative to a finite, if expanding earth and its
resources), thus leading to the necessity of a mass-extinction – hence
the aforementioned apocalypse-proof underground ark.

Various Zoroastrian accountings differ in their explanation for the
‘deathless’, ‘ageless’ \[not quite ‘timeless’\] characteristic of Yima’s
regime. Some suggest that it is a feat accomplished through wise and
prudent rulership – which may have included securing the secret for same
from the depths of the Underworld, wrestled with from the mouths of
demons, consequentially kept at bay for a prolonged period thereafter;
or, in some other tellings, via the effective banishment of ‘death’ *to*
the Underworld, there to trouble mortal man for no longer, provided the
banishment and ensuing seal thereupon held. Although the ‘seal is
evidently an impermanent one – as not only does this ‘golden age’
eventually draw to a close, but even Yima himself is subsequently
condemned to the hellish afterworld; with varying accounts ascribing the
reasoning for this to his abandoning his proper duty having become
corrupted by power and indolence, or the honeyed words of the Daevas, or
even for being worshipped as a god himself.

Curiously, this effectively sets the Zoroastrian “Yima” as something of
an ‘opposite’ to Hindu Yama, in multiple senses. With Vedic Yama, we
have the Twin Who dies, and goes forth to the Afterlife as a positive
and necessary act – there to rule in justice, harmony, and hailed in
positive terms as both DharmaRaja and a God; while on the other hand,
Manu is left to live, as the bringer of order to His descended race,
successfully guiding Mankind through a great catastrophe and thence
establishing the fundaments for the ensuing mortal civilization.

WIth Yima, however, it is a mirror – and that is why everything is the
wrong way around. Including, ironically enough, the lack of a ‘pair’ and
the ‘Image’ becoming the single figure in its space. Thus, we have Yima
at first *not* dying, and instead ruling over mankind for a period; in
particular, sealing *off* the pathway to the afterlife, rather than
traversing it, and as a partial consequence of this – becoming
associated with life and longevity (particularly through his performance
of various ritualine elements) instead of death. Indeed, even when
presiding over a separated area that would otherwise seem figuratively
resonant with the concept of ‘Underworld’, Yima’s role is dedicated to
the preservation of life and the avoidance of death, instead of the
presiding over its inevitability and ordered (post-)mortem circumstances
as a result.

It could be argued that the underlying Indo-European typology is
eventually reasserted when Yima *does* die and find himself condemned to
the hellish Underworld, notwithstanding the fact that this is manifestly
out of chronological order. And in a way, this is quite likely quite
correct – as various of the elements which may have gone into Yima’s
damnation (consorting with Daevas, being hailed as a God, for instance)
are, in their own way, echoes of Yama’s status amongst the Vedic
pantheon. This is particularly the case when we consider that the
hellish Underworld aforementioned is held to be a realm of the Daevas –
in much the same manner, presumably, as RV X 135 7 asserts that Yama’s
Realm is the Home of the Gods.

The situation of Yima’s relationship to the order promulgated by Ahura
Mazda is more complex – as both Yima’s earlier disregarding of same,
followed by his eventual embrace of it, can be held to echo the strong
association of Vedic Yama with Order. What I mean to suggest by this, is
that Yima when he is non-compliant with the ‘new order’ of the
Zoroastrians … is, as we have already demonstrated, much closer to the
Vedic figure upon which he is based. A God (or claimed to be such),
associating with the Daevas, amidst their realm. Indeed, he is even
brought out as the hypostasis of grave impiety and sin by Ahura Mazda in
the course of the moral instruction of Zoroaster. Exactly what we would
otherwise expect for an adversarial perspective upon one of the most
Lawful of the Vedic Gods, as printed as propaganda by those who sought
to overturn and replace the prior Indo-Iranian religious orthodoxy. A
theme that continues when we consider Yima’s subsequent ‘redemption’ –
wherein this Yima finally and more fully accepting the order of the
Zoroastrian over-deity, is granted release from the alleged hellish
realm of the Daevas, and transmission to a more beatific afterlife that
he eventually assumes rulership of.

Or, to phrase it another way – the figure of Yima undergoes a
‘sanitization’ process similar to what we have asserted to have taken
place to produce the Verethragna deific … wherein a previous
Indo-Iranian deific figure (in the case of Verethragna, the otherwise
explicitly demonized yet likely still popular/salient Indra/the
Striker/Thunderer) that wasn’t obviated is instead ‘re-introduced’ to
the Zoroastrian religion in a more amenable, controllable, and in some
ways ‘inverted’ or curiously unsettlingly docile form. The major
difference here, is that instead of simply being a later-stage
full-scale ‘replacement’ insert … we are given the unseemly privilege of
witnessing the attempted co-option and subversion taking place almost
‘in real time’ within the course of the myth itself; and with it being
parcelled up with an unmistakable message: Support the Daevas \[‘old
order’/pre-Zoroastrian Indo-Iranian religious orthodoxy\], find yourself
Damned to Hell – Renounce the Daevas, Accept the ‘new order’ of Ahura
Mazda & Zoroaster, and secure redemption.

Insidious stuff.

Although in some ways perhaps not as invidious as the near-complete
obviation from the Zoroastrian mythology of the Indo-European figure of
Manu … whose role and features, where they survive, are effectively to
be found bundled up into the figure of Yima – or even overtaken by
Zoroaster himself. This erasure did not only serve the usual purpose of
helping to further distance the Zoroastrian Iranians from the common
heritage and mythoreligious sphere of the Indo-Iranians which had
prevailed beforehand – but was also a specifically targeted thing. One
of the key roles of Manu in Vedic mythology is not simply to be the
‘first man’ – but to be a ‘first priest’; a figure who carries out
proper and accordant acts of piety, and then engenders same in his
descendents. It is not at all hard, then, to see why he had to go. And
instead, be replaced by a figure who could be handily pointed towards as
a morally imperfect precursor that was ‘dead’; while also clearing just
enough of the mythic space for Zoroaster to step into the remaining
breach as the promulgator and practitioner of the religious rites, and
re-orderer of society once more. It is a process akin to purloining the
mantle of myth from another, more authentic bearer – and then carving
the cloak up into two so as to produce one that shall actually fit you,
while having the larger remainder component utilized as a coffin-shroud
and buried. And, in the process, bringing down religion to a level where
it is the manipulable tool of mortal humans.

As an associate put it, in reference to Varg – “It’s the ultimate in
self-serving euhemerization: make god so small others might mistake you
for him.”

\[Coming in Part IV: Romulus & Remus Reconstructed – The Sepulchral
Legacy Of The Shadow-King\]
