+++
title = "The Scythian Idanthyrsus As Fundamentally Indo-Europeanxa0Man"
date = "June 14, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/alexander-deruchenko-battle-between-scythian-king-and-persians-1.jpg?w=1024)

As is widely-known by now, one of my favourite portions of Herodotus’
Persian Wars is the exchange between the Scythian king Idanthyrsus, and
Darius the would-be world-emperor. There are some obvious reasons why
this is so, and in previous posts I have gone into some detail
explicating them. But for today, I thought we would approach it in a
somewhat different way: namely, as a brief window in upon some
fundamental Indo-European concepts:

“To this message Idanthyrsus, the Scythian king, replied:- “This is my
way, Persian. I never fear men or fly from them. I have not done so in
times past, nor do I now fly from thee. There is nothing new or strange
in what I do; I only follow my common mode of life in peaceful years.
Now I will tell thee why I do not at once join battle with thee. We
Scythians have neither towns nor cultivated lands, which might induce
us, through fear of their being taken or ravaged, to be in any hurry to
fight with you. If, however, you must needs come to blows with us
speedily, look you now, there are our fathers’ tombs- seek them out, and
attempt to meddle with them- then ye shall see whether or no we will
fight with you. Till ye do this, be sure we shall not join battle,
unless it pleases us. This is my answer to the challenge to fight. As
for lords, I acknowledge only Jove my ancestor, and Vesta, the Scythian
queen. Earth and water, the tribute thou askedst, I do not send, but
thou shalt soon receive more suitable gifts. Last of all, in return for
thy calling thyself my lord, I say to thee,  
‘Go weep.'” (This is what men mean by the Scythian mode of speech.)”

Stirring stuff, and you can see why it resonates.

Now first, a bit of background. It’s generally my view that the
Scythians managed to preserve better than most, an Indo-European way of
life and religious perspective (but, then, I repeat myself) that had
come straight down from the not-too-much-post-PIE ancestors. We can see
this, not coincidentally, in the earliest Zoroastrian accountings of
their war-efforts against the ‘Turanians’ – with these representing, in
effect, the religiously conservative Indo-Iranians to the north who were
*considerably un-amused* by the Zoroastrians’ religious “reforms”. And
it has often been my supposition that the various and recurrent Persian
military attemptscapadesagainst the #GangSteppe peoples to the north in
much more recent times, were effectively something of a ‘Mythic
Recurrence’ of those prior conflicts.

Hence, as you can see in the excerpt above, the bellicose exchange of
remarks (but not sovereignty) between a man proclaiming the divinely
sanctioned unfurling of Zoroastrian-inflected sovereignty across the
known world … and another man, quite comfortable in his own knowledge
that Divine Sovereignty already rests with *him* via rite of descent,
and that his own ancestral practices are shortly to drive out the
interlopers. You could almost term it a sort of proto-“Jihad Vs
McWorld”.

But back to the conceptry. The Integral Indo-European perspective we can
addeuce from these remarks.

Probably the most obvious element is, of course, that This Is
#GangSteppe. So we’ll leave that be.

No, what I want to focus upon here are three things. All of them,
appropriately enough, both Pious – and in some certain ways, Ancestral,
as well.

We shall start at the start: with the origins of Idanthyrsus’ Kingly
Line. Which he declares to be Papaios \[rendered in the translation here
as Jove, equated for obvious reasons with Zeus Pater by Herodotus\]. As
you shall have seen if you’ve been following my “Sons of the Sun” series
on the mythic origins of Indo-European Man – that’s exactly as we should
expect it to be. Papaios is, quite literally, “Father Sky” – and this
forms a demonstrable resonancy with the Indo-European typology in
evidence elsewhere, albeit often requiring slightly more
‘reconstructive’ effort in order to show this (e.g. demonstrating that
Mars is likely not the original mythic progenitor in the Roman iteration
of the myth in question).

And lest this be considered to be the idle words of a boastful king in
this specific encounter – Herodotus also reiterates the claim far
earlier in the relevant book of the Persian Wars, ascribing just such a
parentage to the forerunner of the Scythian race,Targitaus (the mother
being a Daughter of the River Dnieper / Borysthenes – and therefore
known as Borysthenis ; which would interestingly, also accord with the
Mother of Manu & Yama in RigVedic reckoning, Saranyu, as this is also a
theonym closely associated with hydronomy; and would further potentially
link to the riverine nature of Father Tiber in the aforementioned
Romulus & Remus accounting; although I shall leave the in-depth
theological inquiry around this confluence for a future article, for
now\]. Interestingly, the millennium between Herodotus’ writing and
Targitaus’ birth would place the origin of the Scythians in their own
mythic terms, roughly contemporaneous in sidereal time with the early
Vedic Age, and perhaps broadly proximate to the promulgation of
Zoroastrianism.

The point is: The Indo-European (Noble)Man is a descendent of Gods, of
the Sky in particular. Which is not (necessarily) the same thing as
making him a God as well; but does help to establish one of the
fundamental underpinnings of proper Indo-European piety – that of the
viewing Deities as deserving respect, and intrinsically linked to us
(even as They are oft-remote and invariably far greater than we),
precisely due to this heritage. And, going the other way, why the
respect, support and care of one’s own parents is an act of high piety
itself.

The notion of ‘ancestral piety’ also finds expression when Idanthyrsus
sets out to Darius that the Tombs of his Ancestors are the Scythian holy
ground, that he shall not tolerate interference with.

The second element, concerns the name of the Scythian King in question –
Idanthyrsus. For it, too, records something incredibly important
pertaining to the fundamental Indo-European World View. As signified by
that secondary portion to the name: “Thyrsus”. Which in (extra)ordinary
usage refers to the spear-shaped staff of Dionysus. A full consideration
of the rather heavily connoted relationship of the Scythians with
Dionysus is beyond the scope of this piece, but suffice to say that
there are repeated points of deliberately emphasized connectivity
between the Dionysus deific known to the Greeks, and the broad range of
Scythian peoples. Which more plausibly may be explicated as, again, the
Scythians’ own deific(s) in this area being reinterpreted via a
Greek-familiar lense – just as we saw with Papaios. Or, interestingly,
as we see somewhat later on when Alexander the Great’s armies spared the
Shaivite City of Nysa due to their interpretation of this being the City
of Dionysus. They were not entirely wrong.

What this means in practice, is that the Dionysus being referred to –
whether directly, or more obliquely via the “-Thyrsus” of Idanthyrsus’
name – would plausibly be the same deific Who we would hail as Odin
Rudra. Swift-speeding as the Storm Wind, and bringing the empowering
elixer (the Mead of Poetry, or the Soma), and facilitating the Divine
Fury that is Odr, Manyu … or Furor Teutonicus, Furor Poeticus, etc. in
Latin. In a way, therefore, this too is likely to be an ‘ancestral’
hailing – and not simply because Idanthyrsus’ own ancestor may have been
the *other* Idanthyrsus recorded as having lead the Scythians to a
mighty southern expansion all the way to Egypt several hundred years
afore.

The point is – near every Indo-European culture has some recollection of
this concept, the Furor aforementioned. Even if it is spoken of somewhat
indirectly, as with the Roman accounting for ‘Vates’ \[the trance-like
state of a Seer\]. And that these are almost invariably in some way
correlate and coterminous with the Wind-warrior nature of the God Who
Brings These (On). The Scythians, at least in Herodotus’ presentation of
them, are rather more prominent in this than some others, precisely
because they are having their King portrayed as so closely aligned with
this concept. And so, as I say, they are recalling a fundamental,
foundational Indo-European concept.

There is a further element worthy of consideration here when we note the
prominence of the same deity aforementioned in the demonology of the
Zoroastrians – along with the co-option of the concept in question to
more closely affix it to such ‘wild’, ‘unconstrained’ and in their view
‘demonic’ impulses. Hence also, in some ways, the urgent and repeated
desire of the Persians to conquer and subdue/subjugate their northerly
neighbours – as these represented a tangible recollection of the archaic
Indo-European and thence Indo-Iranian religious conceptry and
mode-of-being that the Zoroastrians were at such pains to suppress.

Now, the third element that I shall draw attention to here, is
Idanthyrsus’ statement that other than his Forefather, Papaios, he shall
only bow before one other figure as his Lord – “Vesta”, “Hestia”
dependent upon translation … more properly hailed as “Tabiti” in
something more closely approximating the Scythians’ own language.

The reason why this is important, in terms of the
Fundamental/Foundational Indo-European Values perspective that I am
advancing, is because She is quite prominently and pointedly identified
as the Supreme Divinity of the Scythians … and is, as you may have
noticed, a She – A Goddess.

This matters. Because not only does it show that the concept of a
powerful female figure is something that is, indeed, intrinsically
Indo-European (if not, necessarily, finding expression in all
Indo-European descendent cultures and mythoreligions equally) … but it
also helps, as part of this, to put to rest the ridiculous notion so
popular after Gimbutas, of “Invading Indo-Europeans” bringing Warlike
Sky Gods that then suppress/incorporate more peaceable Earth/Mother
Goddess figures from the conquered. As we can clearly see from this
Scythian instance, especially in constellation with the scriptural
evidence from the early Vedic Goddess hymnals to Vak and Saraswati
(inter many alia), along with the Phrygians’ own Cybele deific brought
from the similar Urheimat-adjacent area … the Indo-Europeans were not
requiring the pantheons of those conquered or otherwise assimilated to
recruit Goddesses from – and our Goddesses are *quite capable* of
bellicosity (‘bella’, you might say, in both senses) and rulership
rather than being mere hood-ornaments for Conan-caricature male
divinities as some Feminist analysis would apparently like to believe.

But to return more directly to the Deific in question –I have written
considerably more upon the comparative mythology and theology of this
figure with other Indo-European expressions of the same deific complex
elsewhere, and shall not seek to repeat all of that here. But ‘Tabiti’
as a theonym likely recalls the heat and light associated with the
figure – we would find parallel Sanskrit expressions “Tapas” and
“Tapati”, and you would likely be familiar with more local linguistic
derivations like “Tepid”. This partially underpins the Hestia
identification made by Herodotus – although too much emphasis upon how
people often think of Hestia is somewhat unhelpful in understanding the
Goddess in question. As what we are effectively dealing with here, is
not simply a ‘home-fire’, but is closer to both the Polis Fire, and even
the unifying Fire of Creation at its heart and empowering, illuminating,
radiantly reigning over same. Rather like the Sun, you might say.

In any case, there are three short lessons in the world-view of the
Indo-European ancestors, as fortunately preserved for us via the
combination of the Scythians and their recounting by Herodotus. There is
room for further interpretation and, of course, further explication as
applies each of them … and in future pieces I may do just exactly that.

But for now … Under Sun, Under Sky, and Under The Influence – it is
sufficient.
