+++
title = "On ‘Moon’ And Moon God – A Brief Comparative Of Several Major Indo-Europeanxa0Religions"
date = "June 29, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/moon-god-chart.png?w=750)

It is MONDAY – quite literally “Moon\[‘s\] Day”; and therefore, a brief
look at the names for the Indo-European Moon God in various descendant
languages and faith-groupings.

Now, note that I said “Moon God” – I have not included any Moon
Goddesses, as these are largely restricted to the Greek & Roman
mythologies, perhaps as the result of Mess-O-Potamia style
cross-cultural influence upon them from non-Indo-Europeans. Or, in the
case of the Zoroastrians and those influenced by them … the usual
‘inversion’ suppositions.

And I have also not included Lunar Aspects and associations of other
Gods or Goddesses (e.g. Chandraghanta, Shiva Chandrasekhar), in part for
reasons of space.

Broadly speaking, for everybody but the Anatolians (and somewhat, we
Hindus), the pattern is quite clear: a male Moon God, bearing a name
reasonably directly derived from Proto-Indo-European ‘Mehns’. \[Which
may have its own earlier underpinning in ‘Meh’ – a term for
‘measurement’ (gosh, guess where \*that\* one ultimately comes from),
for example of ‘Time’ – which is, after all, one of the prime uses for
the Moon, in supporting calendars with which we divided the year into
‘Months’ \[also a related term, and a direct co-occurring meaning for
many Indo-European languages’ words for “Moon” – including English …
“many Moons ago”, for example\]; and which may set up a potential
mytholinguistic co-occurrence of Lunar and Royal symbolism due to the
manner in which some Indo-European terms for rulership-related concepts
(e.g. Ancient Greek ‘Metis’/’Mesis’) are similarly derived, even before
resonancy cross-over with PIE ‘Med’ descended terms is considered.\]

Although it should also be noted that in many of these mythoreligious
complexes, the “Moon” term is not the only theonym in-use for the Deity
in question; and in some, it has become partially or significantly
displaced by other often ‘functional’ theonyms denoting some particular
quality or association thereof.

Hinduism provides a shining example for this – as while ‘Mas’ and ‘Masa’
\[मास् & मास\] are also in-use to refer to the Moon, the far more
frequently encountered term for the deity is ‘Chandra’
(‘Shining’/’Bright’/’Glittering’/’Lustrous \[like Gold\]’) \[which
derives from PIE: ‘(S)Kand’ (‘Glow’/’Shine’), via Proto-Indo-Iranian:
‘(S)Candras’ (which almost directly survives on in parallel as the
Sanskrit adjectival qualifier particle ‘Scandra’ –
‘luminous’/’radiant/’shining’); and interestingly enough renders the
modern English ‘Candle’ something of a cognate for ‘Chandra’; along with
various other Western I.E. languages’ terms for “Moon” \[Breton:
‘Cann’\], “White” \[Welsh: ‘Cann’\], etc.\]. Both terms are encountered
together in ‘Chandramas’; and Chandra (or its derivative terms) is also
occasionally used to refer to Monday.

The \*other\* major Sanskrit theonym for the Moon – Soma – has an
entirely different derivation (and you can read more about that in some
of my previous works), and links to another ‘functional’ relationship;
that between the Moon(-God) and the Soma brew. This, along with ‘Indu’
\[‘Bright Drop’\], which stands at the confluence of both spheres of
conceptry \[‘illumination’ and the ’empowering elixir’\], rounds out the
syllabry for “Moon-Day” in a range of Indo-Aryan descended languages.

However, when we come to the Anatolians – the situation is different.

The Phrygians have the directly straightforward ‘Men’ – an almost direct
derivation from the Proto-Indo-European. This speaks to the strong
probability of the Phrygian religion having closely descended from and
therefore studiously preserved features of the Proto-Indo-European one;
as befits their likely origin-point immediately adjacent in both space
and culture to the Proto-Indo-European Urheimat, to the north of the
Black Sea. The observable coterminities elsewhere in the Phrygian
religion with those of the Thracians and Scythians would further support
this contention. As the Phrygians only migrated to Anatolia quite late –
likely during the Bronze Age Collapse of the final two centuries of the
2nd Millennium B.C. – they therefore did not go down the same trajectory
as the much earlier arriving ‘Anatolia Proper’ Indo-European group.

Speaking of which – as you can see from the bottom left of the chart,
there is some considerable discussion as to the plausible underlying
etymology (and therefore, meaning) of the “Arma” that pretty much all
the Anatolian family Indo-European languages make consistent use of for
their Moon. \[Note: I’ve deliberately left out the non-IE derived
syncretic ‘Kaskuh’, as the name is of Hurrian origin\].

The supposition that it derives from an “Orma” or “Or-mo” meaning
“Wanderer” or “Moving One” may seem a reasonable stab at sketching out a
figurative meaning that’s PIE-derivable \[from PIE: ‘her’ – move\]; but
has come in for quite some criticism from linguists. It’s also been
suggested that it may be a non-Indo-European incorporation … but I don’t
buy that attempted explanation for a number of reasons. Not least of
which being that, in order to be true, we’d have to ignore a range of
viable Indo-European reconstructive etymologies in favour of that
unfortunate typology so beloved of some corners of academia: “anything
we can’t immediately and unambiguously explain (or even which we can)
MUST be non-Indo-European” (which, to be fair and sure, is more viable
amidst the Hittites than just about anyone else. But that is another
topic for another time).

My preferred etymology (for now), links it to PIE: ‘Herb’ – meaning
‘poor’ or ‘ill’; which handily has quite a range of closely comparative
descendants in various Indo-European languages (including Hittite –
‘Erman’/’Arman’) that mean broadly the same thing (e.g. Proto-Germanic
‘Armaz’, whence Old Norse ‘Armr’, Swedish ‘Arm’, Old English ‘Earm’,
Scots ‘Arm’, etc.), or something logically derived therefrom (e.g.
Sanskrit ‘Arma’ meaning ‘Ruin’, and ‘Armaka’ meaning ‘Thin’ or
‘Narrow’).

The idea here would be that the Moon is a ‘pale’ and questionably
healthy or hale figure – that literally wastes away before one’s very
eyes, night after night; and is quite often thought of as a Crescent –
the shape of the Moon that’s missing quite a lot of Himself and is
obviously ‘thin’. \[The Luwian hieroglyphic character for Arma is also a
crescent moon, as it happens, further reinforcing this symbolic frame of
referencing – it is, after all, much more visually distinctive than a
radiant circle, of which there is already one rather prominent one in
the sky … \]

It has also been suggested that ‘Arma’ may, effectively, connote
‘pregnancy’ – yet while the resemblance between the relevant Hittite
etc. terms is unquestionable (‘Arma-‘ with various suffixes) , and while
the otherwise ‘thin’ Moon \*does\* swell up to a much more healthily
round figure over the course of a month … I’m not quite sure how or why
a \*male\* Moon deity would be undergoing pregnancy. Although it is also
possible that the ‘pregnancy terms’ represent a figurative
back-formulation derived from the Moon’s changing shape – rather than
the other way around.

Which raises the rather interesting question of whether the  
Anatolian terminology for “Pregnancy” is more directly translatable as
feeling \*seriously\* Ill.

The ‘Lunar’ associations with pregnancy did, however, persist with the
worship of Artemis in the area in the Classical period – as Artemis was
well-renowned for Her power when it came to the caring for expectant
mothers-to-be. Although it should also be noted that the strong Lunar
associations of Artemis in the Classic canon are … look, you’ll have to
read the next few installments of my ‘Radiant Queen of the Heavens’
series on the Solar Goddess(es) of the Indo-Europeans to see why they’re
almost certainly later and incompletely salient additions.

There have also been further attempts to affix ‘Arma’ to a
Proto-Indo-European underpinning upon more figurative and/or functional
bases – including the rather interesting and almost ‘mytholinguistic’
stab at linking it to terms for ‘completion’, phases begun, and also
potentially for ritual … as well as the expected efforts for the passage
of time demarcation, words and stems for ‘horn’/’crown’, adornment or
covering, limbs and joints, ‘wheel’/’axle’, and even various military
terms ; but none of these have seemed quite so substantive as the
potentiality around PIE ‘Herb’ (‘Poor/Ill’).

Whatever the truth of the Anatolian matter in specia, the general
typology – and thus, the fundamental, underlying consistency of the
Indo-European religion – is quite clear.

The Moon-God Shineth On!
