+++
title = "The Indo-European Man – Sons of the Sun [Part I –xa0Introduction]"
date = "June 7, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/ntii_sgb_1271047-001.jpg?w=1024)

One of the quite literally foundational tasks of our mythology is also a
simple one – to tell us who we are, and where we’re from. I say
‘simple’, and yet it’s also unutterably complex. Particularly when it
comes to distinguishing ourselves from other people(s) who might happen
to exist around us, and potentially have quite similar tales of their
own. This can also mean that our ‘origin myths’ come to change and shift
down the ages – in response to political or cultural stimuliwhich
demand yet further differentiation. And, of course, alterations in the
surrounding theology, the surrounding mythology that would otherwise
ground them.

Still, it is my contention that not only can we utilize a comparative
approach to the Indo-European myths of the Origin of Man to adduce a
common understanding, a shared origin *to* these myths (and their
accompanying world-views) – but also to help fill in some blanks, and
better understand some of the less well attested or seemingly curious
aspects to various Indo-European peoples’ accounts of their own
origins.

Now it is important to note that, as with any mythology – the various
Indo-European canons tend to include multiple renditions of what would,
in a sidereal sense, be the same event. This is partially the nature of
dealing with scriptural corpuses which may have taken centuries or even
millennia to be compiled; but it is also due to the way in which
Indo-European mythology actually works. That is to say – not so much as
a strict-literalist accounting of *the* history or characteristics of a
thing … but rather, as an explanatory/expository framework which is
capable of considering things from multiple angles. And emphasizing what
is important for the purposes of a given explanation at the time.

There are fascinating typologies to be addeuced from some of these, as
well – and in future pieces we most definitely intend to take a more
thorough look at these. But in order to avoid this article growing well
beyond its initial, intended scope – we shall instead restrict ourselves
to the more limited and multiply attestable mono-myth of our race’s
birth.  
  

\[Coming in Part II – Yama & Manu – Firstborn of the Indo-Aryans; Coming
in Part III – Zoroastrian Yima – The Death of Manu; Part IV on Romulus &
Remus yet to be titled\]
