+++
title = "The Doom That Never Dies – On The Judgement Of Thexa0Dead"
date = "June 3, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/800px-mack-ludwig-die-unterwelt-mitte_orig.jpg?w=800)

Deyr fé, deyja frændr,  
deyr sjalfr it sama,  
ek veit einn,  
at aldrei deyr:  
dómr um dauðan hvern.

These are famous words – even if you do not recognize them in the Old
Norse, then you will almost certainly have heard them at some point in
life. They are from the Havamal – the Sayings of the High One.

Broadly translated, they run thus:

“Cattle die, kinsmen die,  
the self will die the same;  
I know one thing which never dies:”

And there, we shall interrupt … for this piece is upon that last line.
And just what it is that does not die.

Often, we see the line in question translated somewhat erroneously – as
the “Glorious Deeds” of the dead men. Perhaps as the “Reputation”, which
is better.

Yet the actual wording in Old Norse is somewhat different. And quite
instructive. It is “dómr” – that is to say, “Doom”.

Now, in the modern age the “Doom” of something is often taken to mean
its “fate”, and more specifically, the thing that shall damn or kill it.

Yet older times what it effectively meant was “judgement” ; the PIE it’s
derived from \[‘deh’ => ‘dohmos’\] is effectively “to place” .. so, the
‘doom’ upon somebody is exactly that .. placed upon them.
\[Interestingly, on a side-note, this renders Greek ‘Theos’ – God – as
hailing from the same PIE root as “Doom”.\]

Now, in this context, the idea is that the ‘judgement’ placed upon
somebody, the reflection of their deeds in life – well, we would like to
think it is the positive ones that are remembered and form our
post-mortem reputation. I can tell you from having spent a bit of time
in politics, that art not so. As Marc Antony puts it in the funerary
oration given to him by Shakespeare in Julius Caesar – “The evil that
men do lives after them; The good is oft interred with their bones”.

So, the ‘reputation’ of a man is something that does not die.

In no small part because , as we know from certain other
cosmological/eschatological scriptural points ..well, where you wind up
*after death* is in a considerable manner a reflection of the sort of
life you lived, your deeds, your essence.

It is, I suppose you might say, *where you get placed* \[see what I did
there?\]

And it does not die, because it carries on after death.

Both in the mouths of your fellow man, and also in your circumstances
when you are no longer among the living.

To quote from the Bellows translation of the Voluspa, in reference to
Nastrond \[‘Corpse-Shore’\]:

“A hall I saw, / far from the sun, / On Nastrond it stands, and the
doors face north, / Venom drops / through the smoke-vent down, / For
around the walls / do serpents wind.

I there saw wading / through rivers wild / treacherous men / and
murderers too, And workers of ill / with the wives of men; / There
Nithhogg sucked / the blood of the slain, / And the wolf tore men; /
would you know yet more?”

Now, at this point when we had previously explained this to an associate
– he asked the quite natural question. Is what we are describing, the
“Judgement” that is upon a man in his moment of death and thereafter …
is this analogous to the Hindu concept of Karma?

And the answer, broadly speaking, is “Yes”. For as we can see – what it
is that we put out into the world, shapes ourselves; shapes the
circumstances we find ourselves in; ultimately shapes not just who we
are, but where it is that we are to wind up afterward. As it is said in
the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad – we are both the Spider, and the Web that
the spider puts out around him which ultimately becomes his world.

Except it is important to differentiate somewhat between the
‘Reputation’ of the man, the deceased – which is what his fellows know
of him and pass down; and the standing of the man, the Judgement upon
the man, when he finds himself in the hereafter confronting the Judges
of the Dead.

This is not going to be an article upon Them – except to note that there
are some curious correspondences between the Nordic and the Hindu
accountings thereof.

My comrade Tristan brought forth these excerpts when seeking to
illustrate this point – around being Judged at the HelThing:

“Kormt and Ormt \| and the Kerlaugs twain  
Shall Thor each day wade through,  
(When dooms to give \| he forth shall go  
To the ash-tree Yggdrasil;)  
For heaven’s bridge \| burns all in flame,  
And the sacred waters seethe.

“Glath and Gyllir, \| Gler and Skeithbrimir,  
Silfrintopp and Sinir,  
Gisl and Falhofnir, \| Golltopp and Lettfeti,  
On these steeds the gods shall go  
When dooms to give \| each day they ride  
To the ash-tree Yggdrasil.”

— Grimnismal

“”Now when he and Loki brought forward the precious gifts, the Æsir sat
down in the seats of judgment; and that verdict was to prevail which
Odin, Thor, and Freyr should render. Then Loki gave Odin the spear
Gungnir, and to Thor the hair which Sif was to have, and Skídbladnir to
Freyr, and told the virtues of all these things…”

— Skaldskaparmal

To this, I would only add three-and-a-half quotes from my previously
published work: “Saturday – Shani Dev’s Day – Saturn’s Day”:

“Still, while I have earlier maintained that the ‘trials’ of Lord Shani
are actually opportunities for the uncovering of hidden treasures within
us, it is nevertheless often considered a rather good idea to attempt to
appease the baelful gaze of ShaaniDev, so that it is averted – or,
taking things several steps further, endeavouring to carry out
appropriate Hanuman-related worship so as to directly ward off the Dark
Deity in question.

Now, from a comparative mythography perspective, this is particularly
interesting. As Hanuman and Shani are running off the Striker/Thunderer
\[Son\] and Sky Father/Lord of the Anncestors(Dead) figures,
respectively \[for further, albeit brief discussion upon this, I would
recommend my previous commentaries from mid-July, “THUNDERSTRUCK”, and
“Sky-Earth-Thunder”\], and more particularly, given that the way in
which Hanuman establishes Shani’s healthy respect *by repeatedly bashing
His Own Head with Shaani upon it with stones* … it is not hard to see
how this may perhaps recall whatever lies at the root of the somewhat
fraught familial relations which lie at the heart of Theogenesis in the
Greco-Roman understanding – wherein, as you will recall, first Cronus is
subdued by Zeus following the former’s being *fed* rocks, and second
Zeus finds Himself with one *Almighty* Headache, leading directly to the
birth of Athena, after He had attempted to imitate \[the opposite, in
this context, of ‘to ape’\] His Own Father in these regards.

However, other tales take a somewhat different perspective upon the
establishment of the concordial relations between HanumanJI and
ShaaniDev; and the accounting of the Ramayana is particularly
interesting in this light.

\[…\]

Yet the rather more ‘subtle’ interpretation is that it may perhaps refer
to a third explanation – Lord Hanuman, in the course of His
reconnaissance/escape of/from Lanka in search of Sita, happened across
the imprisoned Lord Shaani, and loosed His bonds, freeing Him. The
grateful Lord Shaani thanked Hanuman, Who is also, as it happens, often
regarded as the One who loosens the fetters of the bonds of Karma upon
the Devotee as well \[said bonds of Karma also being very much within
Lord Shaani’s direct purview in His role as the Bringer of Justice,
Bestower of Consequence, and Lord of Lawful Outcome(s) – thence also, of
course, and in common with His Half-Brother Lord Yama, Death\] ; and
then proceeded to turn His Destroyer Gaze upon the Imperial Capital of
Ravan. \[in either case, the utilization of Bajrangi – the
‘Adamantine’/’Thunderbolt’ – to carry out a pair of Curses bestowed by
the Sky Father, Shiva, upon Ravana for the latter’s unjust and
ultimately severely impious conduct, would have interesting resonances
with the occasional identification of the ‘Sickle’ or ‘Scythe’ of
Kronus/Saturn as in fact being an Adamantine ‘Harpe’ blade.\]

This, in its own way, also illustrates another fundamental principle
relating not only to ShaaniDev, but also to the Divine Concept of
Justice and Law all up. “The Long Arc of the Universe”, it is said,
“bends ultimately toward Justice”. Which, if you are of a certain sort
of view, may perhaps be taken as indicating the ultimate death-sentence
upon *everything* and *all* \[or just about, anyway\], that is the
Pralaya, the #EKPYROSISWHENN that lies at the conclusion spasms of the
Current Yuga.”

“One of which, hinges around the notion of ‘Cutting’,
Proto-Indo-European: (S)Ker, which is occasionally connected to what may
be another PIE root: “Ker” or “K(w)er”, that refers to ‘making’ or
‘doing’, and which supplies the underpinning for the subsequent Sanskrit
: “Karma”. “”This second of these, the notion of ‘Scars’, also
figuratively connects with this other “K(w)er” particle – as ‘Sanskara’
in Saskrit, refers to the process of ‘imprinting’ or ‘shaping’ through
the actions and effects of our ‘actions’, that produce the effect often
colloquially referred to in modern English as “Karma”. Or, perhaps less
prosaically, to the Proto-Germanic “Skardaz” – meaning to be ‘banged
up’, damaged, cut and wounded … which is how we may feel as a *result*
of this Lord of Karma’s attentions upon us.

But to go back to the ‘Sword’ point, it is intriguing here to note not
only the sword-saliency with these other comparative representatiosn of
the Divine complex in question \[the aforementioned Harpe of Kronus, the
Sickle of Saturn, etc.\], nor the array of descendant “(S)ker” words
referring to swords, knives, daggers, and keen sharpness in later
Indo-European languages. But also the more ‘figurative’ import of this
feature – both as the potential ‘severer’ of the ties of previous
actions pon us (in the manner of a Judge, properly satisfied
\[especially of repentance or restitution\], bringing to an end one’s
sentence) , and in a not entirely unrelated sense, as the cutter of the
threads that are lives (reaping-tense), as Death – the final sanction
and Judgement, after which, the *real* Karmatic-Dharmatic assessment, in
the Underworld, can Begin.”

What I seek to elucidate with these quotes is quite simple. First and
foremost, that what we see with the HelThing Judgement – of Thor, Odin,
and Freyr – has a parallel in the relations expressed between Hanuman
and Shaani.

Rather than the ‘literal’ interpretation of Hanuman having fisticuffs of
the Glaswegian style with Shaani – it is best interpreted
metaphorically. As two Deities contending, arguing over the fate of the
soul of a Devotee.

Hanuman, the joyous, boisterous ‘Friend to Man’ taking the more
beneficent role; Shaani, the Stern and Severe One, taking a more
scrutinizing and austere perspective.

Interestingly, there are also three Judges of the Dead in Greek
eschatology – but, as I say, this is not a piece upon this concept.
Simply the notion of the Judgement upon a man’s soul, as expressed in
the Havamal, and how this squares with the broader Indo-European
world-view.

So as for what it is that is actually being ‘Judged’ – it is the soul of
the man. Which is not some idle and abstract concept of a point of light
; but in this sense, it has been ‘scarred’, it has been ‘marked’, it has
been ‘imprinted’ \[‘Sanskara’\] by the words and deed and experience and
will of the man in life.

Hence, the reincarnations will continue – until the soul improves, we
might perhaps suggest.

As I said at the time:

“The #NAS synthesis position of the above is probably to point out that
the line between a man’s reputation \[in this sense\] .. and a man …

… is not really much of a line at all. Hence that Sanskara principle.

What you do .. becomes you – even, perhaps especially, if it does not
become you to do it.

So it is rather important to do the right thing. And therefore *be* the
right thing as the (ongoing) result.

This can take some time.”

As Tristan put it:

“I’d even argue the opposite in nordic metaphysics, that a mans deeds
and behavior are almost the thing occupying the man-sleeve.”

I am not sure that it is an opposite point of view, so much as coming at
quite the similar thing from opposite ends.

Another way of looking at it, may be the words of Kurt Vonnegut:

“We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we
pretend to be.”

Not least because, in Death, all those pretensions really do fall away.
There can be no hiding from what one has become.

And that – that is truly a terrifying thought.

The terror that that, unlike us, does not die. That it is with us always
– even unto the next world.

A “Doom”, you might perhaps say.
