+++
title = "The Indo-European Man – Sons of the Sun [Part II]: Yama And Manu – Firstborn of thexa0Indo-Aryans"
date = "June 8, 2020"

+++


![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/manu-1.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/d9xzc8z-7323e6bb-1384-415a-ae03-16a7ec2736f1.jpg)

So, with that in mind – let us take a brief look at probably the oldest
Indo-European origin myth that has come down to us: the Vedic
understanding, which is to my mind also the ‘cleanest’ and easiest to
directly understand. Both due to its age, and the strong presence of
pretty much all the elements which underpin other, later iterations – we
can probably fairly say that this is, in some ways, the most “complete”
accounting that has come down to us.

So, what do we have? A pair of Twins – Manu & Yama. Sons of Vivasvan –
often identified as the Sun (Surya), although to my mind the intended
definitional field for Vivasvan \[‘He Who Shines Out/Broadly’\] is
actually a little broader and higher than that. But we’ll come to that
later. First, a look at the etymologies involved. “Manu” is almost
exactly what you think it is. It means “Man”. But where does this term
come from? Its ultimate origin is likely to be Proto-Indo-European “Men”
– which, as I discussed at length in MahaShivratri And The
Mytholinguistics Of War, roughly means ‘active mind’, ‘spirit’, the
faculty of ‘thought’. Its occurrence in “Manu” \[which would therefore
give it the same root as “Mantra” etc.\] is likely to encode the idea of
Man as a ‘thinking being’, something clearly invested with sapient
spirit. And, therefore, the bestowal of the title of “Man” upon another
man as being a recognition that he, and we, are both able to think. We
are both sentient. It is, in a fundamental, foundational sense, what
separates us from inanimate matter – although not necessarily from the
animal kingdom, and certainly not from various other spirits and even
greater being still. “Manu” is such a dominant element, and accords so
well with various other origin of Man Indo-European myths, that we have
often taken to referring to Manu as “Man(n)u(s)” – bringing together
“Manu” with the Germanic ‘Mannus’, of whom we shall hear more about in a
moment … and utilizing this “Man(n)u(s)” to help ‘stablish the concept
of “Mankind” as “Sons of Man(n)u(s)”. Thus emphasizing that all
Indo-Europeans are, ultimately, from the same familial tree – the same
people, broadly considered.

Now, “Yama” is perhaps more interesting. In more recent Sanskrit, it has
of course come to take the meaning of “Death” (both due to Yama’s status
as Lord of the Realm of hte Glorious/Ancestral Dead, as well as His
being First to Die, in order to chart a path out thereto) – however it
has also continued to maintain a figurative understanding as “Twin”. And
that should absolutely not surprise us, considering the nature of Yama’s
relationship with Manu – and also, for that matter, Yama’s relationship
with His Twin Sister, Yami. However, I don’t think that “Twin” *quite*
captures the concept here. Instead, we ought perhaps trace things back
furhter – not to PIE ‘Yehm’ \[‘Twin’\], but to PIE ‘Heym’, which
underlies even that, and refers to a ‘copy’, an ‘imitation’ \[it is, in
fact, the ultimate origin of modern “Image”\]. Why do I suggest this?
Because if “Manu” is the ‘living’ Man, then what is a Dead Man? An
‘image’ – a ‘reflection’, but ‘colder’ of what the mortal man is in
life. Interestingly, this name and broader concept survives also in
another set of ‘progenitor twins’ whom we’ll be looking at later in the
piece – Romulus & Remus; wherein Remus, earlier “Iemus” or “Yemos”, both
by thanatology and etymology makes for a strong cognate in some ways
with “Yama”.

So, to recap – what we have is a situation wherein, on the face of it,
the Sun (or, at least, a Solar paternal deific) fathers two Sons. One
who lives, and goes on to father the human (there’s that ‘man’ again)
race \[in the process, bringing order to his progeny via the
promulgation of a caste-like social division – whether the CaturVarnas
of Manu or the various classes of Roman society brought about by
Romulus\]; and the Other, who instead takes another route – and becomes
the foremost amidst the Ancestors in another way, by dying. Becoming, in
fact, a Hades-like figures \[both Hades & Yama have a dog named ‘Spot’\]
as the result. And speaking of which – it is necessary to make a brief
note before progressing further of the rather strong coterminity of the
iconography (and, in a certain sense, the mythology) of Yama with not
only Hades, but with Odin. Lord(s) of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead in the
High(est) Heaven, wielding a Staff, accompanied by two dogs, and both
having already, symbolically, died. This has important ramifications,
given the Varuna-Odin and Aryaman-Odin linkages that I have already
demonstrated, the Yama-Varuna and Yama-Agni linkages in evidence in the
Vedas, and the linking of all of the above to Shiva-Rudra. That is to
say – the Sky Father. The implications of which, I shall discuss later
in the piece.

\[Coming in Part III – Zoroastrian Yima – The Death of Manu;  
Part IV on Romulus & Remus yet to be titled, also contains an expansion
upon the Vedic understanding of Yama & Manu\]
