+++
title = "Gott In Himachal Pradesh – On The ShivLing Of Kinnaur Kailash [Incredible Indo-European Holy Sites Series Part Ixa0]"
date = "June 1, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/8b3e6369db5b1fbccd0cfb049bf88628.jpg?w=1024)

It is Monday – Lord Shiva’s Day! And therefore … we’re starting our
series on impressive Indo-European holy sites around the world, with
this frankly amazing Shaivite place of pilgrimage – the ShivLing of
Kinnaur Kailash, in Himachal Pradesh, India. We’ll also be taking a
brief look at how this site relates to comparable Western Indo-European
religious conceptry.

Now, despite the name, this should not be confused with *the* Kailash
(Shiva’s main abode, in the manner of Mt Olympus for Zeus) – which lies
over the border in Tibet. Instead, Kinnaur Kailash is customarily
regarded as Lord Shiva’s winter residence. Here are also to be found
further religiously resonant sites, including a lake sacred to Parvati,
and woodlands named for Ganesha. Interestingly, it is not only the
Shaivite Divine Family Who are to be found in residence here around
Winter. Shiva is believed also to have convened His Court here as well,
and thus summoned the rest of The Gods here with Him. And, in addition
to this, there is a local belief that the ‘haunting’ music often
reported to be heard near the neighbouring summit of Rangrik, is as a
result of the Spirits of the Dead of the Kinnaur congregating there.
Which is as we should perhaps expect for the proximity of Shiva – as He
is also Lord of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead, and would more usually be
found amidst cremation grounds, the afterlife. In this situation, the
Mountain has come to Mahadeva – or, rather come *with* Mahadeva when He
has gone to The Mountain. \[This is also a Parvati reference\]. The
music may also recall the last line of RV X 135, which speaks of the
Highest Heaven, where Death Dwells amidst the Ancestors – “Here is the
seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the Home of Gods: Here
minstrels blow the flute for Him here He is glorified with songs.”

So, as we can see, there is a localized re-situation of what we should
otherwise expect to be the standard Indo-European cosmological model
here. A Mountain-range that is DevaLoka \[‘Realm of the Gods’\], Ruled
by the Sky Father, accompanied by the Mountain Queen/Earth Mother, and
where They Hold Court with the rest of the Gods; the High Afterlife
located conveniently nearby. This is, as it happens, a fundamentally
Indo-European thing to do – the ‘transposition’ of the eternal and
supernal sites of our mythology ‘down’ onto more localized anchors for
our belief. Hence why there are, for example, more than a dozen Mount
Olympus sites dotted around the Aegean, many of which have quite
prominent local mythological saliency in relation to Zeus et co; or, for
further instance, why we may speak of both Mt Meru and Mt Olympus as
humanly tangible and physically (rather than metaphysically) visitable
mountains in the material world, that are also the Palace of the Gods,
without either claim being inherently contradictory on either level.
Because we *know* that what we are talking about are the earthy sites
that are resonant with the Mythic one – and that it was quite a natural
and normal process for the Indo-Europeans spreading out from the
Urheimat to carry their Sacred Geography with them.

But why here? Well, according to local legend, an ardent Shaivite king
of the area once petitioned Lord Shiva to assist His People, who were
finding it impossible to make it all the way to the main Kailash for
pilgrimage, to assist them in this regard. Hearing their prayer, Mahadev
in His Great Merciful Compassion, responded that He would relocate for a
certain portion of each year to be nearer to them. And so, in response,
people both from the area as well as Shaivites from all over the rest of
the Hindu world – make their way to this Kinnaur corner of Himachal
Pradesh each year during Winter, to be nearer to The Lord. In this, you
could perhaps say, they are engaged in an act of mythic resonance or
mythic recurrence – as that is also what the rest of The Gods are said
to do, to resume Their far more lofty stations in some ways rather
closer by His Side.

On another level, it is a prominent holy-site specifically due to the
ShivLing which is situated here. That immense free-standing stone that
towers above the devotees who come to worship there, just as the
mountain it stands atop towers over the surrounding valleys. 24 meters
in height, even before we take into account its colour-changing property
and its Trishula shape when viewed from the valley – it is seriously
impressive!

One local myth as to the formation of this ShivLing holds that it was
once a devotee who had performed penance here for quite some time,
eventually resulting in Mahadeva appearing before him to afford him the
opportunity to ask for a boon. So the story goes, whatever the boon was
– it was displeasing to Rudra, and so the devotee was turned to stone as
a result. Whatever the truth of its origins, the important point is that
it is regarded as being a ShivLing today.

And in terms of what that is, what it means … a ShivLing is an aniconic
representation of Mahadeva, of His Power. Most usually, it takes the
form of a reasonably large black smooth river-stone, which is also
utilized as something of an altar. We pour milk offerings upon it, pile
high leaves of particular varieties at its top and anoint its side with
various kinds of paste. We also perform parikrama \[processional
around\] as an act of devotion. It can take other forms, as well – with
the justifiably famed Amarnath Jyotirlingam \[‘Lingam of (Star)Light’\]
spontaneously forming from ice in a high mountain cave in Jammu &
Kashmir, for instance. And with the “Shankara Stones” from Indiana Jones
and the Temple of Doom forming an immediately recognizable example (as
well as one of the few areas wherein said movie actually managed to
represent a Hindu concept with something approaching decency – although
“Fortune And Glory” is certainly a rather interesting translation for
“Shankar”).

But what does it mean? Other than representing Lord Shiva Himself, a
ShivLing is, in effect, a miniature Axis Mundi. It is also a resonance
with the Sacrificial Pillars/Posts \[‘Stambha’\] of the Vedic age. And,
of course, all at once – as I have previously argued, some of the
‘cosmological’ hymnals of the Rig and Atharva Vedas effectively make
such a coterminous linkage between Axis Mundi, Sacrificial Post, and
Great God … curiously enough, in terms that often appear to echo later
Shaivite iconographic depictions, such as the Nataraja figure. We find
further resonancy for this concept in the well-known Puranic accounts of
Shiva manifesting as the Lingodbhava – the endless, infinite pillar of
fire; that per my interpretation, would be the intersection of our
universe of Rta/Brahman from above/beyond, in the same manner as the
Bowstring of Brihaspati (a feature which also links the latter to
another expression, weaponized, of the Axis Mundi – the Trishula; which,
funnily enough, is also seen in the shape of the ShivLing atop this part
of Kinnaur).

It is therefore understandable and appropriate that a ShivLing,
especially a rather impressive one situated atop a mountain peak such as
this \[the mountain, in multiple senses, standing for Devi\], would be
the focal point for our devotions.

And this is not a uniquely Hindu custom, ether. We can also find mention
of vaguely similar acts of devotion carried out with reference to the
Herma pillars of Ancient Greece; although these also had an array of
other functions to them, which means that even despite the significant
and useful coterminity of Shiva and Hermes (more on that, perhaps, some
other time), the parallel is an imperfect one. The best correlate,
however, is to be found amongst the Nordic/Germanic Indo-Europeans – the
Irminsul; which fulfils both a similar cosmological-resonancy role (it
is a localized and ‘microcosmic’ representation of the World Tree) as
well as, flowing from this, a similar function as votive offering focal
point in pillar form. The Irminsul is even dedicated to the same Great
God – the Irminin question being Odin; Whoalso, as it happens, has a
milk-flow point of coterminity via the Irmin’s Way (Galaxy – Milky Way),
that may suggest a similar mechanism of use to the pouring of the milk
oblation upon the ShivLing which we to this day engage in.

As applies the Parikrama element of ritual observance – the idea here is
to engage in an act of contemplation while walking around the subject of
veneration; and in mythic terms, it stems from the account of the
contest between Lords Skanda and Ganesha to race around the world. Lord
Skanda took the direct approach, and sped off to physically make His way
all around the World and back. Lord Ganesha, by contrast, took a more
metaphorical ambit, and walked in a circle around Their Parents, Shiva &
Parvati. When asked why He did this, rather than rushing off after His
Brother in the hope to catch Him, Ganesha thoughtfully replied that as
His Parents were His World, by walking around Them, He had already won.

Now, in the course of the relatively short series of not-quite-circles
of an ordinary ShivLing, we could say that this is simply an act of
mythic resonancy – an expression of similar devotion to that displayed
by Ganesha for His Parents, the expression of the centrality of the Gods
in question to our world and lives. But in the course of the much more
challenging and long-distance Parikramas out ‘in the wild’ wherein a
distance of many kilometres must be covered in order to walk around the
circumference of an entire mountain – there is far more time and scope
for contemplation, and the gesture should almost certainly be thought of
as meaning much more. It is, in effect, a pilgrimage (Yatra), and a
ritual element, all in one.

So, there you have it. An immensely impressive Shaivite Hindu devotional
site; but also, a brief comparative commentary upon two of the key
trends which we see in Indo-European mythoreligion.

First, that of ‘movement’ and ‘adaptation’, ‘localization’ – for as
noted above, Kinnaur Kailash is itself a localized re-situation of the
great Holy Kailash, with direct Divine facilitation to make such a thing
possible; and also the manner in which both physical Kailash mountains
are, themselves, resonancies, emanations perhaps –of the mythic
Mountain upon which the Imperial Court of the Ishvara is to be found.
Part of a long-running trend whereby Indo-Europeans have brought their
(our) mythology with them (us), and re-‘stablishedit via affixing it to
the localized environs they now find themselves amidst.

But second – the veer-y opposite to that. ‘Enduring’, ‘Permanency’.
Fixed and constant principles which, while they might now differ
somewhat in the location or the precise form and the minutiae of
mechanism of their expression – are nevertheless recognizable and have
retained their saliency down thousands of years and across thousand of
miles; literally from one end of the Indo-European-Isphere to the
other.

Just as it should be.

Shiva is a Wandering God; just as the Indo-Europeans were (and are)
themselves, Wanderers. It therefore makes considerable ’emblematic’
sense to honour the site – the place where Lord Shiva also wanders *to*
on a cyclical basis – via the act of Parikrama. That is to say,
wandering around and in the process, finding one’s self coming Home. HIS
Home.

After all, as a great man once wrote – “Not All Those Who Wander Are
Lost”.

Jai Mahadev !
