+++
title = "On The Sky Disc, On The Solstice, On The Eclipse – A Bronze Age Commemorative Cartograph For The Sea Of Stars [Arte-Factsxa0#6]"
date = "June 22, 2020"

+++


![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/ddfc692cf449e643d7f03cd5324b53fe.jpg)

Sunday (aptly enough) marked the Solstice – Winter if you’re down here
in Patala-loka, Summer if you’re in the Northern Hemisphere. With that
in mind, it seemed an ideal time to produce an article on one of the
most intriguing artefacts of the Indo-European Bronze Age – the Nebra
Sky Disk, of theUnetice Culture in central Germany circa the first half
of the 2nd Millennium B.C.

Interestingly, for our purposes, the likely construction of the Disc in
the 18th-17th century B.C. (before its eventual burial in the late 1600s
or early 1500s) places this roughly contemporaneous with the entry of
the Indo-Aryans into India. A matter we shall (briefly) return to later
in the piece.

But first, let us admire the Disc itself. Even despite its near four
millennia of antiquity from us in our advanced (post-)modern age, it is
difficult not to be moved by it simply as an aesthetic object. In some
ways, it may seem crude, but with the combination of the glittering of
gold and the dark patina (which ‘in life’ would likely have had a more
blue colouration – a deliberately derived effect of the application of
rotten eggs to it to replicate the distinctive tincture of the night
sky, which has slowly faded to the more usual green), there’s just
something about it that seems to *resonate*. It radiates a powerful,
primal energy that does not require the sophistication of latter ages to
make itself known.

Although having said that, it would be fallacious in the extreme to
attempt to state that this artefact is not the product of
sophistication. The metals utilized in its construction come from right
across Europe – copper from relatively close by in modern-day Austria,
joined with tin from Cornwall in order to make the bronze; gold from
both the Carpathians and the western United Kingdom for the varying
layers of ornamentation thereupon. The aformentioned chemical treatments
of the bronze in order to produce a colouration more apt for the starry
night sky. These speak to complex and interconnected trade-routes, and a
perhaps surprising practical knowledge of chemistry. And even before we
begin to consider the astronomical design and purpose of the device, we
can show that the notion of the ‘barbarians’ of the Bronze Age as
‘unsophisticated’ is a theme-park conceit of limited practical
application.

This becomes particularly so in light of those aforementioned
astronomical design features. For you see, the Disk is not merely an
aesthetic object – encoded upon it is specific information, most
plausibly for both a functional and a commemorative purpose.  
  

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/83c06602e82cde7431e3207a4f36c7df-950x950-1.jpg?w=950)

The arrangement of the Stars upon the Disc is not random – but quite
deliberate. This is demonstrable not only through the Pleiades
cluster’sprominent reproduction in between the golden disc of the Sun
and the crescent Moon (and note that it is the *seven* Pleiades, the
‘Seven Sisters’, rather than the six that are visible to most naked-eye
observers today – reflecting what appears to be the disappearance of one
of the seven at some point in the past three and a half thousand years;
as also suggested by the Greek myth of the disappearance of Merope, and
the dysjunctionbetween the Seven visible here with the Six Krtikka that
find mention in the Puranic-era accountings for Lord Skanda’s unusual
birth); but also through the careful placement of other stars to form
imprintings of other constellations as they’d be seen in the night sky
of the era.

In addition to these, there are also to be found three further ‘stars’
located between the Moon and Sun which do not easily accord with what we
know of the position of the prominently visible constellations of the
time … because they’re not stars at all, but rather planets. Mercury,
Mars, and Venus, to be exact, in ascending order and from left to right.
This helps us to affix the Sky Disc in terms of time – and suggests
rather strongly that the arrangement of celestial bodies is a quite
deliberate reproduction of the night sky circa the 16th of April 1699
BC. Which, as it happens, is also the date of a rather impressive total
solar eclipse. The sort of event, you’d have to agree, that it would
make indelible sense to commemorate and record in suitably fine
materials – perhaps poetic verse or some other such enduring substance.
But more, again, upon that a bit later.

At some point subsequent to the affixing of the aforementioned heavenly
topography, a further series of alterations were made to the Disk –
chiefly the attachment of two golden arcs to either side of the Disc
(which also necessitated the movement of one star to the right – and
straight-ahead til morning; as well as the obscuration the right-hand
arch of two others that are still in place underneath the new arrival).
These have attracted the most attention for those seeking to reconstruct
the functionalist meaning for the Disc, and understandably so. Measuring
eighty two degrees wide in span each, when the Disc is oriented via the
position of the Pleiades in the (Winter) Sky above the nearby Mittelberg
Hill, they show the height in the sky of sunrise and sunset upon both
the Summer and Winter Solstices. This therefore has obvious (and highly
localized) calendrical utility for the people who authored (and then
somewhat edited) the Disc’s existence, as it would have allowed the
Bronze Age user to accurately assay how close to these dates they were
via comparing sunrise and sunset to the respective extremities of each
Arc.

However, the application of these Arcs to the Disk was obviously a later
addition. We can tell this in part due to the notably different source
of gold utilized for their manufacture (an Eastern European source in
the Carpathians that would have been relatively more local, rather than
the British gold initially used for the celestial objects depicted
thereupon in the first phase of ornamentation); as well as the fact that
the Arcs’ placement necessitated the moving or covering over of three
stars. There would, after all, be little reason to place the two stars
on the right that are completely covered by the respective Arch , if it
were known by the artificers of the initial phase of its manufacture
that that was going to happen.

A third phase of addition took place somewhat later still (although how
much later is a matter for conjecture), to add a downwards-facing
crescent to the base of the Disc. This has been much theorized about
over the years since the Disk’s discovery, but with many speculated
explanations for the shape seeming both unsatisfying and unsound. The
major exception is the notion that this represents a Solar Boat – a
concept that has clearly found expression throughout not only the
better-known Egyptian mythological instance, but which also seems to
have been known (and materially represented in not dissimilar terms) to
the Bronze Age Indo-Europeans of Europe.

In some ways, it might be slightly surprising – as we are often more
used to thinking of the Chariot or Wagon when we are conceiving of Solar
Vehicles; the Sun, perhaps, forming the Wheel visible to us of such a
mode of conveyance – or pulled along behind it. However, as I have
repeatedly demonstrated in the course of my work, for (Early)
Indo-European Man, Space is an Ocean (the Sea may also be another kind
of Steppe – but more upon that, some other time). It therefore makes a
considerable sense for the Sun to be borne across the Sea of Stars
amidst the darkness via just such a vessel. A Space Ship, you might
say.

Although there is one curious detail obvious via its omission in
relation to the above – namely, the lack of the Sun actually being
positioned in or near the boat. But this, too, is reasonably explicable
within the context of the mythic interpretation – the mythic resonancy –
of both the depiction, as well as of the event itself.

So what is that? Well, on one level – the scientific one, perhaps, or
more accurately the euhemeric– it is an astronomical event. An eclipse;
specifically the total solar eclipse occurring upon the 16th of April
1699 BC. Yet on another level – the mythic level – it is something
rather more significant.

The coming together of Sun and Moon in this manner, is no mere
astronomical event – the procedural motion of inscrutable and
inscrutably remote far-flung glob(e)s of fire and cratered stone in the
sky. Rather, it is the intersection, the interplay, of two great and
powerful beings – two Gods. One Female (the Sun), one Male (the Moon).
\[And, before somebody takes issue with this … I have a forthcoming work
that sets out in some depth the strong argument for the
Proto-Indo-European Solar Deity portfolio being prominently held by a
Goddess, and likewise the Moon Deity being a God – something that
continued amongst the Nordic people and Baltics, as well as to a more
mixed extent the Vedic Aryans; yet also finds ‘echoing’ expression even
amidst the Greek and the Roman mythunderstandings that are mostly
responsible for modern eyes thinking it’s all the other way around\].

What would we term this coming together, I wonder? Perhaps we might call
it for what it is – a “Marriage”!

As it happens, this theory, this interpretation has been put forward
before. A chap by the name ofAndis Kaulins made reference to just such
a possibility, specifically with reference to the Nebra Sky Disk some
years ago, building his analysis upon certain Latvian folk-songs that
could be interpreted as referring to such an occasion (in general terms
that is – the meeting of Sun and Moon as a marriage, rather than
directly referencing this particular eclipse with its salient
identifying features). Personally, I think he may have been over-reading
them somewhat – but in such a manner as to produce an actually-correct
outcome.

We can tell this, via the application of an authentically ancient
Indo-European text to the matter – one that, it now seems, may actually
have been roughly contemporaneous with the events under our present
discussion. This is, RigVeda X 85 – The Bridal of Surya. In the course
of this hymnal, Surya \[that is, the *female* Surya – also The Sun\]
undertakes a marriage with Soma \[the Moon\]. The preparations for this
are undertaken in the Lunar month of Magha, the act itself in the
following month of Phalgun. These would correspond with, broadly
speaking, March and April, respectively. Three figures are stated to
have appeared to act as the Bridesmen for the ceremony – the Asvin Twins
and Lord Agni. These would correspond with the three mysterious stars
that are located between the Moon and Sun upon the Nebra Sky Disk – and
which Kaulins’ archaeo-astronomical reconstruction has demonstrated
*should* be the planets Mercury, Mars, and Venus; which he interestingly
assigns the roles of “bridesmaids” in his own Latvian-inflected
‘reconstruction’ of the marriage myth in question. There are further
points of symbolic coterminity between the words of the relevant
RigVedic Hymnal and the poetic descriptiveness of a (total) solar
eclipse – but we shall, perhaps, leave those for another time. For now
and for our purposes, it is enough to know that various important
identifying elements (including, all-importantly, the date – April)
match up rather well with what we know of the situation of the Skies on
the 16th of April 1699 BC.

And therefore – that it seems rather likely that these two artefacts –
one physical, one scriptural/textual – are in fact depicting *the same
event*.

Although this invites the question – why think about such a cosmic event
in positive terms? Why not the far more familiar and understandably
explicable myth of a Demon devouring the Sun? And that is because – this
is being presented as a fundamentally, indeed *foundationally* Lawful
event. It is not the random chaos and malefic un-balancing of a
rapacious demon robbing us of the source of our light and life. It is a
predictable, pre-ordained phenomenon \[as we find attested in the
Hymnal’s notation that Surya’s Father has expressed His support for the
union; and the first lines beginning with the dual precepts of ‘Satya’
and ‘Rta’ – Truth and Cosmic Order. And, further, the notation that the
Soma, the Moon, Who is shortly to be in receipt of His Bride, is an
important, powerful, respected, and integral constituent of the Divine
(and Divinely Ordered) Kingdom\]. Instead of placing the Power of the
Sun under threat of extinguishment – it, the Eclipse, is portrayed as a
noble, necessary, re-vital-izing action (and therefore also for the
Adityas – the Solar Gods); an acknowledgement of Soma’s core place in
the cosmos (even despite His seeming waxing and waning and shifting
faces). In other words, it is the complete opposite of something to be
feared – even though it may look like something that one should be
needfully reassured about, if one is uninitiated as to the underlying
Purpose and Order of such an occurrence.

Interestingly, this also suggests that the state of Vedic astrology was
sufficiently advanced to have some comprehension not only of solar
eclipses as a general phenomenon (rather than a specific and
world-ending/imperilling one) – but also to perhaps be able to predict
these, as well. Which connotes a state of astronomical technical ability
and understanding rather in advance of what various commentators have
suggested could have been the case for the Bronze Age elsewhere. This
latter objection is, as it happens, one of the objections that has
previously been mooted to the possibility of the Nebra Sky Disc
depicting an Eclipse – the idea that Bronze Age European Man had no
concept of an Eclipse and therefore presumably even after directly
witnessing one unfolding in the skies above him, could not depict such
and same again in symbolic terms.

So – what does this mean in terms of our interpretation of the Nebra Sky
Disc?

Well, for starters it suggests that the original purpose of the Disc was
not, in fact, Solstice marking and time measuring. But rather, a quite
specific commemoration of a suitably impressive stellar and therefore
mythological event. This explains the particular patterning of several
elements upon the Disk – including those aforementioned trio of Planets;
as well as the *lack* of those two golden arcs that turn it into a more
‘mundanely’ functional device upon either side. Those are added later,
perhaps some decades subsequent – after the initial, powerfully
resounding recollection of the Solar Eclipse had faded somewhat, and it
became apparent that the handily accurate ‘star map’ could be utilized
for such a purpose \[and I say ‘handily’ because, unlike pretty much
every other instance of such a device we have found of contemporaneous
or earlier construction … it’s man-portable rather than a fixed and
often downright gigantic physical structure rooted in the Earth’s sturdy
palm, with protruding fingers of megalithic construction and durability,
if not perhaps ‘convenience’ in other respects\].

Later still, with the ‘functional’ utilization of the Disc also perhaps
fading (or not – who can say, that far back), the Solar Barque is added
to the bottom of the Disk. This may also recall somewhat the Eclipse
symbolism that should have been initially there – the ‘waves’ or ‘oars’
of the deliberately grooved crescent perhaps echoing the appearance of
the coronaof the Sun during its Eclipsing marriage \[and which may also
find expression in the aforementioned RigVedic Hymnal when speaking
about the veiling of the bride and its fringes, etc. . This helps to
make much more visually striking and apparent the nature of the event to
those who were not around/alive to see it – and also, via the
utilization of the Solar Boat mytheme, helps to show that such an
occurrence is not a portent of immediate, impending doom – but a
temporary phase within an ongoing, Solar cycle.

Finally, somebody put holes all around the rim of the Disc, presumably
so that it might become affixed to something – whether a wall or some
mobile facing, or a standard of cloth or wood … or, as has also been
suggested from time to time, as the device upon a suitably impressive
looking shield. We can but speculate.

At some point after this, either in the late 1600s or early 1500s, the
Sky Disc is buried. The possible explanation for which, being that the
immense ash and dust-clouds thrown up by the Santorini eruption of 1613
BC (or thereabouts) – would have rendered pretty much everything in the
skies above and over Central Europe … pretty dark and dim for some
years; thus rendering the Disk’s stellar cartography of limited utility,
especially in light of changed climatological conditions that would have
meant that what may have been predicted-by-proxy by the Disc’s users via
the Solstice distance, may not have eventuated (for some years
afterward) anyway. This severely noticeable impact upon the Sky as well
as the surrounding natural and habitable environment (including a
significant deterioration on plant-growth and therefore yields) may
have been taken as a religious occurrence – thus, perhaps, mandating
some act to set things back ‘in balance’ , which might have included the
consignment to the Earth (Mother), of one of the most precious and
fantastically valuable (Sky) artefacts in the tribe’s ownership. Who can
say.

What we CAN state – and I believe it is with some certainty – is that
the Nebra Sky Disk is not only visually impressive, but remarkable as
well in terms of what it tells us about our ancestors, and those closely
related or at the very least contemporaneous with them. It shows us that
despite all the stereotypes and insistent interpretations – of both our
time, with its technological might, and of theirs – that Ancient
(Indo-)European Man was no uncultured, rock-headed primitive. But rather
a thoughtful, creative figure – capable of living in both surprising
harmony and comprehension with the world around him; taking advantage of
continental-spanning trade-networks and the stored, storied, but above
all *shared* insights and observations of that world passed down to him
from years, perhaps even generations afore.

As it happens, on the eve of the Winter Solstice itself this year, I was
out in the darkness; myself and an associate had visited a graveyard for
the purposes of paying our respects and asking for national assistance
of a particular prominent figure interred therein, and we had noticed
the prominent alignment of Jupiter, Saturn, and eventually a rising Mars
(Neptune was also there, although for obvious reasons not visually
apparent). We checked and confirmed these by using my associate’s
cellphone astronomy ap. Seeking for a better view of the Heavens with
which to deploy said hand-held stellar chart, we headed up to a higher,
more open location. The same day, there was also a solar eclipse.

I had not, until just now, considered the overt resonancyof these
proceedings – and yet it now seems inescapably apparent.

Albeit with one really key difference – unlike the artificers of the
Nebra Sky Disc … I somehow doubt either of us would have been able to
hand-manufacture and accurately plot the stars upon such a device. Even
*with* the cellphone.

Some things *do* change. Others – like the Power of the Sun and our
wonderment in staring up at the incomprehensibly vast Heavens as They
Move and Move Us Here Below … Others remain. Even if they must, by
necessity, remain in waiting for us just out of sight pending their
eventual recovery.

Rather like an Eclipse in that manner, come to think of it.

