+++
title = "Sons of the Sun Part V: Romulus And Remus Reconstructed: Forensic Theology [Sectionxa03]"
date = "June 12, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/romulus-and-remus.jpg?w=500)

  
So, to bring it all back together – and hopefully rather simply – the
Myth of Romulus & Remus provides something quite fascinating to us. For
it is an account that has obviously transposed something far older, and
in some ways far grander \[that is to say, the origin of the Race of Man
– the Indo-Europeans), to a much smaller and localized context (the
origin of the Roman people amidst Man); and in so doing, has also lost
or changed subtly yet markedly other details in the re-telling. This has
been partially in evidence by looking at the gradual progression of the
Roman sources upon the matter (which change and shift various elements
contingent upon how euhemeric they are intended upon being, and what is
otherwise narratively or politically convenient); and partially evinced
by the direct comparison of the mythology around Romulus & Remus to both
the Vedic and therefore the underlying Indo-European
‘proper’/’reconstructed’ typology for the Progenitor Twins.

The way the story goes, if you asked somebody to recite it – is that the
God Mars, fathers a pair of brothers upon a mortal woman of august
bloodline, wrongfully imprisoned by the usurper-king of Alba Longa.
Following their birth, they are to be put to death, but are instead
taken pity upon by the servant charged with their murder and thence
Father Tiber Himself (The Mother, meanwhile, Rhea Silvia, casts herself
likewise into the river). They are provided for in the wilderness by a
Mother Wolf, and then brought somewhat to civilization as the adoptive,
foundling children of a shepherd; before in adulthood finding their way
back to the place of their birth in Alba Longa, and setting things to
rights there. After which, they proceed back to what would become Rome
(or Remuria), and engage in a contest or conflict over who shall have
the patronage of the soon-to-be city, its naming and its actual physical
situation amongst the Hills. This includes a divinatory rite and/or a
pointed argument around construction … triggering a scenario wherein
either Romulus, or one of Romulus’ supporters murders Remus – and
establishes via process of elimination, the Roman Monarchy (with an
emphasis upon the “Mono-“) in the process. Said Monarch then giving both
Name \[Rome\] and Order \[the division of Roman society, selection of
the Hundred, promulgation of Laws\] to the city. Rendering them Romans
by making the idea, the ideal, the concept of Rome real.

Except we now know that this is not quite how things should go.

The comparative Indo-European myth, based upon the Vedic accounting for
Manu & Yama, reads as the following:

The Far-Shining One \[likely Dyaus Pitar, although later specifically
the Sun deity, Who may be somewhat distinct\] fathers the twin brothers
\[potentially as part of a set of triplets – the daughter Yami being the
third sibling\], with a Mother \[Saranyu\] Who becomes somewhat remote
– kidnapped, incarcerated, “vanishing” also from the lives of Her
Children at least for a time. The male Progenitor Twins grow, and in
adulthood their paths diverge. Yama goes forth to find (indeed,
\*found\*) the Realm of the Dead – an act of self-sacrifice which grants
Him a kingdom in the Heavens (or, in later renditions, of the
Underworld) to match and mirror the Kingdom His Brother is soon to
build; depicted as a noble and necessary undertaking by Him for all our
common good. Manu, meanwhile, becomes the progenitor of the Race of Man,
and sets down pious dictates for the proper conduct of rites and of
society.

Immediately, some clear points of difference should be making themselves
apparent between the ‘standard’ accounting for Romulus & Remus, and the
archaic Manu & Yama myth.

The first, and quite literally most foundational one is the question of
paternity. For Romulus & Remus, it is generally agreed to be Mars
(although some tellings cite Hercules, and at least one instead refers
to the soon-to-be-deposed false king of Alba Longa). For Manu and Yama,
it is Vivasvat – an element shared in the parentage of Zoroastrian Yima,
whom we met in Part III. We can also tell via comparative analysis that
this \*should\* be how the myth goes. As I’ll argue in a future
installment of this series, the Tuisto that is Father to Mannus for the
Germanic, is likely a similarly ‘Shining One’ ‘Sky Father’ expression.
Similarly, the Scythian origin myth has their first man, Targitaus, also
directly descended from the Sky Father (although I am unsure just how
much credence I place in a supposed identification of this figure with
Herakles by some commentators). Amusingly, there is also another and
rather more archaic Classical accounting of the foundation of Rome by a
‘Rhomos’ (‘Strength’), a son of Odysseus – which I mention, due to my
previous postulation that Odysseus is an ‘echo’ or a resonancy with the
same deific complex as Shiva-Odin-Rudra; and so therefore a Son of the
Sky Father is the progenitor of Rome all over again. But I digress.

The point is, it seems unlikely that the Romans would be seemingly the
only major Indo-European people whose origin myth otherwise works out
reasonably faithfully to the Manu & Yama typology … yet diverge from it
in a rather major way to have Mars rather than a Dyaus Pitar expression
– or, at least, a more overtly Solar male deific than Mars (or Hercules)
hailed as their immediate divine ancestor.

So why the shift? Well, there could be a number of reasons for it. The
Romans were quite keen to emphasize their position within the myth – the
mythology – of the Classical world; and it may have suited their
internalized (as well as externalized) not-quite-‘propaganda’ to feel
themselves to be more directly connected to Mars. It would certainly go
well with the Venus linkage of which they otherwise boasted in reference
to Aeneas. And, perhaps more to the (spear-)point, it fitted well with
the quite literally Martial aspect and vigour that they wished to
present to the world. This may also help to account for the presence of
the She-Wolf within the nascent phase of the Twins’ upbringing. After
all, Wolf-Warriors are an enduring and fearsomely renowned feature of
the Indo-European world. The claim that the progenitors of the Roman
Race were the next best thing to literally mothered by a Wolf would help
to subconsciously underscore the militant overtones to their
self-embroidered origin-myth.

Curiously, I somewhat suspect that the ‘foundational’ elements to the
myth \*before\* it was tampered with, are still to be seen in various
elements detailing the parentage of the Romans – namely, “Father” Tiber,
and Rhea Silvia. Which is, to be sure, a controversial notion – but bear
with me. Now, we \*know\* that there is a standard Indo-European deific
expression for the Sky Father that is phraseable in riverine terms. This
is why there is a ‘Sindhu’ hymnal in the RigVeda \[ RV X 75\] that is,
functionally, significantly coterminous in its language and expression
with earlier Parjanya and Varuna hymnals from elsewhere in the same
Veda. We also find quite pointed references to each of these deific
expressions in relation to the fatherhood and kinship with mankind (and,
as applies Varuna, linkage to Yama particularly), something which
reaches an intriguing directness of expression in, of all places, the
Zoroastrian canon – wherein Apam Napat is specifically hailed as the
‘author of Men’. I considered these issues in much greater depth in the
course of “Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On
The Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune Ouranos”, and would only seek to
emphasize the underlying ‘Radiant’, ‘Golden’, and potentially ‘Solar’
connotations of Varuna and Apam Napat in particular; but given our
present Italic focus, a direct and more ‘local’ comparative would be
helpful.

Which is fortunately provided for us by the Falisci – an Italic people
who spoke a language closely related to Latin, and who lived not all
that far from Rome’s position on the shores of the Tiber. This partially
explains their recurrent pattern of warmaking and attempted insurrection
against the Romans – whether alongside Etruscan allies, or simply on an
opportune basis as occurred during the First Punic War. Where this
becomes relevant is in the Falisci’sown foundation being ascribed to a
figure by the name of Halese – stated to be Son of Neptune (it also
being important to note that Neptune, amidst the Italic peoples having a
far stronger riverine association than Poseidon, perhaps more in keeping
with the archaic Indo-European characterization of the God). It would
therefore seem not entirely implausible that the notion of one’s own
heroic progenitor – Romulus – being the Son of the Sky Father in a
Riverine aspect … would be rather impolitic to acknowledge. As that
foundational narrative was already claimed by a closely neighbouring
people with whom the Romans had fought repeated and bloody wars. These
wars, as it happens, coincide with the period immediately before the
first major Roman sources detailing the Romulus & Remus myth that we can
attest the existence of start appearing. Given the Romans also appear to
have been perhaps understandably keen to displace the Odysseus – Rhomos
potential parentage for their state, on grounds of the role of the
former in the Iliad many centuries before against their claimed major
forebear of Aeneas … it would make completely logical sense for them to
have been at similar pains to distance themselves from another, and far
more closely related (as well as closely proximate) recurrent adversary
in their own back yard with a potentially overlapping origin story and
therefore mythic legitimacy.

A further support for my theory is to be found in the person of Rhea
Silvia. Or, rather, in her name, and some of those aforementioned more
‘upbeat’ accountings wherein Rhea Silvia casts herself into the Tiber,
only to find herself in Father Tiber’s arms as His wife. Rhea, should be
immediately familiar as the name of an Earth Mother deific amidst the
Greek mythology – and while perhaps unexpected in Roman/Latin
expression, is nevertheless in evidence also in subsequent usage as a
theonym for Cybele, another ‘Mountain Mother’ deific expression.
‘Silvia’, meanwhile, is derived from a Latin term for forestry, or a
grove. The latter explanation requires considerably less imagination –
it is, after all, where the conception of the Twins take place, in the
‘standard’ Romulus & Remus account: a sacred grove. However, I suspect
that the former concept is likely to produce more fruit. The logical
explanation in light of our comparative mythography, would therefore
tether this sobriquet to the conceptry around the interplay of Parjanya
and the Earth Mother in, for instance, RV VII 101 or RV V 83 – wherein
Parjanya’s fertilization does not simply make the rains run on time, but
also produces the direct growth of vegetation. Rhea Silvia, therefore,
would be the Earth, fertile and fertilized. And, in this case, bearing
the fruit whose seed would become Roman civilization. The return of Rhea
Silvia to the Tiber, therefore, is the reunification of the married
couple. Interestingly, ‘Saranyu’ – the Mother of the Divine Twins per
the Vedas – also has a riverine symbolism to Her Name. But I digress.

In any case, lest there be any salient confusion over this – I am not
attempting to radically re-define the parentage of Romulus & Remus in a
manner that does not accord with my earlier statement around the
‘proper’ typological model for the Indo-European racial origin myth.
Whether my supposition around the underlying identity of Father Tiber is
accepted, or whether the more ‘conservative’ ‘corrective’ of instead
simply arcening back to the more prominently usual ‘Sky Father’
expressions within Classical mythology … the point is the same: that it
is the Sky Father, rather than Mars, that should be regarded as the
Grandfather of Rome. The only major difference, from an Indo-European
point of view, is whether we are hailing the Sky Father in a more Solar
or Water oriented aspect. However, as we have seen with Great Varuna, as
well as Apam Napat (but, then, I repeat myself), the two can quite
feasibly co-exist in under the umbrella of a single deific expression. I
am also not a linguist (merely a theologian who happens to make use of
linguistics … and hold Vak Devi in highest hallowed admiration), but it
would also seem intriguing to explore the potential etymology of
“Tiber”. On the face of it, the most plausible that I have yet seen
effectively mean ‘The Deep’, or ‘The Flow’, although other
reconstructions are possible (including one involving the Mountain(s) as
a potential origin/source point). Yet there is also a rather curious
Etruscan inscription of about 400 BC found upon one of the priestly
Negau Helmets, which attests a ‘Teiva’ – generally considered to be a
‘Deva’ style ‘Shining One’ designation. It would not seem entirely
impossible for the ‘Teiva’ of these Etruscan-speakers to have some
resonancy with the Italic terminology that ultimately gave rise to the
‘Tiferis’ – although potentially, in the mytholinguistic manner wherein
it is a case of ‘both’ the Solar \*and\* the Water resonanciesrather
than either, flowing down in parallel from the concept’s ultimate
mythological origins.

But to return to our Forensic Theology approach – the reconstructive
Myth of Romulus & Remus is about rather more than just assaying putative
parentage.

Bringing together our comparative mythographic evidence upon the
subject, we can basically conclude that the all-important question of
Rome’s foundational narrative – Who Killed Remus – has but one truly
plausible answer.

Although this invites further questions – namely, how and why did the
myth \*shift\* in Roman hands so that by the time it had started coming
down to us via textual format it looked so dramatically different (and,
in fact, with key details occluded even from the Romans themselves to
the point that multiple potential assailants were considered, or even
Remus actually outliving Romulus to begin with).

In truth, we shall likely never know the comprehensive answer to that.
Which does not mean that we are unable to make reasonable inferences as
to what may have occurred. These include the aforementioned ‘reworking’
of the myth for political reasons \[including the ‘localizing’ of it to
Rome and Romans rather than Mankind entire; but also to further
‘distance’ it from the accounts similar to or favourable to rival
groupings); but also for ‘artistic’ ones \[such as a desire to depict
the relationship of the Founder Twins as fratricidal, so as to make a
poignant point about the nature of Roman politics and civic life\].

And, for that matter, the regrettable tendency toward mythic degradation
if not outright literary disintegration-ism that is quite logical for
many a traditional accounting passed down across multiple millennia.
Particularly when the canon being transmitted is in a fragmentary state
to begin with (this is Why You Have Priest Caste – to prevent this, as
far as possible, from happening; hence in large measure why we \*have\*
the Vedas in such excellent condition today, coming down to us from
three and a half to four thousand years before); and when it has been
deliberately altered at various stages in its implicit reproduction.

Or, to phrase it another way – given the current prominence of the
Marvel cinematic universe, which features a ‘Thor’ … it is not entirely
impossible that this portrayal, done for artistic purposes, will have
such a salient impact upon how people think about Thor \[and/or, more
worryingly, Loki\] – to the point that some decades or centuries down
the track, the notion of a one-eyed Thor taking over the rulership of
Asgard from Odin following the latter’s seeming-death, may actually
become a part of the ‘popular mythology’ for the God. Amplify that out
by various subsequent authors taking inspiration from this portrayal and
‘reproducing’ it in their own work – and we end up with somebody from
several centuries or even millennia later, coming across some of these
accounts and wondering why there’s no big green giant mentioned in the
Eddas despite multi-source attestation elsewhere. And we thought
“Mess-O-Potamia” \[the re-arrangement of Greek mythology as a result of
Near Eastern influences\] was bad!

As applies the evident divergence of Romulus & Remus’ tale from that of
Manu & Yama \[or, for that matter, the particularly salient portions of
Odin’s accompanying mythology\] – it would be a simple enough thing to
have happen. Take the logic of what I have earlier proposed – that
Remus, effectively \*had\* to die \[and go forth, rise to rule the Realm
of the Dead by carving it out\] in order that Romulus and the Roman
People might live … and then reduce that down to everything outside the
square-brackets, you have an easy space to infil the presumably rather
under-adorned details in the original Indo-European accounting for
Yama/Iemus’ self-sacrifice as to mechanism and means. And where it makes
a regrettable human sense to assume that internal strife was ultimately
to blame. The ‘poetic’ element of pointing out how civic conflict
tarnishes even what should be the most golden of ages, a recurrent Roman
leitmotif, is an added bonus.

Meanwhile, the \*next\* element – what Remus did after death, indeed why
Remus died in the first place … may have become detached, de-emphasized,
distanced from its proper comprehension – because the position of Yama
was already filled in the popular mythology of the Romans as well as the
broader Classical world. That is to say, Hades/Pluto – as well as quite
an intriguing cast(e) of Etruscan and other Indo-European-descended
Underworld deifics and figures – was already there. So what would Remus
do? Other than the seriously ‘localized’ and inevitably ‘diminished’
role of looking after a particular clade of Roman shades of the dead
during a particular portion of the year when they are still with us. It
is hardly even a psychopomp’s role – more of a vague ‘primus inter
pares’ position for the oncoming horde of the uninvited geist. Which is
a dual tragedy, as not only is the Warden of Souls reduced to but a
shadow of His elsewise self, but so too are the proper bonds between
living member of the community and deceased ancestor, almost inverted
from respect and hospitality to banging pots and pans in an effort to
drive them out to the Underworld again.

Now, it is interesting to note that the RigVedic account and associated
cosmology – does not really have this problem. Yama rules in the Highest
Heaven inhabited by the Ancestors … but Varuna, too, is to be found
there alongside Him. This is important, because Hades is a Sky Father
expression (just as Varuna is), and yet shares significant iconographic
coterminity with Yama. Remus is, per our aforementioned reconstructive
analysis, a Son of the Sky Father. Varuna and Yama, therefore, are
Father and Son Together \[although it is possible that the nature of
this connexion is .. more complex than that, due to the coterminity of
\*both\* with Shiva\].

Except that this makes comparatively lesser sense for many Romans – as
they’d potentially already replaced the Sky Father with Mars in the
parentage of the Progenitor Twins, and had largely (but not entirely)
forgotten that Hades/Pluto, too, was Dyaus Pitar \[even despite
literally recalling this with the theonym – Dis Pater\].

So, faced with the choice of reiterating and reintegrating their own
original mythology, in a way that would notably diverge from the
Classical ‘consensus’ on various matters \[as distinct from the actual
underlying Indo-European mythology as it \*should\* be\], and which
would also feature an implicit apotheosis involved for Remus \[which
would potentially disrupt the ‘only one special’ mytheme around
Romulus/Rome\] … or simply letting the ‘inconvenient’ / ‘aberrant’
element fall through the cracks, out of sight out of mind – the Romans
chose to do the latter. After all – they already \*had\* their Rulers of
the Underworld, they already had their glorious founder (later
implicitly deified) … what need had they for a wandering ghost?

All things considered, then – the answer I gave before, as to the most
plausible identity for Remus’ killer … was, as they say, necessary but
not sufficient.

I don’t doubt that Remus, in effect, killed (sacrificed) himself.

But that was only dying the \*first\* time.

The second time – that of the Obliviation which Remus has quite clearly
suffered …

… for the culpability for \*that\* killing, we need look no further than
the Roman people themselves.

Perhaps this helps to explain why the Lemures of Remuria were so angry
and baelful toward their descendents when they came to visit during the
course of Remus’ festival bearing their (and His) name.
