---
title: ADDRESS AT THE FINAL SESSION

---
<div>

[←](v1_c1_buddhism.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Addresses at The Parliament of
Religions](addresses_at_the_parliament.htm) /
[→](../karma-yoga/effect_on_character.htm)

  

## ADDRESS AT THE FINAL SESSION

*27th September, 1893*

The World's Parliament of Religions has become an accomplished fact, and
the merciful Father has helped those who laboured to bring it into
existence, and crowned with success their most unselfish labour.

My thanks to those noble souls whose large hearts and love of truth
first dreamed this wonderful dream and then realised it. My thanks to
the shower of liberal sentiments that has overflowed this platform. My
thanks to his enlightened audience for their uniform kindness to me and
for their appreciation of every thought that tends to smooth the
friction of religions. A few jarring notes were heard from time to time
in this harmony. My special thanks to them, for they have, by their
striking contrast, made general harmony the sweeter.

Much has been said of the common ground of religious unity. I am not
going just now to venture my own theory. But if any one here hopes that
this unity will come by the triumph of any one of the religions and the
destruction of the others, to him I say, “Brother, yours is an
impossible hope.” Do I wish that the Christian would become Hindu? God
forbid. Do I wish that the Hindu or Buddhist would become Christian? God
forbid.

The seed is put in the ground, and earth and air and water are placed
around it. Does the seed become the earth; or the air, or the water? No.
It becomes a plant, it develops after the law of its own growth,
assimilates the air, the earth, and the water, converts them into plant
substance, and grows into a plant.

Similar is the case with religion. The Christian is not to become a
Hindu or a Buddhist, nor a Hindu or a Buddhist to become a Christian.
But each must assimilate the spirit of the others and yet preserve his
individuality and grow according to his own law of growth.

If the Parliament of Religions has shown anything to the world it is
this: It has proved to the world that holiness, purity and charity are
not the exclusive possessions of any church in the world, and that every
system has produced men and women of the most exalted character. In the
face of this evidence, if anybody dreams of the exclusive survival of
his own religion and the destruction of the others, I pity him from the
bottom of my heart, and point out to him that upon the banner of every
religion will soon be written, in spite of resistance: "Help and not
Fight," "Assimilation and not Destruction," "Harmony and Peace and not
Dissension."

</div>
