+++
title = "Vedic human sacrifice"

+++
The Indo-Aryan kshatriyas performed a peculiar rite called the
puruSha-medha that has been spoken of by Indians in hushed tones. Much
like the cow sacrifice and horse sacrifice, which people have tried to
explain away as not implying a real slaying, the human sacrifice has
also been denied. However, there is really no point being coy about our
past, based on modern notions and standards.

The puruSha-medha was a rare rite, as it finds very infrequent mention
in Indic literature. Typically, it was a exaggeration of the ashvamedha
that was occasionally conducted by victorious kings. In the
puruSha-medha rite the rival king was captured and brought as a prisoner
by the sacrificing king. The rite lasted a whole year. At the end of it
he was smothered and sacrificed with the deployment of the puruSha
sUkta. Along with him, his animals may also be sacrificed and immolated
as offerings. The pUru king, ayutanAyi is said to have performed the
puruSha-medha rite with his enemies. In many ways this gory rite was
reminiscent of the rite of Julius Caesar when he slew some detractors of
his along with the sacrificial horse. The puruSha-medha may have been
seen as a more formal mode of eliminating ones foes in the context of a
pious ritual, as compared to a bland execution.

We have rare cases of the puruSha-medha in the archaeological record of
India. There is the famous Vedic ritual enclosure, which was reported
from Kausambi in 1957-58. It is perhaps the only case of the evidence
for a puruSha-medha preserved in situ. There the skull of the victim is
seen right on the chiti itself. It comes from the time the victorious
shu\~Nga army at the height of Hindu power defeated and expelled the
yavana-s from India. This puruShamedha was likely performed to
commemorate that historic event. We do not know if the victim was a
captured yavana. There is also the record of a Chola king having
performed a puruShamedha placing the head of his severed enemy at the
altar. It is also likely that the ashvamedha of vIra hammIra had a
puruSha-medha component as the inscription from the 1400s says that he
slew several turuShka-s to perform the yAga.

![puruShamedha](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2003/08/purushamedha.jpg?w=640)
