+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "November 30, 2020"

+++
This will be a regular series of posts, mostly translations of the
Athenaze readings that I do often, for my own practice. A good archive
to look back at and might help the odd person here and there. I find
blogging a good way to stay committed to my goals with regards to
language learning.

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/screen-shot-2020-11-30-at-4.56.44-pm.png?w=1024)

“Dikaiopolis is an an Athenian. and Diakiopolis dwells not in Athens but
in the field. For \[he\] is a farmer. So he cultivates his farm and
works in the field. and hard is his life. For, the farm is small but
large the toil. So, always Diakaiopolis works and often groans and says
‘O Zeus, hard is the life. for endless is the work. and small the farm
and not much grain it provides’ but strong is the man and energetic. so
often he rejoices. for he is a free farmer. and he lives his home. for
beautiful is his farm and provides grain not much but enough”

A few things to note, lot of postpositive adverbs/conjunctions (more
than sanskrit but similar to vā & ca, the 2 common ones). Some adverbs
like ου make the adjectives take the accusative endings. The locative
case, missing in Greek is formed by the periphrastic formation of εν +
dative case (notice; τοισι \> τοις contraction). Simple paragraph,
introduces nominative+accusative + the definite article (ὁ , ἡ , το).
Note the definite article often takes a possessive sense here “his” .
It’s in 3 genders just like Sanskrit and has similar usages, (often a
weak demonstrative) – cf. Skt. saḥ / sā / tad

The copula εστιν has a “nu movable” in which ν can be added in front of
vowels or at end of words/sentences. That’s my take on this passage and
grammar gleamed from it.

**Chapter 1 (b)**

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-01-at-3.41.40-am.png?w=1024)

“Dikaiopolis works in the field. For the field he digs. Large is the
work and difficult. For he carries the stones out of the field. He lifts
the big stones and carries towards the stone heap. Strong is the man but
works for a long time and he is very tired. For, the sun is blazing and
wears him out. So sits under the tree and rests not for a long time.
Soon he gets up and works. And finally the sun sets. Then, no longer
works Dikaiopolis but walks towards the house.”

A few things I noticed, ablative constructions seem to be formed
periphrastically with the preposition εκ + genitive (ek tou agrou).
Necessary in Greek because it lacks the ablative unlike Skt. προς is
cognate with Skt prati and has somewhat similar usage “towards” το ἑρμα
seems to be accusative governing it. ὑπο has many meanings but ὑπο +
dative = under, it seems. επ here is a conraction of **ἐπῐ́** (cognate
with Skt api) and here is used in a reflexive sense with ***ἑαυτῶν***.
Last line confirms that hupo was governed with the accusative! “pros ton
oikon” . epi + genitive is “on” A few verbs introduced, straightforward.
Not familiar with the pronoun eauton, though I know auton/autos/autē

**Chapter 2 (A)**

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-03-at-6.39.17-pm.png?w=942)

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-03-at-6.39.28-pm.png?w=910)

“Dikaiopolis steps comes out, out of the house and calls Xanthias.
Xanthias is a slave. On one hand, \[he is a\] strong man but is lazy.
For he does not work, if Dikaiopolis is not present. And now sleeps in
the house. So, Dikaiopolis calls him and says ‘Come! here, O Xanthias.
Why you sleep? So don’t be lazy but hurry! ‘ So Xanthias slowly comes
out, out of the home and says ‘So why are you difficult, O Master; For I
am not lazy but already I hurry’ and Dikaiopolis says ‘Come! Slave and
help! For lift the plough and carry it towards the field. For I drive
the oxen. but hurry! for on one hand the field is small, but on the
other hand the work is large.”

men and de form connected clauses that link back to each other. nun
seems to cognate with nunu of sanskrit. ισθε with अस्तु seems like
another cognate. Interesting to note, a slave is called Xanthias,
literally meaning “golden-haired” – A master is called δεσποτα literally
the source for English “despot” and cognate with Sanskrit “dampati” -ous
is the accusative plural for masculine nouns it looks like. Also here,
the 3 person verb endings of the indicative active present are
introduced (ω, εισ, ει). It is represented by αυτο, presumably the
accusative neuter singular. συλλαμβανε “help” imperative has the prefix
(συν) which is likely cognate with (sam) in sanskrit and with regressive
assimilation becomes (συλ).  
  
**Chapter 2(B)**  

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-05-at-4.56.22-pm.png?w=1024)

“On one hand, Dikaiopolis drives the oxen. and on the other hand
Xanthias walks behind and carries the plough. and soon, Dikaiopolis
takes in the oxen into the field and looks towards the slave. And
Xanthias is not present. For he walks slowly. So Dikaiopolis calls him
and says ‘Hurry, O Xanthia, and carry the plough to me’ and Xanthias
says ‘But now I hurry, O Master. Thus why are you harsh?’ And slowly
carries the plough towards him. So, Dikaiopolis leads the oxen under the
yoke and attaches the plough. and thereafter looks towards the slave and
Xanthias is not there. For he is sleeping under the tree. So,
Dikaiopolis calls him and says ‘Come here, O you cursed creature, don’t
sleep but help! For carry! the seed and walk behind’ On the one hand so
the slave takes the seed and follows, but on the other hand the master
calls Demeter and says ‘Gracious you be! O Demeter, and multiply the
seed.’ Thereafter takes the goad and goads the oxen and says ‘Hurry you
all, O Oxen. Drag the plough and plow the field!’  
  

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-05-at-4.50.10-pm.png?w=1024)

Few notes. Notice the dual usage of prepositions like (ὑπο), which I
think is common in Greek, less so in Skt due to more inflectional
structure. ὑπο + genitive = underneath (Static), ὑπο + accusative =
movement under something. Also note, imperative plural is -τε and the
word σπερμα is 3rd declension (not introduced yet).  
  
**Chapter 3(A)**

“On one hand, Dikaiopolis drives the oxen, and on the other hand the
oxen drag the plough and Xanthias sows the seed. but look, the oxen stay
in one place and no longer drag the plough. So now, Dikaiopolis calls
the oxen and says ‘Hurry you all, O Oxen’ and the oxen still stay in one
place. So Dikaiopolis says ‘why you all waiting! O Oxen’ and sees
towards the plough. and look! A stone is obstructing it. So Dikaiopolis
takes the stone but does not lift it up. For it is large. So, he calls
the slave and says ‘Come here! O Xanthia, and help! ‘ For large stone is
obstructing the plough. And the oxen stay in one place.  
  
So, Xanthia slowly approaches but not helps. For he sees towards the
stone and says ‘The stone is large, O Despota. Look! Not possible is to
lift it.’ and Dikaiopolis says ‘Do not be lazy you! but help!’ For
possible is to lift the stone. So together, both master and slave lift
the stone and carry it out of the field.  
  

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-08-at-12.20.40-am.png?w=1024)

“and while carrying it, the slave stumbles and drops the stone. and the
stone falls towards the foot of dikaiopolis. so dikaiopolis groans and
says ‘O Zeus, Oh my poor foot. take the stone, O you fool, and lift it
and thus do not be clumsy!’ and the slave says ‘why in this manner harsh
you are, O Despota’ ‘For I am not responsible. For the stone is large
and not possible is to carry it’ And Dikaiopolis says ‘Do not talk
nonsense! O you rouge, but lift the stone and carry it out from the
field’ and thereafter on one hand Dikaiopolis drives the oxen and on the
other hand the oxen no longer stay in place but drive the plough”

First thing to note is the infinitive. “to do” and ending in -ειν. Then
we see φεσι which is postpositive and cognate with भाष of Sanskrit.
Greek usually devoices the aspirates. -πιπτω is cognate with √पत् for
sure.

  
  
**Chapter 3(B)**

  
“Meanwhile, Phillipos approaches. Phillipos is the son of Dikaiopolis.
Both a large and brave boy. and carries the dinner towards his father.
and when he walks in into the field, he calls the father and says ‘Come
here, O father. See! I carry the dinner. So no longer work but sit down
and eat.’ So the father leaves the field and calls the slave. So they
are sitting together and eating. and after the dinner Dikaiopolis says
‘Stay, O Boy and help!’ Carry the seed and sow! and you, O slave, dig
the stones and carry them out from the field. For many are the stones
and with difficulty is it possible to plow. and Xanthias ‘but it is not
possible to carry out so many stones’ and Dikaiopolis ‘Do not talk
nonsense! O Slave, but work!’ So work both the father and the child and
the servant. and finally on one hand the sun sets, on the other hand the
men no longer work but loosen the oxen and leave the plough in the field
and slowly walk towards the house”

**Chapter 4(A)**  
  

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-09-at-11.29.16-pm.png?w=1024)

“and the next day when the first sun is rising, the wife calls the man
and says ‘lift yourself! O Husband’ For the sun is rising and the slave
already leads the oxen towards the field and both I and the daughter we
intend to walk towards the spring. Life yourself! For time is to walk
towards the field. and Dikaiopolis is very tired and not wants to lift
himself. So he says ‘Do not be difficult! O Wife. For I am very tired
and I want to sleep.’ And the wife says ‘But this is not possible. Why
sleep? For time is to work. Lift yourself. O Lazy Man!’  
  
So, on one hand Dikaiopolis reluctantly lifts himself and walks towards
the field. and both the Myrrhine and the Melissa walk towards the spring
(Melissa is the Daughter, very beautiful girl). So both the mother and
the daughter slowly walk. For they are carrying water jars. And large
are the water jars. So that not possible is to hurry.”  
  
and when they approach the spring, look, other women are already there
and filling the water jars. So, Myrrhine calls the women and says
‘Greetings, O Dears. Are you filling the water jars already? and they
\[the women\] say ‘Greetings to you. Yes, already we fill the water
jars. For early in the day we are present. but come here swiftly and
listen! For messenger has come from the city. and he says that the
athenians celebrate the festival of Dionysus. So we intend to walk
towards the city. For we want to see the dances and the contests and the
plays. and do you want to see the festival?”

few pronouns are introduced, μοι (to me), συ (you), ἡμεις (we). a new
verb “to wish” is introduced, εθελω. εθελω + infinitive = i want to do
ABC. So for the first declension, what happened was it seems the
original endings were a/ā and in Attic Greek, most of the ā \> ē (in the
singular). But after e,i,r the original ā were retained. So in total, we
get 4 kinds of feminine declensions.

**Chapter 4(B)**

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-15-at-10.02.50-pm.png?w=1024)

“and Myrrhine, ‘Why do you talk! O Dears! Do we really celebrate the
festival the Athenians? On one hand I very much want to see it. but on
the other hand you, O Melissa, and do you want to celebrate? But not
possible is. For difficult is the man. For always works and rarely wants
to go to the city. and Melissa \[says\] ‘But not very difficult is
father. For easy is to persuade him. and Myrrhine \[says\] ‘Thus not
talk nonsense but the water jug quickly fill! For time is to return to
home”

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-15-at-10.11.56-pm.png?w=1024)

“So both the mother and the daughter quickly fill up the water jugs and
walk homeward. and in the road stumbles Melissa and drops the water jug
towards the earth and breaks it. So groans and says ‘alas! I am not
faulty. For big is the water jug and not possible is to carry it’ And
the mother ‘Why do you talk! O daughter! Not talk nonsense but hurry
homeward and carry other water jug’  
  
So on one hand Melissa hurries homeward and on the other hand Myrrhine
slowly walks. For big is the water jug and Myrrhine not wants to stumble
it.”

some adjectives who are 1st declension are masculine, follow the same
pattern except taking -ou in the genitive singular. some feminine nouns
are 2nd declension, like ho hodos ‘road, way’

just like nouns, adjectives with second last word being e,i,r also take
-ā instead of ē in the 2nd declension. adverb forming = genitive plural
ων \> ως

humas = acc pl “you” and autous = them, autoi = themselves. me = me.

**Chatper 5(A)**

“While both Myrrhine and Melissa are away, The grandfather works in
garden. Both the child and Argus, the dog walk towards the sheepfold.
Argus is a dog both big and strong. and he guards the house and the
sheep. While both the child and the dog walk up the path, Phillip sees a
hare running in the field. So he loosens the dog and says ‘Go on. Lead,
Chase” And so, the dog barks and chases the hare. but it (hare) flees up
the hill. And so, we run quickly so that soon it is not possible to see
neither the dog nor the hare.”  
  
“So, Phillip hurries after them and shouts ‘Come here, O Agre! Come
back! O cursed dog’ but the dog still chases. So Phillip climbs into the
top of the hill but does not see the dog. So (he) loudly shouts and
calls, but does not hear the dog. and finally, the child despairs walks
down the hill.”  
  
“And when he approaches the sheepfold, The grandfather sees him and says
‘what do you do. O child’ From where have you come and where is Argus?’
and Phillip says ‘from the hill i have come. O grandfather. and the dog
is somewhere in the mountain. For he chases the hare.’ and the
grandfather says ‘Go on, O child. Why not look for him?’ Thus not
careless be. and Phillip says ‘I am not careless, O grandfather. and not
even lazy I am. For I shout loud and call, but do not hear the dog.’ and
the grandfather says ‘come here, O child.’ Thus he talks and takes his
stick and hurries together with the child up the path.’

![](https://vriitrahan.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/screen-shot-2020-12-23-at-2.24.05-pm.png?w=1024)

**Chapter 5(B)**

“And when approaches the sheepfold, Both Phillip and the Grandfather
hear a lot of noise. For Argus is savagely barking and the sheep make
much uproar. So they hurry. For they want to know what the sheep are
experiencing. So present first, the child and look, While Argus stays in
front of the road and barks fiercely, at that time a big wolf from the
hill comes down towards the sheepfold. So, on one hand Phillip shouts
loudly and takes stones and pelts the wolf. and on the other hand, Argus
rushes upon it \[wolf\] and thus fiercely attacks in order to turn back
the wolf and make it flee. So on one hand, he chases the wolf and on the
other hand, Phillip hurries after him. And the grandfather already has
come into the top of the hill and sees the wolf and shouts loudly ‘Come
here, Phillip. Do not chase but here. and now Argos takes the wolf with
his teeth and holds it fast, and Phillip himself is already present and
takes his knife and strikes the wolf. and it struggles and falls down
towards the earth. The grandfather lready approaches here and sees the
wolf lying on the earth. So he is amazed and says ‘Well done, O Child,
very brave you are. For the wolf is big and fierce. and you, O Argus,
Good dog you are. For you guarded the sheep well. and now, O Phillip,
hurry homeward. For mother I suppose wants to know where you are and
what you experienced. And when they approach the home, they see the
mother. So on one hand the grandfather hurries towards her and tells
everything. and she says ‘the truth you tell’ ‘well done, O child. very
brave you are. but look– Melissa approaches from the spring. Come here,
O Melissa and see! For Phillip has killed the wolf. So while the
grandfather tells everything again, and Melissa is very amazed and says
that Argus and Phillip are very brave and strong. and thereafter, the
mother says ‘and now come here, O dears’ and ‘sleep with us, under the
tree. for you are very tired. and you, O Melissa and you sleep. So
listen. For I am about to tell a nice story to you. So, on one hand the
grandfather sleeps for he is very tired and the children sleep under the
tree and listen. For they desire to listen to the story.”

**Chapter 6(a)**

  
“Minos lives in Crete. and He is the King of the island. and in it is
the labyrinth of Minos. and there dwells the Minotaur. A certain
terrible beast. Who is on one hand half man, and on the other hand, half
taurus. And the Minotaur eats men. So, Minos compels the athenians to
send both seven youths and seven maidens each year towards Crete and
hands them over to the Minotaur to eat.”  
  
and in Athens ruled Aigeus. and he has a child by the name of Thesius.
and when he first grows up, He pities the comrades and wants to come to
their rescue. So he approaches his father and says ‘O Father, Dear. I
pity the comrades and want to save. So, send me! with the comrades
towards Crete. ‘ And Aigeus is very afraid but nevertheless obeys him.  
  
So Theseus embarks into the boat with the comrades and sails towards
Crete. And when they arrive in the island, both the king himself and the
queen and their daughter, called Ariadne receive them and lead \[them\]
towards Knossos. (for in this manner, the city of Minos is called). and
guard \[them\] in the prison.  
  
and Ariadne, when she first sees Theseus, loves him and wants to save
\[him\]. So when night comes, she hurries towards the prison and calls
Theseus and says ‘be quiet!, O Theseus. I, Ariadne, am here. And I want
to save you. Look, for I hold to you this sword and this thread. So
don’t be afraid but bravely embark into the labyrinth and kill the
Minotaur. and thereafter escape with the comrades and hurry to the boat.
for i have in the night to stay in front of the boat. for i want to flee
from crete and sail to athens with you. so, she says and quickly departs
to the city. and theseus on the one hand is very amazed but on the other
hand accepts the sword and waits the day.”

chapter 6(b)  
  
and when day happens, minos goes to the prison and calls both thesea and
his comrades and leads them to the labyrinth. and when they arrive, the
slaves open the double gates and the athenians are driven into \[the
gates\]. and thereafter, the double gates are shut and they depart.
because they provide food to the minotaur for many days. so on one hand
the comrades are very afraid and on the other hand theseus says ‘not be
afraid, o dears’, ‘for i will save you all. follow me so bravely.’ thus
he says and he leads the way for them in the labyrinth.  
  
and theseus is not afraid, but very bravely fights. for on the left hand
he takes hold of the head of the beast. and on the right hand strikes
its breast. and the minotaur terribly screams and falls down to the
earth. and the comrades, when they see the beast lying upon the earth,
rejoice and say ο theseus, how brave you are. how we marvel at you and
fight. but now indeed you save us from the labyrinth and lead us to the
gates. for long is the journey and many the darkness. and the road we do
not know. 4) and theseus not fears but takes the song for thus he knows
the road. and leads the comrades to the double gates. and when arrives,
they cut through the bolt and stay there. for still it is day. and when
night comes, they go out from the labyrinth and hurry to the boat. and
there the ariadne herself they see. for she stays in front of the boat.
so quickly they walk into and sail away to athens. so thus theseus both
the minotaur kills and the comrades brings safely into athens. so ends
the myth of myrrhine, and melissa says ‘and the ariadne, rejoices, does
love her theseus.?’ and myrrhine says ‘in no way’ ariadne does not
rejoice, that theseus loves her. and melissa says why does theseus not
love here. why it becomes? and the mother says ‘ that the myth not i
want to tell you now indeed’

