+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "November 29, 2020"

+++
Ancient Languages are the relics of a bygone past to most. But most
doesn’t care about history, culture or the heritage of his forefathers
of yore. If you are most, you can very well not bother reading this
post. If one cares about history, history as a voice of your ancestors
speaking to you from paper, from the oral word, then ancient tongues are
rusty but efficient keys to a lock that contains the map to El Dorado
itself. Languages are also tools, not just tools that help in life but
also understanding entire cultures. Then again, not all languages are
created equal, and I mean this as no
[whorfianesque](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity)
statement. Some languages matter more, some languages were historical
winners, others loosers. Some produced science art literature and
philosophy, whilst others not a single papyrus to their name. Some
languages are conquerors, the others the conquered. This is all relative
but if you are an ordinary man with limited time from a monocultural
background, this relativity is efficiency. What do I mean by this?

Well, learning languages is hard. Especially ancient ones. You see,
languages head to simplicity, roughly speaking and with some generous
assumptions. They move away from rigid complex morphological systems
with multitude of cases, declensions, tense-aspect systems, a vast
vocabulary and difficult phonemes to simpler ones. When you seek to
learn Sanskrit, you’re unwinding the clock that lead to Hindi in the
first place. You’re going back in time, back to a complex language. This
is not easy, in fact, if your primary goal is reading literature in
ancient tongues, this is a magnitude harder. You simply do not have the
time or energy to master
[Andamane](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andamanese_languages)se without
giving up. So we pick for efficiency, select for value. Of course, I am
assuming you’re not a linguistics nerd who learns languages just because
he enjoys grammar or wants to show off in his niche circles by speaking
minority languages. I want to learn Ancient Greek because I want to read
what the Ancients said, I want to unwind the clock and read Plato or
Marcus Aurelius, in his own words. I desire to squeeze out the literary
achievements our forefathers and their religious cousins held in
common.  
  
With this in mind, I have a list which I desire to share. This is for
Indians or folk from the greater Indian civilization. (there will be
different priority languages to learn for different civilizational
cultures)  
  
1) **Sanskrit.** – Without a doubt, this is and was the language of
prestige of a large majority in Asia. This is your golden goose that you
must nourish. There can be no serious study of the Indian epics, of our
religion, of our philosophy and literature without it. The vocabulary &
alphasyllabary in common with most of India and (SEA) tongues provides
you a good head-start. This is the deva-vāṇī, the language of the Gods
themselves. Respect it, study it and will give you back more than you
can imagine. (Not to mention, it makes learning other ancient languages
easier)  
  
Once you are done with Sanskrit, the paths will diverge. It comes down
to personal interest. I will provide options.

2\) **Persian/Greek/Classical Chinese** . – Important, these are
options. You are **not** learning all 3. Pick one. If you are interested
in medieval indian history and literature, Persian is the natural
choice. It is quite simple, grammatically and has a large vocabulary
overlap. Familiarity with the script will be the hardest part for most
people. If you are solely interested in ancient indian history, the
natural choice is Greek. If you are also interested in comparative
studies of the Epics(Illiad Odyssey with Mahābhārata Rāmāyaṇa), the
natural choice is Greek. The language is very hard but not harder than
Sanskrit. The vocabulary is the hardest part. (If you are at this stage,
you should already have learned Sanskrit). The advantage of Persian is
one can work their way back to Old Persian and it is a spoken language.
I suspect most here will pick Persian. If you are daring and also
interested in classical history, you can pick Chinese.

3\) **German/Portuguese** – German is not only an excellent aid to
studying Vedic prehistory (the best resources are oft wholly in German
and untranslated), but also the language of a premier strain of european
philosophy and science of the last 250 years. Nietzsche, Kant, Hegel,
Schopenhauer, Einstein, Freud et al all wrote in German. Even the
pitāmah of both the mārxvādi and fascistvādi wrote in German. The career
opportunities are a bonus. The other option is Portuguese, which
contains a lot of primary sources on India (some untranslated),
especially southern india. This also gives you reading knowledge of
Spanish.  
  
If you noticed, we have 3 categories. You can distill them down to- 1)
Prestige civilizational language, 2) Prestige ancient language of a
civilization that interacted with your own, 3) Prestige modern language.

In this framework, you learn Sanskrit + 2. (For people from TN or SI,
Sangam Tamil is a good choice with Sanskrit). An important point I want
to make – reading proficiency is not the same as speaking proficiency.
It is far easier to read and understand than speak fluently. You will
find speaking proficiency the hardest with ancient greek. Reading skills
there will do (which is my personal aim). So all in all, we spend our
lifetime on 3 or 4 tongues in addition to the ones we speak natively.
This adds up day by day, three quarters of a decade to know all 3 is a
good timeframe.

Of course, no one is forcing you – this is something you either will do
of your own violition or never find worth spending time on. A century or
two ago, learning the classical languages was a bare-minimum requirement
for any self-respecting gentleman or brāhmaṇā. Today, it seems as if the
only exercise in the classics we get is a cantankerous dialogue in
ebonics from the latest rap video.

