+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "November 24, 2020"

+++
I think I will use this blog as a medium to work on my Greek (which I
have abandoned for some time), by consciously translating classical
authors and posting oft about comparative linguistics (of Sanskrit &
Greek).

There is a lot to be drawn to here. Ancient Greek is a strong magnet for
lovers of prehistory. It’s ancient for one. Myceanean Greece was a
thalassocratic civilization in the early centuries of the 20th millenium
BCE and the second civilization of name in Europe after the Minoans (who
the Myceaneans incidentally, vanquished). Myceanea had thorough cultural
and technological borrowings from the Minoans, including their alphabet
(Linear A). The Greeks tweaked this to write the first form of Greek (in
a script called Linear B). Myceanean-s were conclusively proven to be
Indo-Europeans & specifically Greeks when Linear B was deciphered.

Myceanean Greece (1600–1100 BC) was the timeline of Troy, of Achilles
and Hector. Following that, you see civilization collapse, a tumultous
time in which every Bronze Age polity disappears, barring Ancient Egypt.
A regression. A dark age really. The Greeks loose the art of writing,
they de-urbanize and loose control of the sea. They become primitive, so
to say. This time period, deemed the dark ages is the time of Homer and
Hesiod.

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/William-Adolphe_Bouguereau_%281825-1905%29_-_Homer_and_his_Guide_%281874%29.jpg/220px-William-Adolphe_Bouguereau_%281825-1905%29_-_Homer_and_his_Guide_%281874%29.jpg)

This is the period of epic poetry, bardic literature, of heroes and
beautiful maiden-s, of Gods and zealous Goddesses. It’s a cosy epoch, an
admirer of the itihāsā-s and purāṇa-s finds himself at home. That’s the
feeling Ancient Greece gives one. You cross this twilight to the era of
Classical Greece. The era of household names like Plato, Socrates,
Aristotle, Herodotus, the era of Sophocoles and Phillip of Macedon. A
cultured man charmed by the fables of our own philosophers and kings of
antiquity makes himself warm soup, breathes light into the fireplace and
snuggles in for the ride.

I suppose there is something quite charming about being the locus of
something, the locus of the civilized world here for one. There’s also
something strangely magentic about being all alone out there, the entire
Earth your seeming Oyster. Roma, Germania, Brittania? What relevance
shall they hold? As far as we’re concerned, the civilized world begins
and ends in the Greek Isles.

Digression aside, I think that should suffice to explain why I will and
should make good use of this blog to hone my Ancient Greek skills!

