+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "November 11, 2020"

+++
There is an encanting description of Rājā duṣyanta meeting śakuntalā in
the mahābhārata. Let’s peek at it, along with some excerpts on imagery
in the scene, some idioms and origins of two words. The entire source of
the story will be the BORI sanskrit critical edition of the mahābhārat

The āśrama itself (of ṛṣi kaṇva) is described with a lot of delightful
natural imagery but skipping that part, Rājā Duṣyanta decides to go in
the wood of the hermitage.

सामात्यो राजलिङ्गानि सोऽपनीय नराधिपः \| पुरोहितसहायश्च जगामाश्रममुत्तमम्
\|\|२९\|\| “The commander of men having put away all signs \[liṅga\] of
royalty, accompanied by priest and minister, \[he\] went to the foremost
of āśramas”

The rājā has seen śakuntalā now, although he entered with the intention
of seeing kashyapa’s descendant, he encounters the charming woman. He
asks here where the sage is, to which she replies he has gone to gather
fruits, will be back in a moment!

The king, however, is dazzled by her; thinking of her appearance.

अपश्यमानस्तमृषिं तया चोक्तस्तथा नृपः \| तां च दृष्ट्वा वरारोहां श्रीमतीं
चारुहासिनीम् \|\|१०\|\| “Not seeing that sage, and having been addressed
thus by \[her\] and having seen her, that blessful woman \[with\]
excellent hips, that woman \[with a\] lovely smile”

A note here, the imagery of precious/bountiful hips or waist is common
to address women, but moreso I like how elegant the word used is. वरारोह
is broken up as vara+āroha meaning “excellent waisted” but āroha is made
up of ā+roha, the prefix ā meaning “come” and roha meaning “ascending,
riding” is a nominalization of the root √ruh “to germinate, to sprout”
naturally, āroha is “riding” or simply “rider” so the hips are the
instrument the woman uses to climb, literally, hence the term as āroha
is used. Again, the intricacies of Sanskrit are very pleasing.

विभ्राजमानां वपुषा तपसा च दमेन च रूपयौवनसम्पन्नामित्युवाच महीपतिः
\|\|११\| “\[She\] was resplendent by figure and by austerity and by
self-control, \[She was\] endowed with form and youthfulness…+”

कासि कस्यासि सुश्रोणि किमर्थं चागता वनम् \| एवंरूपगुणोपेता कुतस्त्वमसि
शोभने \|\|१२\|\| “The king said, ‘Who are you? Whose are you? O one with
the beautiful hips and loins, why have you come to the forest? Verily
\[you are\] endowed by form and qualities. From where are you? O beauty”

Clearly, the great rājā was bedazzled by the beautiful śakuntalā,
contrasting this with the hypermasculine irrealis imagery of the founder
of the paurava-s portrayed earlier in the parva, it’s a pleasantly
humbling depiction of a man enchanted by a woman, an altogether humanly
experience. His enchantment isn’t complete yet…

note: hips and loins here means śroṇi \[cognate with latin; clunis
(buttock)\]

दर्शनादेव हि शुभे त्वया मेऽपहृतं मनः \| इच्छामि त्वामहं ज्ञातुं
तन्ममाचक्ष्व शोभने \|\|१३\|\| “O beauty, from first glance indeed you
have carried away my conscioussness, I desire to know you. Tell me.”

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a2/Raja_Ravi_Varma%2C_Shakuntala_%281901%29.jpg)

śakuntalā finally acknowledges the great founder of the kuru-s and
replies.

एवमुक्ता तदा कन्या तेन राज्ञा तदाश्रमे \| उवाच हसती वाक्यमिदं
सुमधुराक्षरम् \|\|१४\|\| “Thus addressed by that king in the hermitage,
the maiden, whilst smiling spoke this sweet dialogue”

कण्वष्याहं भगवतो दुःषन्त दुहिता मता \| तपस्विनो धृतिमतो धर्मज्ञस्य
यशस्विनः \|\|१५\|\| “O blessed duṣyanta, I am considered the daughter of
of the steadfast, knower of dharma, engaged in austerity, illustrious
Kaṇva, \[his daughter I am known as\]”

And thus, śakuntalā introduces herself, beginning the start of a
tumultous and wonderful tale that has been told in sanskrit literature
time and time again! Taking a leap to a part of the story where
śakuntalā has married duṣyanta, and has bore him a son (the future
Bhārata, patron of our country), she goes to his court but finds herself
and her son rejected by him, called the choicest of abuses and has her
character questioned. She sees the king blatantly lying, he says

धर्मकामार्थसम्बन्धं न स्मरामि त्वया सह \| गच्छ वा तिष्ठ वा कामं
यद्वापीच्छसि तत्कुरु \|\|१९\|\| “I do not remember any religious or
sexual \[dharma-kāma\] association with you. Go! or Stay! As you desire,
whatever you wish, do that!”

śakuntalā is quite ashamed to hear this, embarassed in front of all
courtiers, she says;

योऽन्यथा सन्तमात्मानमन्यथा प्रतिपद्यते \| किं तेन न कृतं पापं
चोरेणात्मापहारिणा \|\|२६\|\| “\[The man\] who knowing something tells
his consciousness \[ātmā\] a lie \[another thing\], is not a sin done by
him? he steals his own soul \[like a thief\]”

एकोऽहमस्मीति च मन्यसे त्वं; न हृच्छयं वेत्सि मुनिं पुराणम् \| यो वेदिता
कर्मणः पापकस्य; तस्यान्तिके त्वं वृजिनं करोषि \|\|२७\|\| “You believe
you are alone; You do not know the ancient sage lying in the heart?
\[The sage\] who knows of your actions and sins, In his presense you
lie?”

मन्यते पापकं कृत्वा न कश्चिद्वेत्ति मामिति \| विदन्ति चैनं देवाश्च
स्वश्चैवान्तरपूरुषः \|\|२८\|\| “After doing sin, he believes ‘no one
knows me’ \[but\] the Gods know this and the man who dwells inside you
\[also knows\]”

आदित्यचन्द्रावनिलानलौ च; द्यौर्भूमिरापो हृदयं यमश्च \| अहश्च रात्रिश्च
उभे च सन्ध्ये; धर्मश्च जानाति नरस्य वृत्तम् \|\|२९\|\| “The sun, moon,
air, fire and the sky-father and the earth-mother, his heart, Yama, day,
night and both twilights and dharma \[itself\] know the deeds of man”

यमो वैवस्वतस्तस्य निर्यातयति दुष्कृतम् \| हृदि स्थितः कर्मसाक्षी
क्षेत्रज्ञो यस्य तुष्यति \|\|३०\|\| “\[If\] the seer of actions, knower
of the body, in the heart \[of man\] is pleased, then yama vaivasvata
forgives the evil deeds \[of man\]”

न तु तुष्यति यस्यैष पुरुषस्य दुरात्मनः \| तं यमः पापकर्माणं निर्यातयति
दुष्कृतम् \|\|३१\|\| “But when this being is not pleased, Yama punishes
that sinner for his evil deeds”

śakuntalā continues her chagrin on duṣyanta, but this time she tells him
something that gives us an origin story of two common words (jāyā (wife)
and putra (son))

भार्यां पतिः सम्प्रविश्य स यस्माज्जायते पुनः \| जायाया इति जायात्वं
पुराणाः कवयो विदुः \|\|३६\|\| “The husband having entered the \[womb\]
of the wife, emerges from it again as \[a son\], This birthingness of
the \[wife\] was known by the poets of old”

पुन्नाम्नो नरकाद्यस्मात्पितरं त्रायते सुतः \| तस्मात्पुत्र इति प्रोक्तः
स्वयमेव स्वयम्भुवा \|\|३८\|\| “The son is the one who resuces the
ancestors from hell \[put\]. Therefore, he is addressed as putra by the
self-created one himself”

put here is a part of hell, a specific hell for childless people. the
son born in the family rescues deceased ancestors from this childless
hell. \[through his lineage\]. the wife is jāyā because the husband
makes her bear a child and springs forth as that child, so the man
himself is born as his son is the idea \[presented later in the text
anyhow\].

following, we learn the importance of a wife, there are a lot of verses
dedicated to this, let’s see the intuitively appeasing imagery of a
familial relationship and the praise of a wife.

दह्यमाना मनोदुःखैर्व्याधिभिश्चातुरा नराः ह्लादन्ते स्वेषु दारेषु
घर्मार्ताः सलिलेष्विव \|\|४९\|\| “Being burned by mental grief and
affliction, clever men rejoice in their own wives, like \[men\]
suffering from heat rejoice in water”

सुसंरब्धोऽपि रामाणां न ब्रूयादप्रियं बुधः \| रतिं प्रीतिं च धर्मं च
तास्वायत्तमवेक्ष्य च \|\|५०\|\| “Even greatly enraged, the wise man
shall not speak unpleasant words to his wife. For joy, happiness, love
and religion are placed in her only”

अर्धं भार्या मनुष्यस्य भार्या श्रेष्ठतमः सखा \| भार्या मूलं त्रिवर्गस्य
भार्या मित्रं मरिष्यतः \|\|४०\|\| “A wife is half a man, a wife is the
greatest companion. A wife is the root of the three divisions \[of
life\]. A wife is a friend till both will die”

सखायः प्रविविक्तेषु भवन्त्येताः प्रियंवदाः \| पितरो धर्मकार्येषु
भवन्त्यार्तस्य मातरः \|\|४२\|\| “Sweet-spoken \[wives\] are companions
in solitutde, fathers in the work of religion and mothers in suffering”

similar praise for a wife is found in most smṛtis, and although
conservative religion is deemed as oppressive, i fail to see how someone
can read scripture and deem women as being oppressed. rather, recognized
for their special role and respected immensely for it. duṣyanta goes on
a long tirade after this, picking and insulting śakuntalā-s lineage and
birth. calling her a harlot and a liar. śakuntalā gives a very witty
retort, which is mentioned below;

राजन्सर्षपमात्राणि परच्छिद्राणि पश्यसि \| आत्मनो बिल्वमात्राणि पश्यन्नपि
न पश्यसि \|\|१\|\| “O King, you see the blemishes of others \[even
though\] they are as small as a mustard seed. \[but\] Your own faults
that are as big as the wood-apple tree, even seeing them, you don’t see
them”

The wood-apple tree is the bliva or the Aegle Marmelos. bliva gives bel
in modern IA languages.

![](https://4.imimg.com/data4/QP/SS/MY-29492333/aegle-marmelos-500x500.jpg)

