---
title: REINCARNATION

---
<div>

[←](the_destiny_of_man.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](comparative_theology.htm)

  

## REINCARNATION

(*Delivered in Memphis on January 19, 1894:  
Reported in Appeal-Avalanche*)

Swami Vive Kananda, the beturbaned and yellow-robed monk, lectured again
last night to a fair-sized and appreciative audience at the La Salette
Academy on Third street.

The subject was "Transmigration of the Soul, or "metempsychosis".
Possibly Vive Kananda never appeared to greater advantage than in this
role, so to speak. Metempsychosis is one of the most widely-accepted
beliefs among the Eastern races, and one that they are ever ready to
defend, at home or abroad. As Kananda said:

"Many of you do not know that it is one of the oldest religious
doctrines of all the old religions. It was known among the Pharisees,
among the Jews, among the first fathers of the Christian Church, and was
a common belief among the Arabs. And it lingers still with the Hindus
and the Buddhists.

"This state of things went on until the days of science which is merely
a contemplation of energies. Now, you Western people believe this
doctrine to be subversive of morality. In order to have a full survey of
the argument, its logical and metaphysical features, we will have to go
over all the ground. All of us believe in a moral governor of this
universe; yet nature reveals to us instead of justice, injustice. One
man is born under the best of circumstances. Throughout his entire life
circumstances come ready made to his hands — all conducive to happiness
and a higher order of things. Another is born, and at every point his
life is at variance with that of his neighbour. He dies in depravity,
exiled from society. Why so much impartiality \[partiality\] in the
distribution of happiness?

"The theory of metempsychosis reconciles this dis harmonious chord in
your common beliefs. Instead of making us immoral, this theory give us
the idea of justice. Some of you say: 'It is God's will.' This is no
answer. It is unscientific. Everything has a cause. The sole cause and
whole theory of causation being left with God, makes Him a most immoral
creature. But materialism is as much illogical as the other. So far as
we go, perception \[causation?\] involves all things. Therefore, this
doctrine of the transmigration of the soul is necessary on these
grounds. Here we are all born. Is this the first creation? Is creation
something coming out of nothing? Analysed completely, this sentence is
nonsense. It is not creation, but manifestation.

"A something cannot be the effect of a cause that is not. If I put my
finger in the fire, the burn is a simultaneous effect, and I know that
the cause of the burn was the action of my placing my finger in contact
with the fire. And as in the case of nature, there never was a time when
nature did not exist, because the cause has always existed. But for
argument\['s\] sake, admit that there was a time when there was no
existence. Where was all this mass of matter? To create something new
would be the introduction of so much more energy into the universe. This
is impossible. Old things can be re-created, but there can be no
addition to the universe.

"No mathematical demonstration could be made that would have this theory
of metempsychosis. According to logic, hypothesis and theory must not be
believed. But my contention is that no better hypothesis has been
forwarded by the human intellect to explain the phenomena of life.

"I met with a peculiar incident while on a train leaving the city of
Minneapolis. There was a cowboy on the train. He was a rough sort of a
fellow and a Presbyterian of the blue nose type. He walked up and asked
me where I was from. I told him India. 'What are you?' he said. 'Hindu',
I replied. 'Then you must go to hell', he remarked. I told him of this
theory, and after \[my\] explaining it, he said he had always believed
in it because he said that one day when he was chopping a log, his
little sister came out in her clothes and said that she used to be a
man. That is why he believed in the transmigration of souls. The whole
basis of the theory is this: If a man's actions be good, he must be a
higher being, and vice versa.

"There is another beauty in this theory — the moral motor \[motive\] it
supplies. What is done is done. It says, 'Ah, that it were done better.'
Do not put your finger in the fire again. Every moment is a new chance."

Vive Kananda spoke in this strain for some time, and he was frequently
applauded.

Swami Vive Kananda will lecture again this afternoon at 4 o'clock at La
Salette Academy on "The Manners and Customs of India."

</div>
