---
title: 'BUDDHISM, THE RELIGION OF THE

  LIGHT OF ASIA'

---
<div>

[←](comparative_theology.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm) / [→](the_science_of_yoga.htm)

  

## BUDDHISM, THE RELIGION OF THE LIGHT OF ASIA

(*Delivered in Detroit on March 19, 1894:  
Reported in Detroit Tribune*)

Vive Kananda lectured to an audience of about 150 \[according to the
*Journal*, 500\] at the Auditorium last night upon "Buddhism, the
Religion of the Light of Asia." Honourable Don M. Dickinson introduced
him to the audience.

"Who shall say that this system of religion is divine and that doomed?"
asked Mr. Dickinson in his introductory remarks. "Who shall draw the
mystic line?"

Vive Kananda reviewed at length the early religions of India. He told of
the great slaughter of animals on the altar of sacrifice; of Buddha's
birth and life; of his puzzling questions to himself over the causes of
creation and the reasons for existence; of the earnest struggle of
Buddha to find the solution of creation and life; of the final result.

Buddha, he said, stood head and shoulders above all other men. He was
one, he said, \[of\] whom his friends or enemies could never say that he
drew a breath or ate a crumb of bread but for the good of all.

"He never preached transmigration of the soul," said Kananda, "except he
believed one soul was to its successor like the wave of the ocean that
grew and died away, leaving naught to the succeeding wave but its force.
He never preached that there was a God, nor did he deny there was a God.

"'Why should we be good?' his disciples asked of him.

"'Because', he said, 'you inherited good. Let you in your turn leave
some heritage of good to your successors. Let us all help the onward
march of accumulated goodness, for goodness' sake.'

"He was the first prophet. He never abused any one or arrogated anything
to himself. He believed in our working out our own salvation in
religion.

"'I can't tell you,' he said, on his deathbed, 'nor any one. Depend not
on any one. Work out your own religion \[salvation\].'

"He protested against the inequality of man and man, or of man and
beast. All life was equal, he preached. He was the first man to uphold
the doctrine of prohibition in liquors. 'Be good and do good', he said.
'If there is a God, you have Him by being good. If there is no God,
being good is good. He is to be blamed for all he suffers. He is to be
praised for all his good.'

"He was the first who brought the missionaries into existence. He came
as a saviour to the downtrodden millions of India. They could not
understand his philosophy, but they saw the man and his teachings, and
they followed him."

In conclusion Kananda said that Buddhism was the foundation of the
Christian religion; that the catholic church came from Buddhism.

</div>
