+++
title = "Mental and neural convergence"

+++
Even though we and the little dinosaurs have evolved our brains
convergently, for long we seem to have recognized ourselves cognitive
peers. The udgAtar-s of yore noted how satyakAma jAbAli acquired the
rahasya of “one foot of the brahman” from a swan (hamsa) and the rahasya
of another foot from the grebe (madgu). We noted earlier how the
atharvanic rite of the upanayanam seeks to endow the student with the
powers of the birds. The structure of several key saman (as Fritz Staal
noted long ago) parallel the songs of birds in general syntactical
features. They are clearly different from the syntax used in the common
spoken language or the R^iks. The elements of the saman, the bhaktis, do
not produce a “grammatical” syntax, but a higher order pattern involving
repetition of more complex bhaktis derived from the fragments of the
R^ik and several repeated low complexity stobha-s, such as hA u, au ho
vA, da-da, ihi, ho-i, vo-i, yA hA yi or o yi DA. Songs with patterns
paralleling the sAmans are found in the Black flycatcher, the Reed
Warbler and the Whitethroat. The song of the Black flycatcher are also
believed to have inspired the Western Classical musician Stravinsky. Not
surprisingly several sAmans are also know after birds: the krauncha
sAman, the vA\~Nnidhana krauncha sAman, the plava sAman, vAsha sAman,
the bhAsa sAman and the sauparNa sAman. The upUpa sAman even has
stobha-s mimicking the hoopoe call.

The recent studies have clearly demonstrated that the avian cerebrum has
an expansion of the pallium parallel to the mammals. However the
organization of the regions homologous to the mammalian cortical layers
is very different. In the mammals, the cortex has 5 layers close to the
surface, but in birds only the outermost layer is on the surface as in
the mammals. The other layers are located inside in only a partially
layered configuration. Thus, convergently there has been the expansion
of similar brain regions to produce structure capable of generating the
structured song as seen in humans and birds. Even within mammals the
neocete whales have developed their own parallel large brains and one of
them a similar system of music, e.g. the humpback whales. In this regard
we may note that in the 7th evening of the soma rite a sAman is sung
which is said to have been first seen by the R^iShi of the dolphins to
praise indra when stranded. Now at least humans and birds have heard
each other for long. So this leads us to the following question for
which I do not have a definitive answer and even my tests to distinguish
between the hypothesis are not entirely convincing. So for now I shall
only mention the two possibilities:

1\) There are mynas, corvids to a degree and parrots that can imitate
and use human speech. Likewise it is possible that we might imitate
their music. So similarities between the sAman and bird songs may be
conscious imitation.

2\) The expansion of the neural structures, due to some deep
organizational principles, in both birds, humans, and perhaps the
humpbacked whales favor the emergence of a similar musical structure.
Thus the emergence of the music is a consequence of some organizing
principle that automatically emerges from neural complexity – like say
scale-free structures emerge repeatedly in biological regulatory
networks.

In fact these two explanations are not mutual exclusive: Even to imitate
the avian song in different contexts (the sAman or Western Classical
music) there should possibly be a common neural principle/s that have
emerged and allow the musical structure generated by one to be
compatible with that of the other. If there is even an element of
explanation (2), there should be something interesting about complex
neural systems suggested by all this. For this reason alone it must be
tested rigorously.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/bird_mammal_brain.0.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/bird_mammal_brain.0.gif)

A- bird brain; B-mammal brain.  
Hp- Hippocampus, V- ventricle, BG- basal gangalia.  
Note the different organization of the orthologous pallial regions,
colored differently.
