+++
title = "OF BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE, Vedic, Eddic, and Homeric perspectives upon Lore and Order [Part 4E] Sage Advice From The Highxa0One"
date = "December 14, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/78998089_10162661749985574_2454206589960192000_n.jpg?w=610)

The first being, as noted above, the strong soundness of seeking ‘sage
advice’ when in times of trouble. This, interestingly enough, is
something which the Greeks \*ignored\* in the instance of Ajax the
Lesser – Calchas the Seer had provided rather direct warning, Odysseus
hadalso proffered the right course of action … both eminently wise men,
both with warnings and remonstrations for proper conduct \[i.e. killing
the violator\] which went unheeded, to ultimately \*disastrous\* effect,
even despite the attempt at a perfunctory alternative offering in
general supplication made by the Greeks in lieu of the specific and
asked-for effort on their behalf.

The second being what we might almost consider an ‘introspective’
occurrence, even though it took place couched within the framework of an
outward and overt dialogue between two speakers; but which also has an
important ‘external’ element. This is the conversation between Bhairava
and Vishnu, wherein Bhairava both demonstrates an understanding of the
nature of His conduct, and why it is – on a surface/exterior level,
transgressive … but also, expresses back out to another Deity, indeed
the third of the Trimurti \[or ‘second’, dependent, upon how you look at
such things\] how actually, beneath the ‘transgressive’ exterior, there
is a \*congruent\* (with Balance, with Divine Order) core. These two
elements are the vital components toward most forms of ‘resolution’ to a
situation of perceived infliction of imbalance. The former, necessary
where the individual who has carried out the sin in question must
recognize the nature of their conduct so that they may begin to make
proper amends and repair/restitution; the latter, where exculpatory
evidence must be presented that can lead to the removal or lessening of
the stigma and sanction upon a man … but also, even where this is not
the case, representing the ‘reconciliation’ element wherein a community
can begin to accept back into its sphere a transgressor once they
\*have\* demonstrated their tangible progress down the pathway of
penitence and self-improvement which leads to their no longer being an
incipient danger to the community, to the cosmos even, as a whole.

As applies KaalBhairavJi it is, unsurprisingly, ‘all of the above’. The
demonstration that He is ‘no longer an incipient danger to the cosmos as
a whole’ is in part through the revelation that He was not actually a
‘danger’ to the Cosmos, but rather acting in its upholding, its
maintenance, its Truth. The demonstration of ‘acceptance’ of Him via
Vishnu, around the offering of alms \[whether sourced from Bhairava’s
Own Veins, perhaps His Own Forehead in some tellings – which would be,
perhaps, coming to terms with one’s own self, what is meant by
‘atonement’; or whether sourced from Vishnu Himself – in which case, it
is Compassion, it is Mercy, it is Kripa, and I suppose we might even
call it ‘Prasad’\] and the passing on of important guidance about how
the Pursuing Brahmahatya Personification might finally be shaken off
through the \*proper\* expiation of the Brahmanicide Sin – these are the
hallmarks of the Community, the Authority, making ready to accept one
who has strayed \[although not all who wander are lost – and the
Moon-Crowned \[‘Chandrasekhar’\] was never \*not\* King, regardless of
the waxings and wanings of Mani’s lambent glow\] .

And, quite importantly, we \*also\* see something here which we shall
see again in the culmination of KaalBhairavJi’s Tale – that of a direct
encounter with, and engagement with, indeed \*reconciliation\* with ….
the Divine. Something we might almost regard as being a personified
moral absolute (which is not entirely accurate, as the figure in
question can also be understood the other way around – a personage Who
is representing a moral cardinal point. In either case, it’s a perhaps
unsurprisingly apt situation for Vishnu, considering His role in those
limited citations we have for Him within the realms of the RigVeda as
occupying the high point of the axial of the world, about which souls
twirl and thence head back out into the sphere of more immediately
‘manifest’ creation again, once more, post-mortem\].

Now why \*that\* matters, is because it is the direct response and
counter-point \[‘contra-passo’, except in a more positive sense –
insofar as it is not the infliction of a sin’s equivalent upon one, but
the mending of its infliction upon the perpetrator\] to the Sin of
Bhairava which has set this whole sojourn into motion … the ‘setting
back into Balance’, you might even say.

Confused? Think about it this way. What is a Brahmin – many things, but
in this context, it is supposed to be somebody ‘in touch’ with the
Absolute, The High. Most tightly defined, it would mean the former. A
‘Knower of Brahman’. But particularly as applies Brahma’s …
less-than-ideal conduct and the necessity of His censure via an Axe
wounding in order to \*remove\* an obstacle between Him and greater
knowledge and connexion with what is High (as He had sought to exalt
Himself in the place \*of\* said High .. Harr, we would perhaps say in
Old Norse\], the somewhat looser and more conventional definition is
perhaps more fitting. This is ब्राह्मण in that sense of, as I have said,
something or someone in rather strong connexion with the Divine.

So what did KaalBhairavJI do when He smote down upon Brahma with His
world-ending (and worldly-delusion terminating – c.f also the name of
the Axe of Parashurama , ‘VidyuDabhi’ …’The Bringer of Shocking
Enlightenment’; not at all coincidentally \*also\* a Shaivite Astra\]
Axe?

He had attacked one connected to the Divine, a pillar \[ironically
enough, even if it were jutting up in inopportune places, the proverbial
spanner in the (world)works\] out from which the Divine could emanate
back into the World.

Now, I reiterate at this point that it was a \*necessary\* act of
sanction and of corrective censure, that was vitally important from a
number of perspectives for the \*restoration\* of Cosmic Order and
Balance to the World. So in moral terms, it is not something to be
condemned \*in this specific and precise instance\* – whether
consequentially, or especially from a positivist perspective \[The
God-Emperor of the Universe Tells you to carry out such an action in
protection and preservation of the Cosmos … then Svaha ! It Shall Be
Done! \] ; yet a lack of condemnation in this sense does not remove the
necessity of restitution to correct for the consequent \*further\*
imbalance which the corrective action has itself introduced. If a
vehicle is strongly listing towards one side in its course, and the
wheel is turned to bring it back onto an even keel – yet it now finds
itself slightly listing to the \*other\* side, it does not do to simply
leave it like that because the initial corrective action has been
carried out. That simply leads to further problems rather literally down
the road.

So this ‘reconciliation’ which we see entrenched within the Meeting of
KaalBhairavJI with Vishnu is a symbolic act of ‘making peace’ with the
Divine, the Emanator(s) of Order, the general principle of the Brahmana,
as expressed through both a specific representative (Vishnu … but also,
most intriguingly, for reasons we shall shortly entertain, Bhairava
Himself) as well as a specific set of actions (this is what is entailed
via the exchange involving the Kapala – Skull-Cup, and the symbolic
offering of Blood, Alms as Sustenance; which may \*also\* recall the
general principles so eloquently expressed in each of the Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad around ‘nourishment’ in-universe for the Supernal, and within
one of my favourite of the RigVedic hymnals around AdiShakti’s making
possible both the bestowal of bounty and its consequent consumption by
us – it’s quite literally Brahman both all the way down, and thence
again all the way back up!). It is an acceptance by That Which Was
Wronged, of the acknowledgement of culpability by the transgressor, and
Their genuine desire to transcend the crime and its consequent sanction
– as well as, on an internal level, the moving beyond the state of
having \*been\* the guilty party by the offender. It is, in a word, the
beginnings of “Absolution”.

And, flowing from this, the provision of further \*guidance\* to put the
‘keystone’ upon the (re-)bridging of the situation – how to hasten
towards the producing of its ultimate resolution.
