+++
title = "Ahimsa And The Non-Counterpoint Of Contextually Mandatedxa0Violence"
date = "December 13, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/1_42y2awina2eoy8bo-dxu1w.png?w=1024)

\[Author’s note: This turned up from my writings upon this date in 2018
– given the present series we’re running, it seemed a useful thought to
re-publicize here\]  
  
I have previously, from time to time, written about the Hindu principle
of ‘Ahimsa’ – often (directly) translated as “non-harm” or
“non-violence” … and often rather egregiously misunderstood as
“pacifism”.

To cut a long story (in this case, the Mahabharat … and a few others)
short, this is not the case. (to quote myself on the subject: “Ahimsa
doesn’t mean you’re not allowed to kill them … it means you’re supposed
to give them an opportunity to surrender first” – there’s rather more to
it than that, of course, but that nevertheless illustrates handily the
principle)

Now, in the course of my readings, I happened across this furtherance of
the characteristics of the doctrine contained in the Brahmanda Purana.

I shall not go into detail here about the context for the utterance –
except to state that it is voiced in the context of a moral debate about
a (potential) killing which does not eventually occur. Yet which is
nevertheless presented as the \*correct\* moral statement, superseding
other considerations previously presented:

“in case many flourish happily when a single person is killed, there is
neither major nor minor sin in the act of his killing”

Now as I have said, this is not the proverbial “last word” on this
matter. It is inarguably the case that any issue of morality and legal
metaphysics pertaining to such a matter is going to be … complex. And I
would contend that the Decapitation of Brahma by Bhairava is a
demonstration of just such a ‘balance’ of competing considerations in
train \[for a more detailed discussion of which, consult my writings
elsewhere – suffice to say that while it was an act of Brahmanicide ..
it was a \*necessary\* one; albeit still one evidently requiring the
appropriate penance, even so. “Balance”, as they say, “all the way
down”.\]

I simply present the maxim to add further depth and contour to the
popular understandings of this Ahimsa doctrine. For I am slightly
impatient with the insistence one continually encounters that it’s some
sort of neo-hippy “no violence” diktat-or-dogma.
