+++
title = "ON THE ELVES OF THE NORTHxa0POLE"
date = "December 25, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/80254431_10162738054635574_5597042565141495808_n.jpg?w=780)

By now it should come as little surprise that much of the contemporary
pseudo-mythology around Christmas is, in fact, based upon far older
underpinnings – elements that have somehow ‘seeped through’ the veiling
sheens not only of Christianity, but of Coca-Cola and McWorld. Some
things, I would go so far as to say, are so powerfully resonant as to
not be ignorable even if we are not immediately conscious of what they
are, or why. \[And for more detail upon that, take a look at some of my
Myth In The Modern Age series, particularly Cybele In Madrid\]

Now, a grand and fulfilling article could probably be written upon the
person of Santa Claus directly, with particular and especial reference
to the Odinic parallels of same. But that is not going to be this piece.

Rather, my attention was turned, this fine Christmas morning, to another
group of rather lesser-heralded figures. Santa’s Elves. The Elves of the
North Pole.

As a youth, I was rather ill-at-ease with the concept. After all,
influenced via Tolkien and what we may perhaps term the Standard Fantasy
Setting which has grown up from the shadow of his mighty work, I had
veer-y different conceptions of what an Elf should be. Tall, for a
start. Dwarfs as craftsmen were a thing, as they were in Norse mythology
\[wherein it is important to make the distinction between the various
kinds of ‘alfar’ – some of whom are *indeed* depicted as fabulous
craftsmen of *short* stature and subterranean habitat\] , yet it seemed
an inherent crime against the unutterable dignity of the Elvish Race to
see the the proud scions of downright angelic countenance, be reduced to
the status and the situation … and rather literal stature, of course, of
child-labourers in the sweatshop conditions of the Third World.

Yet the curious thing is – the notion of Elves as Craftsmen beyond
measurable compare, is not only authentically Nordic \[and we have a
long-running internal argument around the likely Indo-European cognates
and position of Volundr the Smith in this *particular* regard\] , but
seems to find much more clear and clarified expression further to the
East amidst the Hindu mythological and scriptural corpus.

I am speaking, of course, of the Ribhus/Rhbus , the Solar Craftsmen Who
through dint of Their ingenuity and wondrous artifice, are elevated to
the ranks proximate to the Divine.

Let us consider the etymologies. In each case – Elf, and Rhbus – there
are two non-exclusive and quite likely decidedly coterminous
explanations for the derivation of the terms.

As applies Elf, the main understanding is that of “White” – the “Alf” of
the Germanic languages shares obvious coterminity with terms like “Alb”
(as in “Albino”) and “Alp” (as in “White” Mountains through Snow)
\[Interestingly, the Hittite 𒀠𒉺𒀸 \[Alpas\] appears to have taken this in
the direction of ‘Cloud’; which not only combines the characteristic
whiteness, but also the ‘elevated’ connotations we should expect of
caelestial meaning\], deriving ultimately from Proto-Indo-European
‘Albhos’/'(h)elbhos’. \[This is also, with deference to a certain
*other* modern writer whose series incorporates worker ‘elves’, the root
origin of Latin “Albus”\]

It is certainly possible to take the “White” connotation rather
literally – as that is exactly and precisely what natural sunlight *is*.
Really, really bright white light \[and there is an intriguing ‘Elbid’
in Celtic languages, meaning “Upper World”, which not only conveys the
“upper” part, as in ‘above-ground’, but also links to how “Loka” derives
from “Lewk” to refer not only to the ‘world’ , as in the ‘visible
world’, but also to the faculty of ‘sight’. “Lewk”, of course, meaning
“Light” (inter alia) in PIE\]. But it also carries inherent within it
the connotations of Beauty \[see also the Sanskrit semantic field around
“Gaura”/”Gauri”\], and, due to the *source* of the ‘Whiteness’ in
question, the Caelestial expression.

The ‘Craftsman’ connotation, meanwhile, is supplied by the other chain
of etymological derivation – wherein it is instead linked to a close
phonetically relative term whose ambit of meaning is almost directly
that of the Sanskrit Rhbus. Incorporating not only the physical sense of
artifice and invention – but also the mental faculties which are
possessed alongside these active expressions of same; those of
inventiveness, ingenuity, the adept mastery of a field, skill and
wisdom, the courage of one’s burgeoning output.

“Divine Craftsmen”, indeed.

It should not be hard at all to see how all of this pertains to the
modern-day pseudomythological conception of “Santa’s Elves” … even
leaving aside the densely packed “Polar” and “Solar” symbolism that
various people have speculated upon over the years (including our good
friend, Tilak). In Tolkien’s Legendarium, too, the Elves were master
craftsmen, so in some ways none of this should be surprising. But the
notion of the Elves working for another – in the Indo-European
mythological cases, generally for a Divine Lord, often with rather
impressive Bhaga to distribute from – that is something that is not so
directly emblematic within his work. Ribhus of the Anglo-Saxon Word
(Logos, indeed, to utilize a fitting concept for the day we are writing
this upon), though he, unquestionably, turned out to be.

But the point of this piece has not been to simply suggest that there is
a close coterminity between an aspect of Vedic and an aspect of Eddic
belief … nor even between these two (which are really much more ‘one’
than many people have often had cause to realize) and something which is
now an indispensable portion of the local super-mall’s ‘Silly Season’
consumerist-temple tableaux-display.

Rather, it has been to reaffirm my general and my genuinely held belief
that in many areas of the modern world, if you know where and how to
look, you shall find that the essential elements of the Myths of our
forefathers are yet ‘preserved’. Even if they are hidden and enveiled in
so much beguiling false-frontage that they have been *enabled* to
continue without suppression \[and this, too, goes quite strongly with
the quality of the Elves to obscurate in various manners in the
mythology\].

Part of our task is not just to identify such situations wherein
something ancient, something true, has been carried forward in hidden
clothing and diminished stature to the world of the present. Nor even to
enable others to begin to see the world in this manner, which expands
vision both ‘backward’ in time and ‘upwards’ or ‘deep-a’ in terms of
supernal saliency (so to speak). But to begin the vitally necessary
process of ‘cleaning’ these representations, in the manner that an
archaeologist might gently remove the grime \[etymological linkage to
terms for ‘mask’ there .. but another article for another time\] from a
precious artefact, and thence begin divining its secrets; or in more
recent times, technological artifice \[we are back, once again, within
the realms of the Ribhus!\] may be utilized to peer behind a
painted-over wall to reveal some ancient fresco or Renaissance mastery
sheltering behind.

This is, I feel, a rather core element of what is meant by “Krinvanto
Vishvam Aryam”. To ‘Re-Enchant’ the World – to Make it Mythological
\[rather than pseudo-mythological for occasional materialist purposes\]
Again.

To reconnect both us with our heritage, even via potentially unorthodox
routes and methodologies where appropriate; and to restore the essential
dignity of these vastly ancient and augustly resonant mythological
concepts through the dissemination of proper knowledge and facilitation
of active mental engagement therewith.

One does not do this by grouching about how Santa-displays in shopping
centers ought be ruled illegal (not least because this is generally only
something done by those without actual power to do so).

One does this by showing the actual truth that these displays are but
dim reflective-refractions via a smokey mirror \[‘Maya’ in several
senses of the term!\] thereof.

As I have often been known to say – in situations of darkness, it is
better to light the flamethrower \[of illumination, and also the
clearing away of obscuring decay\] than it is to simply curse the gloom.

An appropriate sentiment, also, for the occasion about which an ancient
Solar observance marking the lengthening of the Sun’s radiant presence
within the Sky was once held.

You may know it as “Christmas”.
