+++
title = "OF BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE, Vedic, Eddic, and Homeric perspectives upon Lore and Order [Part 4C] Bhikshatana – The Path Of The Divinexa0Exile"
date = "December 12, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/80228066_10162661533515574_3845115827326025728_n.jpg?w=500)

Following on from Bhairava’s decapitation-strike and humbling blow
against Brahma, The Terrifying Executioner (‘Headsman’, as we shall soon
see) incurred the sin of Brahmanicide – Brahmahatya.

And this is quite important, for while Brahma’s egregious misdeed had
themselves both represented and perpetuated a grievous ‘imbalance’ –
Bhairava’s forcible *correction* thereof had *also* created an
‘imbalance’ within the Universe. Albeit, it can rather strongly be
argued, a much *lesser* sin that that which was being ended through His
mighty axe-swing.

But whereas, even when we’re dealing within the realms of mythology,
we’re often subconsciously used to treating the concepts of ‘sin’ and
‘transgression’ as being largely symbolic ethical injunctions – the sort
of misdeed which, if nobody were around to witness it, “doesn’t really
count”, except privately … in reality, and especially in this matter in
particular, little could be further from the truth. This is demonstrated
within the myth of Bhairava via what happened next:

In a manner considerably presaging Lady MacBeth’s “Out, Damned Spot!”,
the severed head held aloft in triumph by the champion Executioner … now
refuses to fall from His grasp. Worse, a horrifying \[and,
interestingly, female\] black shape congeals near Him – the
personification of the Sin of Brahmahatya, which shall ever dog His
steps, never more than a few paces tarrying behind.

Bhairava, in other words, now becomes the Bikshatana , the Kapalika. The
mendicant, the skull-bearer. And is effectively driven off on a
protracted sojourn of wandering thither and yon in pursuit of the means
to expiate His grave crime.

Now, there are several interesting elements to pick up upon in what has
just transpired – and in a future piece, I intend to analyze all of this
in much more depth and specificity than I’m about to do here. But for
the moment … what Bhairava is engaging in is strongly coterminous with
the ancient Hindu legal sanctions that would be applied to particular
classes of offender who had themselves carried out an act of
Brahmanicide. Albeit with the Skull of Brahma here used as a Kapala
\[‘Skull’, but in this context, a ‘bowl’ .. so ‘Skull-Cup’ – out of
which, the Kapalika, the Skull-Man, drinks his nourishment\], rather
than attached to the end of the long Khatvanga staff such figures
customarily carried. In a way, therefore, the Myth of Bhairava provides
a prototypical and archetypal course for the manner in which Hindu
society should deal with this kind of offending.

And from there, we have the element which is coterminous with that we
find in the tale of Odin’s forcible begetting of Vali – wherein the
Wandering God is sentenced to a period of Exile for His transgressive
action.

Yet why Exile, why Wandering? Why not just put somebody to death and be
done with it? Surely that is what would ordinarily happen in many such
cases.

And while that is true, the difference between Exile and Execution is an
important one. Both accomplish the same objective of getting the
offender *out* of the society, the social context in which the crime has
occurred. Which may be protective , but also is a statement of sanction
all its own – to quote Grettir’s Saga “Bare is the back of a brotherless
man”. As I’ve explored in some of my previous works upon the subject,
the notion of a man without a people, a community, is a decidedly
anachronistic one; in the old days, it basically meant one was either
dead, or may as well be, for the most part. As Aristotle put it –
“Whosoever is delighted in solitude is either a wild beast or a god.”
Which gets rather *interesting* as a theological maxim when we consider
Rudra-Odin-Shiva.

In addition to the punitive value of Exile by itself, there is also the
stripping of ‘title’ and ‘respect’ which this should in theory bring –
hence why, in the case of the aftermath of Vali’s conception, Odin is
stripped of His Lordly Position \[although I have my … suspicions about
what was going on *there*, as well\] ; and why in the case of Bhairava,
He is mandated to adopt the outward appearance of a beggar \[which, to
be sure, Shiva often does *anyway*, but this time, more so and without
apparent recourse – although it is also noted that in the course of His
wanderings in this guise, He kept winding up with women He encountered
falling in love with Him. Women do, it seems, even in mythology, often
like a b(h)ad(ra) boy.\]

But while the above might both sound like *similarities* between
Execution and Exile – they are in fact quite different for two further
reasons. One, the state of Exile is often intended to be a *temporary*
one, which the figure in question *can* return from … should they manage
to survive on their own – which is an implicit ‘test’ of the moral worth
of the individual all up. And the second, is that as it is temporary,
this entails the possibility of a *Return*. Presumably having *learned
something*, and consequentially having *improved themselves* to the
point that the offence was, from a certain point of view, carried out by
a different person.

The Path of Exile, therefore, is one which we should be unsurprised to
find often reserved for those who have undeniable’potential’ or strong
worth to their people … but who need nevertheless to be sanctioned –
and, in the course of so being, hopefully return in the inexorable
future, having become better men than when they left. Or, at the very
least, having allowed the society which banished them, to have
‘adapted’, and perhaps ‘forgotten’ somewhat (even if it it is only the
dulling of the immediate intensity of an act of transgression via the
ameliorating mists of memory through consequent passaging of time), just
why it was that they were sanctioned in the first place.

The Wanderers, therefore, are those whom it would induce various forms
of significant ‘imbalance’ to lethally deal-to; yet who cannot be
allowed to remain ‘in situ’ – as both the *lack* of a response to their
transgressions, as well as their direct proximity/presence to the
context and the community and rubric-of-laws within which their actions
were carried out, would *also* represent a considerable ‘imbalance’ were
it allowed to continue. Yet with their penitential pathway eventually
providing the means and the mechanism via which they might ultimately
make a more ‘balanced’ return. As a certain NZ politician once
sagaciously observed – the point of the Prodigal Son .. is that he comes
back!

This is effectively what happens with Bhairava.

And, indeed, it is the veer-y nature of the course trodden by
KaalBhairavJi – particularly as Bhikshatana and thence Kankalamurti –
which beautifully, blood-stainedly illustrate this tangible principle in
most immanentized action. To that, we shall now turn.
