+++
title = "Out Of Context Quotes And DevaRajya Uber Alles From Thexa0Iliad"
date = "December 8, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/78821581_10162655734350574_9174682290427527168_o.jpg?w=1003)

Now this is something interesting to me. Recently, I heard a quotation –
which sounded cool, had a ‘resonancy’ to it, but felt as if it had
something almost ‘missing’.

The aphorism ran thus:

“Without a sign, his sword the brave man draws,  
And asks no omen but his country’s cause.”

I turned it over in my mind, and noted that it ran … on the surface
congruent with, but in a deepa sense right up against how we run our
Indo-European cosmological view on morality.

If you’ve been following my ON BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE series that’s been
running this week, you’ll have spotted exactly what I mean, and what’s
missing inherent in the maxim.

Anyway, I went off and googled the quote, and it turned out to be –
perhaps unsurprisingly – from the Iliad of Homer.

And, sure enough, it *was* missing something:

The line immediately preceding this is:

“While I the dictates of high heaven obey”

And the preceding portions of the exchange, between Hector and a
lesser-known figure by the name of Polydamas, are actually the
meditation *upon* an Omen which has seemingly been heaven-sent, and
which is rather strongly suggesting that the sword-conduct being
implicitly referred to in the words of Hector *not* take place. Which, I
think many would agree, turned out to be the vindicated perspective in
that particular conflict.

So therefore – the plain and direct meaning of the contextless quote …
is not upheld. Rather, the context it has come from not only states the
*opposite* to be true, but in fact *demonstrates* exactly thus in
action.

Although having said that, the *correct* way to ‘square the circle’ upon
this one – is to note that actually, the maxim *is* true … from a
certain point of view.

I have made the case in a previous article that the Sanskrit maxim “जननी
जन्मभूमिश्च स्वर्गादपि गरीयसी” \[“Mother & Motherland Are Superior Even
To Heaven”\] also is not *quite* meant in the straightforward sense that
many would take it. But rather, speaks to the strong *coterminity* of
Mother \[direct, and therefore filial piety\], Mother \[divine, and
therefore rather *literal* piety\], Motherland \[country, but also
people – ‘nation’ we would say\], MotherLand \[i.e. Mother Earth … and
therefore, again, literal Piety\] , with all of these and the allegiance
to same being Rta – rather than one’s own *personal* soteriological
aspirations toward ‘Heaven’.

What I am getting at, then, is that the Cause of Country , at the
macroscopic level, is not simply to be taken as the cause of some
squabbling group of humans.

But rather, as that of the DevaRajya – the Empire of Eternity.

And that is quote a different, far greater and grander and more nobly
righteous , ‘expansive’ \[in a multi-lingual resonant sense around
‘Irmin’, ‘Arya’, “Shri’, etc.\] Nation indeed.

What was missing in that Iliad quote, was the recognition that there
*is* a superior and higher law to even ordinary patriotism. Divine Law.

What I have sought to reaffirm with the re-contextualization of this
quote, and my own interpolation both upon and around it, is that the
Country’s Cause *should* be that of the Divine.

“Mother and Motherland”, therefore, is Shakta Theology and Patriotism
\[‘Matriotism’ ? \] all the way up and down. And not least because of
the excellent point so well made by both the sage Sayana and myself,
that Devi at that level *is* Rta Herself.

AdiParaShakti is the ‘Without Cause’ that *is* Country’s Cause, for Whom
the brave man’s sword he draws
