+++
title = "OF BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE – Vedic, Eddic, and Homeric perspectives on Lore and Order [Part 2]: Freak On A Leash – Why The Gods Allowed The Waxing Of Fenrir ; also The Introduction of The Avenging Son as Deepaxa0Order."
date = "December 5, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/79458618_10162644699270574_7807957163501944832_n.jpg?w=564)

The first example we shall consider, is the binding of the Fenris Wolf.
Now, I had cause to ponder, the other day, just why it might have been
that The Gods did not simply kill the Wolf as soon as They became made
aware of the prophecy surrounding his dire role in the eventual Twilight
of the Aesirajya at the End of the World – and, more specifically, his
bane-status as the slayer of Odin.

I arrived at two immediate possibilities. One of which, also
corroborated by my dvandva-comrade and our in-house Nordic/Germanic
acharya, Tristan Powers, was that it was because it was a ‘family
thing’. Loki still, at that time, enjoyed a kinship status with Odin –
so therefore it would have been \*most\* affronting to have killed
Loki’s son, even despite its reputed further and eventual fate.

The second of which, which also came up in conversation with The Rev.
Rolinson upon the matter, was that … it’s not so much a matter of “if
The Gods had killed the Wolf then and there, as an infant, before he
could become a problem and insurmountable … then there would be no
story”. But rather, that it would not have been nearly as \*epic\* a
story. By which I mean, Nordic mythology, and the actions of certain
Deities therein, often seems to go even further beyond what we call
\[after Terry Pratchett, probably\] ‘Narrative Causality’ – and into a
straight-up Active-Narrative-Epic-Agent hypothesis , wherein a certain
Deity in particular, may be attempting to make His story as epic as
possible. \*Especially\* the ultimate death sequence. And, most
probably, imparting wise ethical maxims all th way along the process, as
well. It is also possible, I suppose, that acting in a manner that would
‘disrupt’ the eventual coming to pass of a prophecy of this nature may
\*itself\* have proven problematic from the perspective of Divine Order.

But I (slightly) digress.

The actual, official, Word of God explanation is given in the
Gylfaginning:

“Then said Gangleri: ‘Marvellous ill children did Loki beget, but all
these brethren are of great might. Yet why did not the Æsir kill the
Wolf, seeing they had expectation of evil from him?” Hárr answered: “So
greatly did the gods esteem their holy place and sanctuary, that they
would not stain it with the Wolf’s blood; though (so say the prophecies)
he shall be the slayer of Odin.” ” \[Brodeur translation\]

So there you have it. The \*official\* reasoning for the avoidance of
infanticide as a rather significant problem-solving tool , is because to
do so would have violated the sacred space within which such a killing
would have had to have occurred.

This, as you can see, is a ‘Deontological’ perspective. And it is here
quite expressely and explicitly overpowering a ‘Consequentialist’ one.

However, there is a bit of a counterpoint to be found within Nordic
mythology to this weighting – concerning the conception of the ‘Avenging
Son’, Vali, via Rindr. We shall not go in any great detail into this
incident – except to note that due to the highly improper \[from a
Deontological perspective\] action of Odin which brought about the birth
of Vali, Odin is sanctioned and sent into Exile. Which … may not have
been \*quite\* the punishment for The Wandering God that it might have
been for others, but I digress.

The point is that from a \*Consequentialist\* perspective, the ultimate
outcome of this – that is to say, the creation of Vali, Who plays a
quite important role, even to the point of surviving Ragnarok and into
the Next Cycle of the World. The Continuation of the DevaRajya \[as
tangible, tacit expression of Rta out into the material universe\] as
the \*ultimate\* Consequentialist outcome that is also Deontological in
nature and scope.

Thesis, Antithesis, Synthesis.

Yet to return to the core compunction of the Tale of the Binding of the
Wolf, we find a most intriguing counterpoint to this within the realms
of Greco-Roman mythology – and more especially, the legendarium that has
grown up around the Iliad.
