+++
title = "OF BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE – Vedic, Eddic, and Homeric perspectives on Lore and Order [Part 3B]: The Vengeance of Athena, The Wrath of Poseidon, The Hubris Of Ajax the Lesser And Also Of The Undutifulxa0Greeks"
date = "December 7, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/79465275_10162647484940574_5662198348598214656_n.jpg?w=567)

Two further points shall be made here before we move on to our third
comparative example, and thence ultimately to our conclusions and
instruction resulting therefrom for the Modern Indo-European Man
\[technically speaking, this is “man” in a less-gendered than usual
sense – ‘thinking being’, or ‘Child of Man(n)u(s)’, I mean\] .

The first of these concerns the ‘corrective action’ which the Greeks
\*did\* seek to undertake following their failure to mete out
appropriate Divinely Ordained Justice against Ajax. Sacrifices had been
ordered, on the presumption that a general “please accept these tokens
of our appreciation” laid out for the Gods would make up for the quite
specific lapse of actual action on the part of the assembled Greeks.

Now, in some ways, this is not an intrinsically bad idea. It is
\*always\* good to display one’s depth of affection for the Gods via
sacrificial conduct, especially having just won a rather major war with
Their powerful assistance.

But just blithely presuming that doing so in this particular manner
would represent a ‘cure-all’ and a ‘blanket absolution’ of the
obligations resting upon the Greeks, is not just erroneous – but
evidently was found to be somewhat insulting by the Gods in question. As
well, come to think of it, as it should have been.

For bound up within it, is the presumption that the \*specific action\*
which had been repeatedly called for, was unnecessary. That the Gods’
righteous demand – and Athena’s in particular – could simply be passed
off and avoided through the ‘distraction’ of a generalized rite of
sacrifice. And that, on an implicit level, may be thought of as
particular men almost placing themselves ‘above’ the Gods; attempting to
overwrite the Gods’ own declaration of what They required, with what was
easy, what was convenient, what was non-difficult to provide instead.
\*Hardly\* properly pious conduct.

Because it misses the point in both this way, and one additional – it
had in no way “set back into balance” the situation in question. Which
was the righteous demand of the Deities, of wise Athena in particular,
in this woeful circumstance.

And without ‘balance’, the ‘order’ is disrupted. When ‘order’ is
disrupted, there chaos waxes stronger. Where chaos strengthens, there
shall be required Divine Retribution to beat and to strike and to spear
it back down again in wrathful, avenging consequence.

So save your Deity some trouble! Intervene \*early\* rather than letting
it fester and grow from otherwise easily extirpated roots! Which,
admittedly, is somewhat at odds with the approach taken in the instance
of Fenrir, but that is not so directly our concern here, as mortals. The
Ways of Gods, after all, can appear somewhat inscrutable to man as they
are occurring – and we have our Word of God explanation for the Divine
Conduct in that particular episode, which should be enough.

In any case, the situation of the Greeks attempting to ameliorate their
previous lapse via a general sacrifice might perhaps be helpfully
compared to an occurrence common among less perspicacious men to this
day. When we do something wrong, and then seek to apologize via a
non-specific “I’m sorry” and a bouquet of flowers or something, without
actually making direct reference to \*what\* we did wrong or
\*specific\* restitution made (particularly in cases where this should
be reasonably easy to do), this can occasionally be read as almost
tantamount to no apology at all. For there has been no actual
recognition of the fault in question, nor genuine attempt to set things
right. If I break a window, and I’m told what the dollar-value is to
repair or replace it – then it does not fix the window to present a
bunch of flowers. It is also rather unlikely to placate teh owner of
said window, if they have rather directly suggested that the settting
back into balance of the window via its fixing is what they are after;
and especially if we do not make any acknowledgemetn at all that the
breaing of the window through our own carelessness or deliberate
malfeasance is the problem and

 The other important ethical injunction to be extracted from this sad
tale of the dereliction of Divinely Delegated Duty, is around Hubris. As
I have already mentioned, the implicit suggestion that man knows better
than a Deity in these matters, is a dangerous position indeed to put
one’s self in \[albeit one with some *limited* degree of precedency in
Hinduism, for particular and almost singularly exceptional humans … and
it did not stop being a perilous position for those sages simply because
of their profoundly great competency\]. We shall also encounter this
grave fault once more in our third case-study tale. 

But as applies the account of Ajax The Lesser, it occurs at multiple
times, and upon multiple levels. 

It is said that while great Athena had wanted to carry out the sanction
upon Ajax which the Greeks themselves had balked at, during the course
of his voyage home … Ajax was preserved from this immediate death by the
direct intervention of Poseidon upon his wretched, undeserving behalf.
The strike which had wrought asunder his ship and drowned many of his
men, failed also to kill Ajax – and he was delivered to some rock where
he might desperately cling to life … and perhaps come to marvel at the
miraculous occurrence which was surely the Hand of a God coming to save
him. And therefore learn some of the proper respect due from a mortal to
the Divine. An act of Sanctuary entirely unlike the one he sought to
claim for himself earlier in the tale, for it was actually Divinely
granted … and much more like the seeking of Sanctuary by Cassandra
‘midst the Mandir of Athena, which he himself had desecrated. 

But hubris, arrogance, is the foundational sin of all, in many systems
of thought – precisely because it blinds us to the prospective
possibility that we are, in fact, capable of sinning. It makes us think
ourselves far more inestimably greater than we actually are. And in this
case, in this instance, this is *exactly* what happened. 

Ajax The Lesser is said to have cried out aloud at this marvelous turn
of events … and instead of giving thanks to the High Heavens and the
Briny Deep for his salvation, he did *directly the opposite*, and
proclaimed to all who could then listen that he had survived through his
own greatness, rather than the mercy of the Gods – indeed, that he had
survived *in spite* of the Gods. 

Now, given ‘all who could then listen’ quite directly included the
Master of the Mer \[‘mer’ in Proto-Indo-European refers to two words –
one meaning a body of water such as a sea … the other, “death”. “Memento
Mori”, therefore, with “Mori” *also* carrying in PIE the derived
connotion of a Sea .. is a most aptly appropriate injunction for the
circumstances; not least due to the potentiality for ‘Mer’ as in ‘to
disappear’ effectively encompassing both skeins, somewhat – for what
else is it to be swallowed by the deep; and in this instance, for the
prior greatness of Ajax (the lesser) upon the fields of war to have been
rendered so drastically undercut by his latter disappointing failings of
person and of piety \[but then, I do repeat myself\] following on after
therefrom.\] … 

… this evidently renders Ajax (the lesser) the sort of man whom Terry
Pratchett called “the sort to stand on a hilltop in a thunderstorm
wearing wet copper armour and shouting ‘All gods are bastards’.” 

Let us quote some Homer upon the subject: 

“‘Aias truly was lost amid his long-oared ships. Upon the great rocks of
Gyrae Poseidon at first drove him, but saved him from the sea; and he
would have escaped his doom, hated of Athena though he was, had he not
uttered a boastful word in great blindness of heart. He declared that it
was in spite of the gods that he had escaped the great gulf of the sea;
and Poseidon heard his boastful speech, and straightway took his trident
in his mighty hands, and smote the rock of Gyrae and clove it in sunder.
And one part abode in its place, but the sundered part fell into the
sea, even that on which Aias sat at the first when his heart was greatly
blinded, and it bore him down into the boundless surging deep. So there
he perished, when he had drunk the salt water.”  
\[- The Odyssey, Book IV; Murray translation\] 

And, with that having been addressed, we shall now seek to move on to
the main event of the Evening. KaalBhairavJayanti, the Victory of the
Avenging Son – Kaal Bhairava JI !   
