+++
title = "The Glorious Victory Of Terrifying Black Time Death – OF BHAIRAVA AND BALANCE, Vedic, Eddic, and Homeric perspectives upon Lore and Order [Partxa04A]"
date = "December 10, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/78594154_10162661422530574_7035519437188890624_n.jpg?w=479)

Now, despite the fact that this piece is, in both inspiration and in
tributary offering, dedicated to the mighty Mahadevan emanation in
question, we shall not seek to cover in any great length the actual
occurrences and theological points bound up within that tale. For a much
more in-depth look at such, rest assured that there are several thousand
words’ worth of explication upon \*exactly\* this subject-matter to be
found elsewhere in my canon of published (or interviewed) output.

Yet a brief run-down of the salient events in question is nevertheless
necessary for the less familiar reader. To which we shall now but
briefly turn.

There are several canonical explanations for just why it was that Shiva
had cause to dispatch His Executioner Emanation to carry out the grim
sanction mandated against Brahma; but for our purposes, we shall parse
but two:

The first, and most foundational concerns Brahma’s attempt to usurp Lord
Shiva’s portfolios and cosmological function. An act of impertinence
motivated in part by the aforementioned sin of hubris, which caused
significant cosmological complications and contingent disorder. The
second, sees Brahma seeking to present Himself as supreme over Vishnu,
by lying and cheating as to the outcome of the test of the Lingodbhava
Incident (the nature of which, as it happens, also happens to be one of
the demonstrations of Shaivite supremacy literally uber alles). These
explanations are non-exclusive, and indeed make best sense when read, as
it were, together. This is particularly the case when we add in a third
explanation, surrounding Brahma’s attempt to behave improperly against
His own Daughter; as it helps to ‘constellate’ the common unifying
thread to Brahma’s transgressions. Namely, that Brahma’s disposition and
actions were violations and indeed violence against Divine Order /
Cosmic Law. Indeed, given the severe scale of his arrogant ambitions, He
perhaps inadvertently struck against the veer-y foundations for the
immanency of same into our universe. (So, to emphasize the point – not
just ‘against the Law’, but \*Against\* the Law, if you see the
distinction)

Now, “Ahimsa”, as I have often noted, can be somewhat figuratively
rendered as “giving the adversary the chance to surrender first” – i.e.
that violence is not to be understood as the insta-go to problem-solving
tool, where dialogue and other means (including the intimidation of
pointing out just exactly what it is that shall happen next if dialogue
is \*not\* positively responded to) can be engaged first. A wise maxim
in instances such as these, given that in the conflict between Gods, the
weaponry and other forms of devastation thus employed are quite
literally capable of unmaking \*worlds\*.

Thus it was that Lord Shiva went to Brahma, and attempted to remonstrate
with Him. An effort which did not meet with any significant success.

Rather than reconsider His position, Brahma responded to Shiva’s
approach by … doubling down. He maintained His pretensions to supremacy,
and in the course of prevaricating upon these, insulted Shiva directly
and repeatedly as to Mahadeva’s appearance, mode of dress, lifestyle,
habits, and other characteristics – before mockingly offering Lord Shiva
protection if Shiva would submit to Brahma. And, for good measure, He
apparently insulted Lord Shiva’s Wife.

So really, what happened next, had all the inexorability of … Time.

Shiva emanated the aforementioned Executioner Aspect (there is a pointed
set of remarks around this involving Shiva’s fingernail – with the
implicit illustration that this therefore means that Lord Shiva quite
literally possesses a greater might in His fingernail than did Brahma in
His entire being); Who proceeded to quite literally cut the upstart
Brahma down to size.

\[it should be noted here that in Hindu symbolism, the removal of a head
not necessarily to be understood as simply a killing – but is also often
regarded as the removal of ‘ego’, the lessening of arrogance, the
provision of enlightenment by getting impediments such as these out of
the way. In this way, the enlightenment of Brahma as to the reality that
Shiva is supreme … occurred via the humbling blow struck by Bhairava and
His Mighty Axe – a strike against which Brahma, for all His posturing
and pretensions, could not hope to stand. This is also one of the
reasons why we have referred to the employment of an Axe as a Roudran
Theological Argument; as its employment quite decisively tends to settle
a range of theological debates around just who is supposed to be
Supreme, or has the authority to call another to account, etc. ‘Ultima
Ratio Rudrasya’, we might perhaps call it.\]

Now it is at this point that the example of KaalBhairavJI contra Brahma
becomes a most strongly worthy counterpoint to the previously mentioned
failure of the Greeks to deal properly to Ajax the Lesser – and not
simply because in one and only one of these instances is the miscreant
in question brought to justice in the manner initially mandated from On
High.

For you see, resting upon Brahma was the status of a Brahmin – and
therefore, upon Him too were all the attendant protections one might
otherwise presume accrued to such a being. The act of striking down a
Brahmin, known as Brahmahatya, being a most grievous crime indeed, and
bringing with it some quite considerable sanctions for the committer.

The reason why this renders the Decapitation of Brahma by KaalBhairavJi
such a counterpoint to the inaction of the Greeks against Ajax the
Lesser, is due to the reasoning of the latter that they should not dare
to carry out sanction against their Divinely directed foe because of the
trepidation that in so doing they might happen to damage the Murti to
which he was clinging, or at the very least be in breach of the
prohibitions upon violence within such a religious sanctum. This stayed
the Greeks’ collective hand, and therefore lead to their upholding the
‘lesser’ pieties around those concerns … at the direct and considerable
expense of the unquestionably \*greater\* piety of following the Divine
Command they had been given – which was also, it should be remembered,
to uphold the Law against a transgressor to those same injunctions which
now gave them pause.

Bhairava, the Avenging Son, was not dissuaded by the travails and
sanction which awaited Him for the fulfilment of His Lord’s Order – it
was enough that the Command had been duly given, and that it was
righteous in its nature for it to be followed through. Not simply
because of the ‘Positivist’ understanding that the Law is what one’s
Sovereign decrees it to be … but also – and this is important – because
the setting things back into balance entailed by the solving of the
Brahma-problem was undoubtedly necessary for the continued Ordered
functioning of the Cosmos at large. Brahma’s actions had imperiled the
immanence of the Divine Order in(to) our Universe; and therefore,
despite the more ‘surface-level’ action against the Law represented by
the Brahmanicide of Lord Brahma, the \*deepa\* understanding showed
Bhairava’s actions to be in \*congruence\* rather than conflict with the
principles of Rta and Orlog in question … and which would have been
placed under escalatingly grave threat had He not chosen to act. The
‘lesser’ piety was noted, and then set aside – so that the far
\*greater\* pieties could be carried out in service of the greatest
possible overarching cause. In this manner, you might say, there may
perhaps be some ‘resonancy’ with the actions of Odin as pertains the
conception of Vali – and as we shall soon see, that is not where the
parallels with that particular case and its eventual handling reach a
conclusion.
