+++
title = "Some notes on Rashid ad-Din bin Imad ud Dawla Abu’l Khair and his times"

+++
There are many ironies that are iconic of the Mohammedan world. One such
is a monument in the modern Islamic state that occupies Iran with a
gigantic statue depicting a Jewish intellectual from the 1200-1300s:
Rashid ad-Din. The tale of Rashid ad-Din is well known to connoisseurs
of Mongol history for he was the author of the famous Jami at’ Tawarikh.
We record some notes on him in the context of Mongol history and its
intersections with Indic history. The remarkable vicissitudes of history
come to fore in the restoration of heathen tradition in Mesopotamia by
the Mongols followed by its subversion and destruction by Mohammedanism.
The Mongol irruptions had tremendous, even if transient, impact on the
religious landscape of Asia. The Mongols were rather tolerant and
allowed the practice of all religions without obstruction in their
realms though they themselves were originally followers of the Altaic
system of Tengri. Indeed, they were one of the first people in history
to establish a truly secular state (unlike the pseudo-secular state that
adorns modern India or the secularized Abrahamistic states that are
common in the Western nations with elevated economies). We had earlier
spoken of how the model of the Tantric state had been successfully
exported from India and adopted by several Central Asian potentates like
the Tibetans and Uighurs and also to a degree in China and Japan.
Through their Uighur and Tibetan interlocutors the Mongol elite became
acquainted with the mantrayAna and the Yuan, Chagadai and Il Khanates
were transiently influenced by the Tantric state model to differing
degrees. However, the religious latitude offered by the Mongol state did
not result in a top-down imposition of the Tantric state model onto the
masses. With the result the masses generally retained their old religion
or simply followed the dominant proselytizing forces around them.
Consequently, in China the undercurrent resentment against mantrayAna,
which was always in play since the reactionary emperor of the Tang,
Wu-zong, came back with a vengeance against the foreign Mongol rulers of
the Yuan Khanate who practiced the path of mantrayAna. In the Chagadai
ulus and the Il Khanate the proselytizing force of Islam eventually
destroyed the practice of mantrayAna by the Mongol elite. To better
understand these historical events, we shall use the life and times of
Rashid ad-Din.

We have the following testimony regarding the secularism of the Mongol
from a contemporaneous Isaistic theologian of the Syriac church,
Bar-Hebraeus: “With the Mongols there is neither slave nor freeman,
neither believer nor heathen, neither Christian nor Jew; but they regard
all men as belonging to one and the same stock.” The religious tolerance
of the Mongol empire was welcomed by the followers of the traditions of
dharma, the heathen Turko-Mongol systems and Judaists. Isaists
approached it with mixed feelings, whereas the Mohammedans saw it with
utmost loathing. A document from the German monastery of Marbach, from
shortly after the conquests of Chingiz Kha’Khan, states that the Jews
were delighted with the coming of the Mongols and felt that their time
of liberation had come. They even called Chingiz Kha’Khan as the son of
Dawid. Similarly, the Kashmirian practitioner of mantrayAna, kamalashrI
and the brAhmaNa jaya paNDita felt that the Mongols would finally
restore the dharma that had been destroyed by the dreaded turuShka-s. On
the other hand the European Isaistic preachers upon hearing of the
smashing of the German, Czech and Polish knights by the Mongol troops in
the battle of Liegnitz felt that the coming of the Mongols was the
arrival of the Anti-Christ. However, the crusader states in the Middle
East saw the defeat of the Mohammedan powers by the Mongols as a
fulfillment of the myth of Prester John and a welcome relief for Isaism.
Indeed, the records present several advantages to the followers of
dharma, other heathens, the Judaists and Isaists. Suddenly, with the
coming of the Mongol rule in place of the Kalif of Baghdad, who had been
killed by Huelegue Khan, the Dhimmi Isasists and Judaists found that
they need not pay any Jizya or wear an yellow badge or suffer
restrictions on trade and movement that were common under the
Mohammedans. Now the followers of dharma, relieved of their Kaffir
status in the Middle East were also free to be employed there and
transmit their religion freely.

It was under these circumstances that Sa’d ad-Dawla bin Moses a Jewish
physician from Baghdad got appointed as physician to Arghun Khan,
grandson of Huelegue. Impressed by his intelligence Arghun Khan
appointed him as his Vazir. In turn Sa’d had Arghun appoint several Jews
to the administration. Due to the Mohammedan persecution of various
groups favored by Arghun he came up with a plan to conquer Mecca and
restore heathen worship there with construction of temples of
buddhakapAla and heruka, but due to other preoccupations he failed to do
so. Indeed, during the Ilkhanid regime multiple temples to buddhakapAla,
kAlachakra and hevajra had been built in Baghdad, Tabriz and in some
places in the province of Khurasan. We may also interpret Rashid
ad-din’s account of the atash-kada and kaffirkot to suggest that there
was at at least one Astika temple in Baghdad. The Mohammedans, smarting
under their loss of power, sent assassins to kill Sa’d, but they were
promptly arrested by the Mongols. When Arghun fell terminally ill the
Mohammedans got their chance to attack Sa’d ad-Dawla and kill him along
with several of his coethnics. However, when the Arabs attacked the
Jewish quarter of Baghdad a great battle broke out till the Mongols
arrived and smashed the Arabs. In any case even after Sa’d assasination,
the actions of Sa’d left several Judaists in the Mongol administration
and from the lower ranks of these arose Rashid ad-Din, the son of a
medicine seller. Rashid was already a physician for the Mongol court
during Arghun’s reign and soon rose the ranks as a civil official.

The death of Arghun was followed by a period of great unrest triggered
by the Mohammedans. Ibn al Fuwati writing from a madrasa in Irak stated
that the ulema in Baghdad had prepared a statement, which stated that a
ruler who raised the Kaffirs and Jews would be laid low by Allah. This
was used to whip up Mohammedan frenzy leading to assassination squads
directed against the non-Mohammedan officials. Gaikhatu succeeded Arghun
was a profligate rule given to alcohol and sex. In his reign paper money
similar to that used in the core of the Mongol empire was introduced in
Mesopotamia. Around this time a powerful Mongol Bek of the Oirat clan
converted to Mohammedanism under the name Nauruz and initiated a scam to
produce fake paper money and bring the finances of the empire to ruin
\[Footnote 1\]. This was followed by the assassination of successive
Mongol rulers in internecine conflict with the Moslem faction growing in
size and power under Nauruz. Order was restored finally under the next
ruler Ghazan who made Rashid his Vazir. Rashid’s fiscal policies, some
time based on loans from his own fortunes, considerably helped to shore
up the empire. He also introduced tax reforms that considerably helped
stabilize the lives of people and reduced the propensity for riots.
However, the Mohammedans were far from content and under Nauruz placed
considerable pressure on Ghazan to convert to Islam. Ghazan finally gave
in and was declared Amir ul-Momin and was called upon like a true Ghazi
to demolish non-Mohammedan religious places. Rashid records the
imposition of Shari’a and the forcible destruction of the temples of
dharma in Baghdad, Tabriz and the like. Bar-hebraeus records Mohammedan
mobs rioting in all the major cities demolishing temples, churches and
synagogues and trashing non-Mohammedans on the streets. Rashid himself
though a favorite of the Khan was pressurized to convert to Islam. He
overtly claimed conversion but remained true to Judaism in private.
Ghazan himself it appears was rather lax on his Islamic observances as
many Mongol Beks were not very happy – for example, Qutlugh Shah a
Mongol commander felt that the Mongols were making a great mistake by
replacing the robust Yasa of Chingiz Kha’Khan with the hundred confusing
ways of the Shari’a. The Mongol princes Oljeitu and Timur also resented
the attempts at breaking the mantrayAna shrines they had built and the
harassment of mantra practitioners.

Nevertheless, the long reign of Rashid as Vazir through the days of
Ghazan and Oljeitu brought much stability to the land and also saw a
period of intellectual efflorescence – he arranged for the safe passage
and residence of several scholars from various nations and religions to
reside in the Mongol court at Baghdad. In fact Rashid kept comparing
himself to Aristole while Ghazan was his Alexander. Throughout this
period, the Islamist faction kept the pressure on Rashid pointing to the
fact that he had not really given up his original religion. They kept
pointing to his letters in Hebrew to his coethnics and the like. But his
closeness to the Khans prevented him and his coethnics from facing any
harassment. Finally, matters came to head when Oljeitu died and the
Islamist faction was firmly in control. The Shari’a court accused Rashid
of having poisoned Oljeitu and forced him to confess his Judaistic
affiliations. He was then made to watch to beheading of his son and then
he was beheaded. His severed head was then stuck on a pole and paraded
through Tabriz with cries of how Allah had brought down the Jews. During
this a violent Mohammedan mob fell upon the Judaist quarter of Tabriz
where Rashid’s clan lived and burnt it down along with a significant
portion of his intellectual works and his printing press established
with technology imported from the Yuan Khanate. The loathing for Rashid
seems to have greatly lingered in the Mohammedan world as some
subsequent Perso-Arab writers like al Kashani hurl abuse at him. Later
in the early 1400 Miran Shah the son of Timur-i-lang even had the
headless corpse of Rashid dug up and thrown into the cemetery of the
Jews in Tabriz.

From our view point the there are two chief issues pertaining to the
above history:  
1\) The unique intellectual activity of the late Il-Khanid court. Ghazan
directed the extraordinary linguistic and intellectual abilities of
Rashid to compose a history of the Mongols. Chingiz Kha’Khan had
entrusted the composition of the Mongol history to his adopted son
Shi’hi Kutuqu, who wrote it down in metrical form in the Uighur script
adopted for the Mongolian language. This became famous as the Altan
Daftar which was kept under lock and key in the treasuries of the Khans.
Only the senior members of the Borjigin clan and some senior Mongol
historians had access to the Altan Daftar, hence lending it the name the
secret history. One such historian was Bolad Sechen who was the
representative of Qubilai Kha’Khan in the Il-Khanid court. While this
text was still secret Ghazan hoped that the history of his illustrious
ancestors would be more widely distributed and it was this task that
Rashid took up, to produce a work in Persian. For this he was directly
assisted by Ghazan who had held both the Altan Daftar and supplemented
by oral tradition. He was also assisted by Bolad whose knowledge of
history was supposed to be best among the Mongols. He supplemented these
accounts by texts he had collected from the Qipchak Turks, Hindus,
Chinese and Uighurs. He also used the history of the Mongols composed by
Ata Malik al-Juvayni the son-in-law of the queen of Georgia. This work
continued through the life of Ghazan and was only completed during the
reign of his brother Oljeitu.

At this point Oljeitu came up with an unique plan, i.e. to compose an
encyclopedic history of the world that would supplement that of the
Mongols and entrusted it to Rashid for a handsome stipend. Rashid was
more than pleased to take it up and declared that no other king had
shown bestowed so much to his Vazir as Oljeitu had done. It was to
encompass the histories of early Turks, Mongols of the Qara Khitai
empire, Hindus, Chinese, Mohammedans, Isaists and Judaists along with
geographical accounts of the world. This venture is particular
noteworthy for number of points. Firstly, it was perhaps one of the
earliest attempts at systematic universal history along with an attempt
to document the knowledge systems of the world. As Rashid states: “The
author has, as far as was in his power, multiplied and verified his
researches from all that was previously known on the subject in this
country, whether described in books or drawn in charts. To this he has
added all that, during this fortunate epoch, the philosophers and wise
men of India, Qara Khitai, China, France, and other countries have
written, and has entered it all in this third volume, after having fully
ascertained its authority.” Secondly, it was noteworthy that despite the
pressure from the Dar-ul-Islam, Rashid managed to assemble a panel of
heathen scholars from different parts of the world to reside in Baghdad
and help him with the composition. Of note these include the yogin
kamalashrI from Kashmir (who had given mantra dIkSha to Oljeitu and also
composed a maNDala-vidhi) and the bauddha-s from the chIna desha,
Li-ta-chi and Mak-sun. Thirdly, he imported a new printing press from
the core of the Mongol empire to make several copies of the history and
distribute it in both Arabic and Persian. Though the original was
written in Persian, it appears that the surviving Persian version is a
re-translation of the Arabic form under the directives of the Mogol
tyrant Akbar, who was keen to have an account of his ancestors (Fazal
uses the same genealogy).

Some implications of Rashid’s account of India might be considered here.
A eulogy of India is given thus: “India, according to the concurrent
opinion of all writers, is the most agreeable abode on the earth, and
the most pleasant quarter of the world. Its dust is purer than air, and
its air purer than purity itself; its delightful plains resemble the
garden of Paradise, and the particles of its earth are like rubies and
corals.” This sentence is also found in the account of the eulogizer of
the Jihad, Abdullah Wassaf, a junior contemporary of Rashid, suggesting
that it might have been borrowed from an earlier work. No doubt the
turuShka-s felt a deep urge to invade India and appropriate it. Rashid
also mentions several Hindu merchants plying their wares in Tabriz and
Baghdad. The destruction of the Kilafat, the lifting of Jaziya and the
safe passage for Kaffrs and Dhimmi’s due to the Mongol Kha’Khanate
appears to have considerably invigorated trade across Eurasia. But the
movement of people brought disease with it and it culminated in the
great plague pandemic transmitted by Chinese fleas borne along the trade
routes opened up by the Mongols. Of Rashid’s Indic sources kamalashrI is
the only one who is well-know. We suspect that kamalashrI was mainly
responsible only for the bauddha material, which appears to have
included an account based on ashvaghoSha’s narrative of the tathAgata’s
life as also some bauddha mantra-s. It also appears that kamalashrI
composed a history of the nAstika mata in India similar in some ways to
what the Tibetan lAmA tAranAtha later composed. Likewise, the chIna-s
who informed him were also clearly bauddha-s who were using Indic
terminology (even for example chIna and mahAchIna).

It is however clear that Rashid had another source on purely Astika
matters. It is conceivable that his understanding of yoga might have
been from a commentary on pata\~Njali that could have been transmitted
by the Mohammedan indologist al Biruni, who produced some works on Hindu
topics, not unlike those produced by the white Indologists \[Footnote
2\]. Also notable his account of an Indian animal called the sharu
(=sharabha), which could have again filtered down from al Biruni: It is
supposed to live in the forests of the Konkan. It was bigger than a
rhino with two horns and a beak and a crest with four protuberances. It
was supposed to kill elephants and no animal can kill it. Other than
natural death it is supposed to die only if it runs off a cliff upon
hearing a thunderbolt thinking something is attacking it. Thus its bones
and horns are said to be found by people on mountain slopes (One wonders
if this is actually points to the fossil inspiration for sharabha).

However, Rashid clearly had another brAhmaNa source for his account
based on the harivaMsha, the Hindu genealogies and material resembling
the nIlamata purANa. Who could have been this source? For this,
ironically, we have to turn the evidence provided by the Kubraviya
Shaikh named Ala ad-Dawla Samnani: Arghun Khan had invited a brAhmaNa
physician from Hindustan to set up a practice in Baghdad and consulted
him for specialist issues. It is quite likely that Sa’d and Rashid keep
us in dark about this brAhmaNa because he was a competitor to them as a
physician, especially given the high respect he held with the Khans.
However, the Shaikh had himself had benefited from the physician’s
advise to him on number of matters and refers to him with considerable
respect. It is clear that though a firm Sunni, the Shaikh has borrowed
extensively from Hindu yoga in his writings while trying to pass them
under a Mohammedan garb. Both Rashid and the Shaikh are terrified by the
possibility of reincarnation and spend considerable effort to negate it.
It is likely that this brAhmaNa was responsible for the remainder of the
Indic material used by Rashid in his history.

2\) Secularism versus Mohammedanism and failure of counter Jihad
alliances. There are several important lessons from the history of these
times that have a direct bearing on contemporary issues. One of these is
how secularism fares when confronted with Mohammedanism. As we mentioned
above the Mongol state was a secular one. Its elite had a rather
eclectic approach to religion. Even after his apparent conversion to
Islam Ghazan retained the several heathen intellectuals and traders from
India, China and Mongolia in his Khanate (though perhaps under pressure
from his brother Oljeitu). In fact even his conversion to Islam seems a
rather superficial one that was primarily emphasized by his Mohammedan
subjects. Evidence for this comes from the fact that even after his
apparent conversion we note that his coins are inscribed with the
Mongolian Tengri-yin Küchündür which means “by the strength of Tengri”,
the original heathen deity of the Mongols. Even after his “conversion”
we see him building hospitals for animals following his Indic advisers
and practiced high culture such as painting of human figures which was
frowned upon by the Ulema. He is also seen sending letters to the
crusaders that he wanted Jerusalem to be returned to the Isaists. His
ability to speak Latin appears to have considerably charmed the Italians
who saw that Khan as one of their own – indeed names of Mongol Khans
such as Alaone (for Huelegue), Abago (for Abaqa), Argone (for Arghun)
and Cassano (for Ghazan) became rather prevalent among Italian traders.
It should be understood that the Il-Khans had conquered Mesopotamia
after annihilating the Shi’a power of the Hashishins and the Sunni
Kilafat. So the Mohammedans were no longer a political force in
Mesopotamia. Yet they were able to destroy the external influences and
re-establish the Shari’a. An important lesson from this is that even if
Mohammedans are not politically in the driver’s seat, if they are
demographically the majority, then they would replace a secular state
with high culture with the dreadful Shari’a state.

When the Hindus drove out the English, the chAchA and his followers
chose to establish a secular state. The main reason for this was the
fear in the Hindu mind of what might happen if the Mohammedans were told
that they had a live in a Hindu state. The chAchA and his men thought
that by going secular they could appease the Mohammedans and also seem
“modern” in the Western (Isaistic) eyes. However, the lesson offered
by the conversion of the Il-Khanate into an Islamic state that was
bloody within is a grim one. It suggests that history might repeat
itself and the secular state of India could be eventually splintered by
the Mohammedans in the regions where they gain a demographic upper hand.
More generally, a secular state can never be stable with a significant
Mohammedan population within its boundaries. That is why even a real
secular state in place of the current pseudo-secular cannot save India –
only a state that returns to its Hindu cultural moorings can.

Finally it should be noted that the Mongols sent numerous letters to
Western European capitals calling on them to form alliances to contain
and reduce Mohammedanism. However, the West even in its pre-modern state
of fragmented identity never took up these calls for alliances for it
feared “Asiatic” dominance. A lesson from this is that hopes from
Indo-Western alliances against Mohammedanism are similarly doomed. We
will have to fight against the Army of Islam by our own strength, even
as our kingdoms had done in the past.

……………  
Footnote 1: The parallels in this incident to the subversion of Indian
rupees by fake notes printed by Mohammedan subversionists in modern
India is striking.

Footnote 2: The fascination of several white indologists and their
Japanese imitators have towards al Biruni is not small part because of
the similarity the two share with respect to Hindu knowledge: The wish
to appropriate Hindu knowledge even while rubbishing it and the Hindus
is a common trait they share.
