+++
title = "Mysterious king shUdraka"

+++
**Great rulers in Indian literary tradition**  
Indian literary tradition has a rather telescoped view of post-epic
history. By epic history we might consider the period circumscribed by
the rAmAyana, the bhArata and the harivaMsha and the period before the
post-bhArata king lists of the purANa-s. In the period following the
epics literary tradition accords a few kings with almost legendary
status and tends to conflate their histories and legends in a peculiar
fashion. Here the curtain is raised with udayana a scion of the old
pANDu lineage. After this, we are led to the cycle of the evil and
depraved king nanda and his end at the hands of chANakya and his student
chandragupta, who replaced nanda as the emperor of bhArata. Then we are
anachronistically informed about vikramAditya and his vetAla siddhi-s.
His glorious reign is ended by the tree-riding shAtavAhana
(shAlivAhana), the andhra, who then replaces him as the grand emperor in
India. Then shAtavAhana’s has his chance to face the axe at the hands
the brave shUdraka, who lives an exalted life of 100 years and 10 days
in a court studded by some of the greatest writers to the age. Then we
have break in the turn of the royal reel, only to resume with
harShavardhana firmly ensconced in sthAnIshvara with his brilliant
courtier bANa. Thereafter, we transit to bhojadeva in whose court we see
an anachronistic assembly of poets of all eras, even as he trumps the
bygone heroes by ascending vikrama’s throne and capping the head of the
kAvyapuruSha with his sarasvati kaNThAbharaNa. With him a the forbidding
green curtain was drawn over Indic tradition, though we hear of the
occasional celebration of regimes, such as that of the vikramA\~Nka of
the chAlukya-s or the dynasty of the rAthoD-s. This is in short is the
legendary landscape of Indic literary tradition. Of the rulers mentioned
here there is not much doubt about the historicity of any of them. At
least nanda, chandragupta the maurya, one or more shAtavAhana-s,
vikramAditya the gupta emperor, harsha and bhoja are studied in
textbooks of history as rulers of note. The general consensus is that
these historical figures indeed supply the foundations of the eponymous
figures in Indic legend. Of course there is the much debated problem of
the anachronism of vikramAditya (and a related problem of the date of
kAlidAsa, both of which we shall not dilate upon right now). This
notwithstanding, there are other elements supporting the historicity of
the said rulers. But the only ruler who hardly seems to find mention
from a historical standpoint is the king shUdraka. Most textbooks of
history, at best, mention him as a playwright renowned for his
mR^ichChakaTika, which is often described as one of the most innovative
plays in Hindu tradition. Yet they might even fail to remark that
tradition holds him to be a king in the same league as the above.

In this regard the purANa-s, the much reviled source of early Indian
history, are not very different. While the andhra-s or shAtavAhana-s
find a prominent place in their terminal account of the dynasties of the
kaliyuga, there is no mention shUdraka as being the cause of their end
\[Footnote 1\]. Indeed the core of the paurANika narrative appears to
have ended with the shAtavAhana-s – e.g. the matsya purANa records them
as the last dynasty. Some old paurANika vaMsha-s appear to have been
extended to include some brief accounts of successor states of the
andhra-s, such as the nAga-s, the shrIparvata-s, AbhIra-s and early
gupta-s; they are hardly the subject of any detailed account. More
pertinently, they do not mention shUdraka as being among the glorious
successor kings. Interestingly, the core paurANika accounts also do not
mention vikrama in connection with the andhra-s. Thus, we may conclude
that the literary tradition of the kAvya-s and nATaka-s are not entirely
congruent with the purANa-s. So was this legendary king shUdraka all
legend after all? This is a question which arrested our attention since
our days of childhood.

**The legend of the shAtavAhana emperor**  
To get a hang of this issue we may first look into shAtavAhana with whom
literary tradition connects shUdraka. The shAtavAhana of literary
tradition might be a composite of more than one andhra emperor,
synonymized under the dynastic name. A number of notable andhra kings
are recognized by the purANa-s and epigraphic records who may be the
prototypes of the shAtavAhana of literature. Indeed, the synonymy of
multiple shAtavAhana emperors in literary tradition appears to be echoed
by the much later jaina polymath hemachandra sUri in his deshI-nama-mAlA
who gives, shAtavAhana \[shAlivAhana\], sAlana, hAla, kuntala as a list
of synonyms. In literary tradition he tends to come as a single figure
of outstanding significance, who founded the era in which we live (at
least south of the narmadA). For example, we commonly hear the verse:  
yudhiShThiro vikrama-shAlivAhanau tato nR^ipaH syAd vijayAbhinandanaH
|  
tatastu nAgArjuna bhUpatiH kalau kalkI\* ShaDete shaka-kArakAH smR^itAH
|| from ananta’s play  
\[\*karkI in the rhotacizing version\]

Thus, tradition explains that the kaliyuga is marked by 6 kings starting
with yudhiShThira. He was followed by vikrama and shAlivAhana
thereafter. About 16000 years in the future it is said that the ruler
vijayAbhinandana would found a new era after he has ousted the
mlechCha-s from the sindhu. After that in Bengal nAgArjuna would start a
new era and finally the kali yuga would be brought to an end by the
coming of kalkI at shambala. Similarly, shAtavahana is mentioned again
with vikrama in another verse composed in the paramAra court after the
death of bhojadeva:  
dhAtar-bhartar-ashesha-yAchaka-jane vairAyase sarvathA  
yasmAd vikrama shAlivAhana mahI-bhR^in mu\~nja bhojAdayaH |  
atyantaM chira-jIvino na vihitAste vishvajIvAtavo  
mArkaNDa dhruva lomasha prabR^itayaH sR^iShTAhi dIrghAyushaH ||

Here the poet states that dhAtR^i must really not like poets who live
off patronage (yAchaka-s) because while he has granted a long life for
the ascetics like mArkaNDeya, dhruva and lomasha, he as not granted a
long life for the kings vikrama, shAlivAhana, mu\~nja and bhoja \[who
were great patrons of literature\].

Literary tradition uniformly records this shAlivAhana as being not just
a great patron but also a notable prAkR^ita poet who composed the
sattAsai or the subhAShita-kosha as bANAbhaTTa calls it.

**Who was shUdraka: some ideas prevalent among historians**  
This illustrious shAtavAhana was the one whom shUdraka is supposed to
have superseded. So, what do we known about him within the literary
tradition? Firstly, he is said to have been the subject of a historical
narrative, the shudraka-kathA by the poets rAmila and somila which has
unfortunately been lost. In the absence of this key narrative, the
common practice among historians, who have tried to find history in
shUdraka, is to interpret the available data thus: 1) Since he is said
to have been the nemesis of the shAtavAhana-s he should be found among
the successor states of the said dynasty. 2) Since his locus of activity
is described as avanti and mAlava, he should be located among the
northern successor states of the Andhra-s rather than those taking their
place in the core zone. 3) In his play mR^ichChakaTika he has a
character named Aryaka, who is described as a gopAla-dAraka (son of a
cowherd) who seizes the throne of avanti by overthrowing the king
pAlaka. This is taken to refer to the AbhIra cowherds overthrowing the
shAtavAhana-s. In this regard the authority of certain purANa-s, which
state that 10 AbhIra rulers spanning 67 years ruled after the
shAtavAhana-s, is used to support the proposal. 4) His name “little
shUdra” literally means he was a shUdra; hence, he was an AbhIra (since
these cowherds are traditionally regarded as a shUdra group). So, it was
concluded that shUdraka was one of the AbhIra rulers and is usually
identified with either shivadatta or his son Ishvaradatta. As
circumstantial support for this proposition it has been stated that like
the AbhIra kings who were votaries of rudra, shUdraka also always
specifically invokes rudra at the beginning of his literary works \[note
the use of the phrase “sharva prasAdAt” in his regard\]. Again the date
of the skanda purANa in kaliyuga saMvatsara-s \[Footnote 1\] is taken to
support the AbhIra identification of shUdraka.

However, other than the potentially important historical marker in
shUdraka’s play of the conquest of avanti by a cowherd king, much of the
above speculation does not hold up to close historical analysis. The
AbhIra-s of the region are recorded primarily in the context of the
kShatrapa-s of western India. We first encounter them as backers of the
kShatrapa rudrasiMha in his quest for the throne – they, under their
general rudrabhUti, aid him in displacing the kShatrapa jIvadAman from
the throne (Gunda inscription of \~181 CE). Some time thereafter (but
before 191 CE), the abhIra chief Ishvaradatta, the son of shivadatta,
displaced the rudrasiMha to become lord of avanti for some time. This
probably corresponded to the coup of the gopAla-dAraka Aryaka mentioned
in the mR^ichChakaTika. However, it should be noted that at this time
the shAtavAhana-s were far from overthrown – in fact a reasonably
powerful andhra ruler shrI-yaj\~na-shAtakarNi held his sway throughout
this period and was able to seize the northern Konkan from the
kShatrapa-s. Thus, at least the historical marker in the mR^ichChaTika
is best identified with the brief AbhIra conquest of avanti from the
kShatrapa-s. It can in no way be taken as the conquest of avanti by the
AbhIra-s from the shAtavAhana-s to end their reign. Hence, the whole
identification of shUdraka with one or the other AbhIra king appears
rather facile.

**Literary tradition on shUdraka**  
Now, we may turn to look more closely at the literary tradition itself
to better understand the material on shUdraka. We currently possess
three major works are attributed to shUdraka – the mR^ichChakaTika, the
monologue (bhANa) known as padma-prAbhR^itaka and the vINA-vAsavadattA.
Of these the former two are best preserved, and the first of them offers
the most in terms of information relevant to our quest. Firstly, it
should be noted that in addition to the gopAla character Aryaka, who
finally becomes king by staging a coup, there is another reference in
the mR^ichChakaTika that might connect him to the kShatrapa rudrasiMha.
In the 8th act of the play, the rogue shakAra (saMsthAnaka) is about to
murder the heroine, the public woman vasantasenA, in the park, when she
states that if only her lover the brAhmaNa chArudatta saw her he would
rescue her. To this saMsthAnaka mockingly replies in the vulgar
prAkR^ita (note shakAra is depicted with a speech defect; perhaps he was
of Iranian descent with a bad accent making s-\>sh):  
kiM she shakke vAlIputte mahinde laMbhAputte kAlaNeMI shubandhU |  
ludde lA.A doNaputte jaDA.u chANakke vA dundhumAle tisha\~NkU || (in
8.34)  
He asks if her lover is indra, or the son of vAlin, the son of the
apsara raMbhA or the asura kAlanemI or subandhu or the king rudra or
ashvatthAman or jaTayu or chANakya or dundhumara or trisha\~Nku. Here
the mention of the king rudra rAjan (ludde lA.A) is rather telling in
the context of the cowboy coup mentioned elsewhere in the play. It is a
reasonably strong piece of evidence that indeed the coup of Aryaka is
modeled on the AbhIra coup on the kShatrapa rudrasiMha. Other
circumstantial evidence is the praise of rudra and skanda by Aryaka’s
host upon his successful takeover of the throne – this is consonant with
the epigraphic evidence supporting the mAheshvara affinities of the
AbhIra rulers:  
jayati vR^iShabha ketur dakSha-yaj\~nasya hantA  
tadanu jayati bhetta ShaNmukhaH krau\~ncha-shatruH | (in 10.45)  
In terms of location while prathiShThAna is not the center of the action
there is a mention of durgA as sahyavAsinI (the goddess of the
sahyAdri-s) rather than the usual vindhyavAsinI (in 10.36). This
supports the origin locus of the play in dakShiNApatha. Thus, one might
conclude that the play as we have it was probably composed after the
AbhIra conquest of the kShatrapa-s and in the Deccan region.

However, there are some other features in the play that make the picture
more complex. First, the play’s prefatory statement has a posthumous
eulogy of shUdraka. So, clearly the play appears to have been redacted
after his death. What we do not know is the degree to which it was
redacted. This makes a direct inference of the \*author’s\* age based on
historical events in the play somewhat uncertain. This is further
emphasized by two issues: 1) The plot of the play appears to exist
independently in another play termed the dAridra-chArudatta which is
attributed by some to bhAsa. This implies that redaction of the existing
story line that characterizes this play by different authors is
something that has happened in the early Indian theater. This allows us
to raise the question as to how far the version we have represents
directly represents shUdraka’s contribution. 2) The prAkR^ita verse
quoted above mentions subandhu. Now, there is only one famous subandhu
in Indic literature – the author of the vAsavadattA romance. That
subandhu is generally taken to be a much later author because he refers
to the nyAya intellectual udyotakAra who post-dates the nAstika
intellectual din-nAga. So, if the vAsavadattA as we have it is
subandhu’s original work then we are faced with a further
chronological tangle with respect to shUdraka.However, this problem
vanishes if we accept the position of Hindu literary tradition on
subandhu \[Footnote 2\].

The preface of the mR^ichChaTika describes shUdraka thus:  
dviradendra gatish chakora-netraH paripUrNendu-mukhaH suvigrahash cha
|  
dvijamukhyatamaH kavir babhUva prathitaH shUdraka ityagAdha satvaH ||  
He had the gait of an elephant the eyes of a partridge, his face beamed
like the moon and he had a well-built body. He was a chief among the
dvija-s and a kavi who was known as shUdraka. His good was unfathomed.  
api cha |  
R^igvedaM sAmavedaM gaNitaM atha kalAM vaishikIM hastishikShaM  
j\~nAtvA sharva-prasAdAd vyapagata-timire chakShuShI chopalabhya |  
rAjAnaM vIkShya putraM paraMa-samudeyana-ashvamedhena cheShTvA  
labdhvA chAyuH shatAbdaM dasha dina sahitaM shUdrako .agniM praviShTaH
||  
he knew the R^ig, the sAman, mathematics, the sexual arts and elephant
training and by the grace of sharva his eyes were never covered with
darkness. He placed his son to rule after him and sought to perform the
most difficult ashvamedha ritual. After having obtained a life of 100
years and 10 days he was cremated.  
api cha |  
samara-vyasanI pramAda shUnyaH kakudaM veda-vidAM tapodhanash cha |  
paravAraNa bAhu yuddha lubdhaH kShitipAlaH kila shUdrako babhuva ||  
He was swift in battle and free from drunkenness. He was the pinnacle of
the veda-knowers and the possessors of tapasya. He was keen to engage
with his arm the enemy defenses, such was the king shUdraka.

While this portraiture might be seen as aiming to convey the all-round
brilliance of shUdraka in the three puruShArtha-s, it has one peculiar
element: Although shUdraka is a brAhmaNa, his royal status, and his
physical and military prowess are emphasized in addition to his
traditionally brahminical pursuits of scholarship \[Footnote 3\]. These
points are consistently emphasized by all the other authors in Indian
literary tradition who refer to shUdraka. These accounts include that of
daNDin, who lists shUdraka as one of the old authors whom he respects –
he describes him an a universal conqueror twice over – once with his
weapons and again with his literary compositions. The Kashmirian
historian kalhaNa mentions him in his rAja-taraMgiNi as being one who
was firm in wielding weapons and also a learned man. Several saMskR^ita
literary critics invariably mention him as a famous literary figure
and/or a warrior – these include bANa in his kAdaMbarI, kulashekhara in
his tapatisaMvaraNa, bhUShaNa in his chandrApIDa katha. While his early
biographies by rAmila and somila, and also one by pa\~nchashikha, have
been lost we have account two notable accounts of his life. The
escapades of shUdraka with his two women vinayavatI and harimatI and his
subsequent marriages with them are narrated by daNDin. On the other side
his brave deeds are narrated in a somewhat corrupt and fantastic fashion
by ananta, which includes an interesting textual reference of shUdraka’s
magical voyage to the American continent (krau\~ncha-dvIpa). Comparable
accounts of the deeds of shUdraka are also available from the jaina
works, the kalpa-pradIpa by jina-prabha sUri and the chaturviMshati
prabandha of rAjashekhara jaina. Further material is offered by
bhatta-somadeva in his kathA-sarit-sAgara, rAjashekhara (the Hindu one)
in his kAvya mImAmsa and hemachandra sUri. The general narrative
regarding shUdraka that can be reconstructed from these accounts goes
thus:

A brAhmaNa named harisharman sought the audience of the great andhra
emperor shAtavAhana but was beaten up and driven out by his guards. The
brAhmaNa seeking to punish the king performed a rite to viShNu to obtain
a son who would kill shAtavAhana \[Footnote 4\]. This son was shUdraka,
who was orphaned shortly after his birth. His maternal uncle became his
guardian and shUdraka rapidly acquired considerable proficiency in
various intellectual spheres even as a child. But unlike most other
brAhmaNa children, he displayed extraordinary physical strength and
proficiency with the bow, quarterstaff and sword. Once shAtavAhana and
his vIra-s had a show of strength in pratiShThaNa. They were to lift a
large and heavy rock with their hands. Most vIra-s could only lift it by
a thumb or two thumbs breadth, but shAtavAhana lifted it up to his
knees. It was then that the young shUdraka strode in there and easily
lifted the stone and threw it in the air. It broke into three pieces and
one fell in the nAgahrada and another at the cross of the highways
between uttarApatha and dakShiNApatha. Amazed at this feat shAtavAhana
made shUdraka the chief of this guards. His vIra-s afraid of his power
asked that he only be given a quarterstaff and no other weapon. However,
with just this weapon he was able to stave of the vIra-s when they once
tried to break into the king’s fort in pratiShThana. Once the
shAtAvAhana kingdom was invaded by the chiefs dUrgarAja and chUrNarAja
but they were defeated and subjugated by shUdraka who lead the army. The
king then made shUdraka his prime minister.

At this point things get fantastic and an asura called mAya took the
form of a brAhmaNa and entered the palace of shAtavAhana to seize his
wife ana\~Ngavati. But shUdraka with his magical abilities was able to
see the asura and beheaded him. But he was accused of brahmahatya and
asked to go into exile. He then showed that head of the asura could
still speak and tried to absolve himself of the accusation. The head was
then taken to the inner chambers to entertain shAtavAhana’s women. But
the head of the asura alone was able to regain its power and seize
ana\~Ngavati. Carrying her, the asura flew across the eastern ocean over
the dvIpa-s of suvarNa and finally landed in krau\~nchadvIpa where he
imprisoned her with the help of his brother the asura mAtra. The king’s
court accused shUdraka of having abducted the queen. He vowed to get her
back in two months. Accordingly he performed a great tAntrika ritual to
kAlikA who showed him via the dUradR^iShTi prayoga that the queen was
imprisoned in krau\~nchadvIpa. She asked him to perform another rite of
the jAla-chakra of 64 yogini-s to help he reach the most distant
continent. The yoginI-s pleased by the ritual gave him an invisibility
turban, flying slippers, a magical sword and control over a vetAla, who
would be his assistant. With these accouterments shUdraka flew over the
ocean and the islands and reached krau\~nchadvIpa. There his vetAla was
able to lead him to a dense forest in the midst of which in a stone fort
was imprisoned the queen. He scaled the fort and under the cloak of
invisibility conferred by his turban he reached the asura-s and killed
them after a tough fight with his sword. Then, he flew back with the
queen and returned her to the king. Then she gave birth to a son svAti
and a daughter shakti. After this the shAtavAhana who had ruled justly
till then lost his mind and started seizing and sexually enjoying women
from each of the 4 varNa-s and a dreadful intestinal disease was
spreading through the land. Alarmed at this, the brAhmaNa-s turned to
shUdraka, who had just then returned from his escapade in which he had
gained two wives, one of whom was a mAlavan princess.

shUdraka overthrew shAtavAhana, made his son svAti the king, and cured
the land of the disease \[Some versions say that the brAhmaNa-s invoked
a terrible yoginI of the name karNakumArI in a lump of flour and she
seized shAtavAhana and drowned him in the nAgahrada\]. Then shUdraka
despite his loyalty to the shAtavAhana house was attacked by svAti. In a
great showdown in northern Maharashtra shUdraka bolstered by troops from
beMba, the avanti prince, routed the army of svAti, took him captive and
performed the ashvamedha ritual. He then reinstated svAti as the king
with his own son to watch over him. Some accounts state that finally
shUdraka himself was killed and eaten by a brahma-rAkshasa. Yet others
state that finally at the age of 100 years and 10 days he surrendered
himself to death. The jaina versions state that he would attain
jina-hood in his next birth as he has been enlightened by a jaina
AchArya curiously named kAlika.

**shUdraka as a historical figure**  
The vividness of the shUdraka character suggests to me that beyond doubt
that he was a significant historical figure, who somehow slipped through
the cracks. It is from accounts such as the above we are now left to
piece together his history. At the most basic level we can confidently
reconstruct shUdraka as having been a brAhmaNa minister of a shAtavAhana
king. While he overthrew the rAjan, it appears that in all likelihood he
did not found a dynasty of his own as many accounts mention him as
eventually restoring the kingdom to the son of shAtavahana. This would
imply that we should not expect to find in the paurANic king list and
also that he is unlikely to be found among the successor states of the
shAtavahana-s. Regarding his date two main scenarios present themselves.
In the first option, we make the assumption that, other than the
preface, much of the mR^ichChakaTika was indeed shUdraka’s own work. If
this were the case, then we have the temporal marker of Ishvaradatta
overthrowing the kShatrapa rudrasiMha and also the mention of the nANAka
coin with the image of the Sumerian goddess nAnA, who was syncretized
with the Iranian aredvI sUrA anAhitA. This would place shUdraka after
190 CE. Thus, he could have overlapped with yaj\~na-shAtakarNi or his
immediate successor. It is conceivable that under yaj\~na-shAtakarNi’s
immediate successor the shAtavahana-s declined allowing the takeover of
the kingdom by shUdraka followed by the establishment of puppet rulers.

However, this scenario has a potential problem leading to an alternative
– the successor of the shAtavAhana king is given as being svAti. There
are several svAti-s in the dynasty, but none of them are recorded after
yaj\~na shAtakarNi’s reign. The first of them might have come to the
throne around 57 BCE and the last of them around 86 CE. The last of the
svAti-s was preceded (by a few generations in the purANa-s) by hAla who
is identified with shAlivAhana who is typically the locus of the
shUdraka narratives. He is generally believed to be the shAtavAhana
ruler who tried a naval attack on shrI lankA, the one in whose court the
paishAchI bR^ihatkatha was presented, and the author of the sattAsai.
Hence, he could fit into the role of the legendary king shAlivAhana
whose reign was truncated by shUdraka. A related possibility is
suggested by bANabhaTTa’s record in the harShacharita that shUdraka was
instrumental in the conquest of the chakora province from chandraketu.
We have a short-lived king in the paurANic king lists (e.g. matsya
purANa), in the generations immediately after hAla, named chakora-svAti,
who could well have been named so because he was in possession of the
chakora province. His predecessor, a certain sundara-shAtakarNi whose
reign was also rather short. It is possible that the short reign of
sundara shAtakarNi marks the the period of the rise of shUdraka, his
eventual conquest of the chakora province and finally his return of the
throne to the andhra-s under svati along with the chakora province.
These consideration would place shUdraka earlier in time, approximately
between 50-86 CE. But these proposals would need us to sacrifice the
mR^ichChakaTika as we have it as being shUdraka’s un-redacted work.

My own speculation is that the shAlivAhana legend developed first around
hAla but started accreting material from other shAtavAhana rulers. Thus,
hAla and a svAti down in his lineage were telescoped as father son pair.
In the development of the shAlivAhana legend, hAla provided the
inspiration for a scholarly king encouraging literary activity. His
valiant successor gautamiputra shAtakarNi supplied the image of a
valiant shAtavAhana who took the andhra-s to great heights. The image of
the criminally sexual king appears to have been transferred from an
earlier shAtavahAna ruler kuntala-svAti who is mentioned in the
kAmasUtra as killing his wife with scissors during his violent sexual
activities. Finally, it conceivable that the historical shUdraka emerged
to crush but not displace the andhra-s after the reign of yaj\~na
shAtakarNi. As a result he was then superimposed onto the shAlivAhana
legend that was amalgamated from various earlier shAtavAhana monarchs.
However, I find it equally likely that he was earlier and associated
with the apparent dip in the shAtavAhana regimes following hAla. Given
the evidence for multiple recensions of the chArudatta play, I will not
be surprised if the extant mR^ichChakaTika is a redaction of shUdraka’
version that happened about a century after him.

**Appendix: shUdraka and the thiefs**  
The mR^ichaChakaTika is invaluable in being one of the few surviving
sources of the mysterious shAstra that is said to have been revealed by
kumAra for the benefit of chora-s and taskara-s. In chapter 3 of the
play the brAhmaNa thief sharvilaka is shown citing several usages from
this shAstra. He sights some dirt thrown up by a gnawing rodent and
calls it a portent of success for the sons of skanda, i.e. thieves. He
then goes on to cite various precepts of that had been taught by skanda
regarding how a wall must be breached during a burglary. Importantly,
during the process he applies a magical invisibility ointment and utters
a mantra to kumAra. This mantra is a version of the same found in the
extremely rare ShaNmukha-kalpa, one of the earliest surviving kaumAra
tantras:  
namo varadAya kumAra-kArttikeyAya | namaH kanaka-shaktaye brahmaNyadevA
devavratAya | namo bhAskara-nandine | namo yogAchAryAya yasyAhaM
prathamaH shiShyaH | tena cha partituShTena yoga-rochanA me dattA |  
Then applying the ointment he utters:  
anayA hi samAlabdhaM na mAM drakShyanti rakShiNaH |  
shastraM cha patitaM gAtre rujaM notpAdayiShyati ||  
Then again before entering through the breach he utters “namaH
kArttikeyAya |”.  
The parallels with the ShaNmukha-kalpa found in this play, along with
the several mantra-archaisms of former text itself, suggest that this
kaumAra tantra was likely in place before around 200 CE. This is further
indirect evidence for our proposal that key elements of the shaiva
mantra mArga had their origins in the archaic kaumAra tantra-s whose
knowledge considerably declined thereafter.

In this context we might note some curious incidents regarding
shUdraka’s life narrated by daNDin. While shUdraka was trying to enter
the palace of the princess vinayavatI, he was caught by the men of the
king of mAlava. While he escaped and succeeded in eloping with her
initially, the mAlava rAjan captured his daughter and took her back,
leaving shUdraka to wander in the forests of the Satpura mountains. Here
he was captured by dacoits and taken to their lair. There he greatly
enamored the dacoit chief’s daughter AryadAsI, who selflessly released
him from their clutches. Then he tried to enter mAlava again when he was
captured by the men of the rAjan as a dacoit and was to be sentenced to
death for various crimes. At this point vinayavatI saves him and the two
escape and get married. The intimate knowledge of the chaurya-shAstra
and the character of the peculiar saMskR^ita speaking brahminical thief
suggests that indeed there might be some historicity to the narrative of
daNDin. It is likely that these elements come from shUdraka’s own
version of the play and were related to his time spent with the dacoits.

……………….  
Footnote 1: There is a suggestion that shUdraka has been mentioned in
the vulgate skanda purANa 1.2.40.249. Based on the dynastic list his age
is specified as kali 3290 \~ 188 CE. This reference is unfortunately
somewhat uncertain because the name shUdraka is not reliably preserved
across the manuscripts or recensions. In any case the date is
tantalizing, given his identification by former historians with an
AbhIra king. However, it should be stressed that the SkP text is very
clear in calling him an andhra/andhra-bhR^itya.

Footnote 2: Hindu literary tradition, like the accounts of daNDin and
abhinavagupta, present subandhu as living in the court of bindusAra the
son of chandragupta maurya. subandhu is said to have been captured by
bindusAra in course of his campaigns, but captivated by his work,
vAsavadattA, bindusAra released him and made him his minister. This is
supported by the legend recorded in certain colophons of the vAsavadattA
that subandhu was the nephew of vararuchi through his sister. Tradition
tends to hold vararuchi as being in nanda/chandragupta maurya’s court.
Finally, the ma\~njushriya mUlakalpa states that while ‘vi’ was the
brAhmaNa adviser of chandragupta ‘su’ was the adviser of bindusAra –
viShNugupta chANakya and subandhu. This fits well with the mention of
chANakya and subandhu together in the mR^ichChakaTika. This raises the
possibility that works of previous authors like subandhu might have
indeed been redacted or reworked giving artificially latter dates. A
similar process could have happened for the mR^ichChakaTika too.

Footnote 3: pR^ithividhara (an AchArya of the shaMkara maTha), the
famous commentator on the mR^ichChakaTika, opines that shUdraka was a
kShatriya. However, this characterization is a faulty interpretation of
the preface that goes counter to all the other testimonies regarding
shUdraka (see above). The name shUdraka appears to have been taken as an
ironic screen name, keeping well with his sense of humor displayed in
the mR^ichChakaTika (note saMsthAnaka’s “murder” of the bhArata and the
rAmAyaNa). Indeed daNDin reveals his real name to be indrANigupta. This
also rules out the speculation that shUdraka was an AbhIra shUdra.

Footnote 4: This incident might be compared to a similar incident in the
origin story of the kadaMba dynasty, wherein the brAhmaNa mayUrasharman
of kA\~nchipuraM raised an army to defeat the pallava-s after he had
been roughly manhandled by pallavan cavalrymen.
