---
title: PRAYER

---
<div>

[←](../lectures_and_discourses/one_existence_appearing_as_many.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm)
/ [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_philosophy_of_ishwara.htm)

  

CHAPTER I

## PRAYER

स तन्मयो ह्यमृत ईशसंस्थो ज्ञः सर्वगो भुवनस्यास्य गोप्ता।  
य ईशेऽस्य जगतो नित्यमेव नान्यो हेतुर्विद्यत ईशनाय॥  
यो ब्रह्माणं विदधाति पूर्व यो वै वेदांश्च प्रहिणोति तस्मै।  
तं ह देवं आत्मबुध्दिप्रकाशं मुमुक्षुर्वै शरणमहं प्रपद्ये॥

"He is the Soul of the Universe; He is Immortal; His is the Rulership;
He is the All-knowing, the All-pervading, the Protector of the Universe,
the Eternal Ruler. None else is there efficient to govern the world
eternally. He who at the beginning of creation projected Brahmâ (i.e.
the universal consciousness), and who delivered the Vedas unto him —
seeking liberation I go for refuge unto that effulgent One, whose light
turns the understanding towards the Âtman."

Shvetâshvatara-Upanishad, VI. 17-18.

DEFINITION OF BHAKTI

Bhakti-Yoga is a real, genuine search after the Lord, a search
beginning, continuing, and ending in love. One single moment of the
madness of extreme love to God brings us eternal freedom. "Bhakti", says
Nârada in his explanation of the Bhakti-aphorisms, "is intense love to
God"; "When a man gets it, he loves all, hates none; he becomes
satisfied for ever"; "This love cannot be reduced to any earthly
benefit", because so long as worldly desires last, that kind of love
does not come; "Bhakti is greater than karma, greater than Yoga, because
these are intended for an object in view, while Bhakti is its own
fruition, its own means and its own end."

Bhakti has been the one constant theme of our sages. Apart from the
special writers on Bhakti, such as Shândilya or Narada, the great
commentators on the *Vyâsa-Sutras*, evidently advocates of knowledge
(Jnâna), have also something very suggestive to say about love. Even
when the commentator is anxious to explain many, if not all, of the
texts so as to make them import a sort of dry knowledge, the *Sutras*,
in the chapter on worship especially, do not lend themselves to be
easily manipulated in that fashion.

There is not really so much difference between knowledge (Jnana) and
love (Bhakti) as people sometimes imagine. We shall see, as we go on,
that in the end they converge and meet at the same point. So also is it
with Râja-Yoga, which when pursued as a means to attain liberation, and
not (as unfortunately it frequently becomes in the hands of charlatans
and mystery-mongers) as an instrument to hoodwink the unwary, leads us
also to the same goal.

The one great advantage of Bhakti is that it is the easiest and the most
natural way to reach the great divine end in view; its great
disadvantage is that in its lower forms it oftentimes degenerates into
hideous fanaticism. The fanatical crew in Hinduism, or Mohammedanism, or
Christianity, have always been almost exclusively recruited from these
worshippers on the lower planes of Bhakti. That singleness of attachment
(Nishthâ) to a loved object, without which no genuine love can grow, is
very often also the cause of the denunciation of everything else. All
the weak and undeveloped minds in every religion or country have only
one way of loving their own ideal, i.e. by hating every other ideal.
Herein is the explanation of why the same man who is so lovingly
attached to his own ideal of God, so devoted to his own ideal of
religion, becomes a howling fanatic as soon as he sees or hears anything
of any other ideal. This kind of love is somewhat like the canine
instinct of guarding the master's property from intrusion; only, the
instinct of the dog is better than the reason of man, for the dog never
mistakes its master for an enemy in whatever dress he may come before
it. Again, the fanatic loses all power of judgment. Personal
considerations are in his case of such absorbing interest that to him it
is no question at all what a man says — whether it is right or wrong;
but the one thing he is always particularly careful to know is who says
it. The same man who is kind, good, honest, and loving to people of his
own opinion, will not hesitate to do the vilest deeds when they are
directed against persons beyond the pale of his own religious
brotherhood.

But this danger exists only in that stage of Bhakti which is called the
*preparatory* (Gauni). When Bhakti has become ripe and has passed into
that form which is called the *supreme* (Parâ), no more is there any
fear of these hideous manifestations of fanaticism; that soul which is
overpowered by this higher form of Bhakti is too near the God of Love to
become an instrument for the diffusion of hatred.

It is not given to all of us to be harmonious in the building up of our
characters in this life: yet we know that that character is of the
noblest type in which all these three — knowledge and love and Yoga —
are harmoniously fused. Three things are necessary for a bird to fly —
the two wings and the tail as a rudder for steering. Jnana (Knowledge)
is the one wing, Bhakti (Love) is the other, and Yoga is the tail that
keeps up the balance. For those who cannot pursue all these three forms
of worship together in harmony and take up, therefore, Bhakti alone as
their way, it is necessary always to remember that forms and
ceremonials, though absolutely necessary for the progressive soul, have
no other value than taking us on to that state in which we feel the most
intense love to God.

There is a little difference in opinion between the teachers of
knowledge and those of love, though both admit the power of Bhakti. The
Jnanis hold Bhakti to be an instrument of liberation, the Bhaktas look
upon it both as the instrument and the thing to be attained. To my mind
this is a distinction without much difference. In fact, Bhakti, when
used as an instrument, really means a lower form of worship, and the
higher form becomes inseparable from the lower form of realisation at a
later stage. Each seems to lay a great stress upon his own peculiar
method of worship, forgetting that with perfect love true knowledge is
bound to come even unsought, and that from perfect knowledge true love
is inseparable.

Bearing this in mind let us try to understand what the great Vedantic
commentators have to say on the subject. In explaining the Sutra
Âvrittirasakridupadeshât (Meditation is necessary, that having been
often enjoined.), Bhagavân Shankara says, "Thus people say, 'He is
devoted to the king, he is devoted to the Guru'; they say this of him
who follows his Guru, and does so, having that following as the one end
in view. Similarly they say, 'The loving wife meditates on her loving
husband'; here also a kind of eager and continuous remembrance is
meant." This is devotion according to Shankara.

"Meditation again is a constant remembrance (of the thing meditated
upon) flowing like an unbroken stream of oil poured out from one vessel
to another. When this kind of remembering has been attained (in relation
to God) all bondages break. Thus it is spoken of in the scriptures
regarding constant remembering as a means to liberation. This
remembering again is of the same form as seeing, because it is of the
same meaning as in the passage, 'When He who is far and near is seen,
the bonds of the heart are broken, all doubts vanish, and all effects of
work disappear' He who is near can be seen, but he who is far can only
be remembered. Nevertheless the scripture says that he have to see Him
who is near as well as Him who, is far, thereby indicating to us that
the above kind of *remembering* is as good as *seeing*. This remembrance
when exalted assumes the same form as seeing. . . . Worship is constant
remembering as may be seen from the essential texts of scriptures.
Knowing, which is the same as repeated worship, has been described as
constant remembering. . . . Thus the memory, which has attained to the
height of what is as good as direct perception, is spoken of in the
Shruti as a means of liberation. 'This Atman is not to be reached
through various sciences, nor by intellect, nor by much study of the
Vedas. Whomsoever this Atman desires, by him is the Atman attained, unto
him this Atman discovers Himself.' Here, after saying that mere hearing,
thinking and meditating are not the means of attaining this Atman, it is
said, 'Whom this Atman desires, by him the Atman is attained.' The
extremely beloved is desired; by whomsoever this Atman is extremely
beloved, he becomes the most beloved of the Atman. So that this beloved
may attain the Atman, the Lord Himself helps. For it has been said by
the Lord: 'Those who are constantly attached to Me and worship Me with
love — I give that direction to their will by which they come to Me.'
Therefore it is said that, to whomsoever this remembering, which is of
the same form as direct perception, is very dear, because it is dear to
the Object of such memory perception, he is desired by the Supreme
Atman, by him the Supreme Atman is attained. This constant remembrance
is denoted by the word Bhakti." So says Bhagavân Râmânuja in his
commentary on the Sutra Athâto Brahma-jijnâsâ (Hence follows a
dissertation on Brahman.).

In commenting on the Sutra of Patanjali, Ishvara pranidhânâdvâ, i.e. "Or
by the worship of the Supreme Lord" — Bhoja says, "Pranidhâna is that
sort of Bhakti in which, without seeking results, such as
sense-enjoyments etc., all works are dedicated to that Teacher of
teachers." Bhagavan Vyâsa also, when commenting on the same, defines
Pranidhana as "the form of Bhakti by which the mercy of the Supreme Lord
comes to the Yogi, and blesses him by granting him his desires".
According to Shândilya, "Bhakti is intense love to God." The best
definition is, however, that given by the king of Bhaktas, Prahlâda:

या प्रीतिरविवेकानां विषयेष्वनपायिनी।त्वामनुस्मरतः सा मे
हृदयान्मापसर्पतु॥

"That deathless love which the ignorant have for the fleeting objects of
the senses — as I keep meditating on Thee — may not that love slip away
from my heart!" *Love*! For whom? For the Supreme Lord Ishvara. Love for
any other being, however great cannot be Bhakti; for, as Ramanuja says
in his *Shri Bhâshya*, quoting an ancient Âchârya, i.e. a great teacher:

आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्ताः जगदन्तर्व्यवस्थिताः। प्राणिनः
कर्मजनितसंसारवशवर्तिनः॥  
यतस्ततो न ते ध्याने ध्यानिनामुपकारकाः। अविद्यान्तर्गतास्सर्वे ते हि
संसारगोचराः॥

"From Brahmâ to a clump of grass, all things that live in the world are
slaves of birth and death caused by Karma; therefore they cannot be
helpful as objects of meditation, because they are all in ignorance and
subject to change." In commenting on the word Anurakti used by
Shandilya, the commentator Svapneshvara says that it means Anu, after,
and Rakti, attachment; i.e. the attachment which comes after the
knowledge of the nature and glory of God; else a blind attachment to any
one, e.g. to wife or children, would be Bhakti. We plainly see,
therefore, that Bhakti is a series or succession of mental efforts at
religious realisation beginning with ordinary worship and ending in a
supreme intensity of love for Ishvara.

</div>
