---
title: THE PHILOSOPHY OF ISHVARA

---
<div>

[←](definition_of_bhakti.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](spiritual_realisation_the_aim_of_bhakti-yoga.htm)

  

CHAPTER II

## THE PHILOSOPHY OF ISHVARA

Who is Ishvara? Janmâdyasya yatah — "From whom is the birth,
continuation, and dissolution of the universe," — He is Ishvara — "the
Eternal, the Pure, the Ever-Free, the Almighty, the All-Knowing, the
All-Merciful, the Teacher of all teachers"; and above all, Sa Ishvarah
anirvachaniya-premasvarupah — "He the Lord is, of His own nature,
inexpressible Love." These certainly are the definitions of a Personal
God. Are there then two Gods — the "Not this, not this," the
Sat-chit-ânanda, the Existence-Knowledge-Bliss of the philosopher, and
this God of Love of the Bhakta? No, it is the same Sat-chit-ananda who
is also the God of Love, the impersonal and personal in one. It has
always to be understood that the Personal God worshipped by the Bhakta
is not separate or different from the Brahman. All is Brahman, the One
without a second; only the Brahman, as unity or absolute, is too much of
an abstraction to be loved and worshipped; so the Bhakta chooses the
relative aspect of Brahman, that is, Ishvara, the Supreme Ruler. To use
a simile: Brahman is as the clay or substance out of which an infinite
variety of articles are fashioned. As clay, they are all one; but form
or manifestation differentiates them. Before every one of them was made,
they all existed potentially in the clay, and, of course, they are
identical substantially; but when formed, and so long as the form
remains, they are separate and different; the clay-mouse can never
become a clay-elephant, because, as manifestations, form alone makes
them what they are, though as unformed clay they are all one. Ishvara is
the highest manifestation of the Absolute Reality, or in other words,
the highest possible reading of the Absolute by the human mind. Creation
is eternal, and so also is Ishvara.

In the fourth Pâda of the fourth chapter of his *Sutras*, after stating
the almost infinite power and knowledge which will come to the liberated
soul after the attainment of Moksha, Vyâsa makes the remark, in an
aphorism, that none, however, will get the power of creating, ruling,
and dissolving the universe, because that belongs to God alone. In
explaining the Sutra it is easy for the dualistic commentators to show
how it is ever impossible for a subordinate soul, Jiva, to have the
infinite power and total independence of God. The thorough dualistic
commentator Madhvâchârya deals with this passage in his usual summary
method by quoting a verse from the *Varâha Purâna*.

In explaining this aphorism the commentator Râmânuja says, "This doubt
being raised, whether among the powers of the liberated souls is
included that unique power of the Supreme One, that is, of creation etc.
of the universe and even the Lordship of all, or whether, without that,
the glory of the liberated consists only in the direct perception of the
Supreme One, we get as an argument the following: It is reasonable that
the liberated get the Lordship of the universe, because the scriptures
say, 'He attains to extreme sameness with the Supreme One and all his
desires are realised.' Now extreme sameness and realisation of all
desires cannot be attained without the unique power of the Supreme Lord,
namely, that of governing the universe. Therefore, to attain the
realisation of all desires and the extreme sameness with the Supreme, we
must all admit that the liberated get the power of ruling the whole
universe. To this we reply, that the liberated get all the powers except
that of ruling the universe. Ruling the universe is guiding the form and
the life and the desires of all the sentient and the non-sentient
beings. The liberated ones from whom all that veils His true nature has
been removed, only enjoy the unobstructed perception of the Brahman, but
do not possess the power of ruling the universe. This is proved from the
scriptural text, "From whom all these things are born, by which all that
are born live, unto whom they, departing, return — ask about it. That is
Brahman.' If this quality of ruling the universe be a quality common
even to the liberated then this text would not apply as a definition of
Brahman defining Him through His rulership of the universe. The uncommon
attributes alone define a thing; therefore in texts like — 'My beloved
boy, alone, in the beginning there existed the One without a second.
That saw and felt, "I will give birth to the many." That projected
heat.' — 'Brahman indeed alone existed in the beginning. That One
evolved. That projected a blessed form, the Kshatra. All these gods are
Kshatras: Varuna, Soma, Rudra, Parjanya, Yama, Mrityu, Ishâna.' — 'Atman
indeed existed alone in the beginning; nothing else vibrated; He thought
of projecting the world; He projected the world after.' — 'Alone
Nârâyana existed; neither Brahmâ, nor Ishana, nor the Dyâvâ-Prithivi,
nor the stars, nor water, nor fire, nor Soma, nor the sun. He did not
take pleasure alone. He after His meditation had one daughter, the ten
organs, etc.' — and in others as, 'Who living in the earth is separate
from the earth, who living in the Atman, etc.' — the Shrutis speak of
the Supreme One as the subject of the work of ruling the universe. . . .
Nor in these descriptions of the ruling of the universe is there any
position for the liberated soul, by which such a soul may have the
ruling of the universe ascribed to it."

In explaining the next Sutra, Ramanuja says, "If you say it is not so,
because there are direct texts in the Vedas in evidence to the contrary,
these texts refer to the glory of the liberated in the spheres of the
subordinate deities." This also is an easy solution of the difficulty.
Although the system of Ramanuja admits the unity of the total, within
that totality of existence there are, according to him, eternal
differences. Therefore, for all practical purposes, this system also
being dualistic, it was easy for Ramanuja to keep the distinction
between the personal soul and the Personal God very clear.

We shall now try to understand what the great representative of the
Advaita School has to say on the point. We shall see how the Advaita
system maintains all the hopes and aspirations of the dualist intact,
and at the same time propounds its own solution of the problem in
consonance with the high destiny of divine humanity. Those who aspire to
retain their individual mind even after liberation and to remain
distinct will have ample opportunity of realising their aspirations and
enjoying the blessing of the qualified Brahman. These are they who have
been spoken of in the *Bhâgavata Purâna* thus: "O king, such are the,
glorious qualities of the Lord that the sages whose only pleasure is in
the Self, and from whom all fetters have fallen off, even they love the
Omnipresent with the love that is for love's sake." These are they who
are spoken of by the Sânkhyas as getting merged in nature in this cycle,
so that, after attaining perfection, they may come out in the next as
lords of world-systems. But none of these ever becomes equal to God
(Ishvara). Those who attain to that state where there is neither
creation, nor created, nor creator, where there is neither knower, nor
knowable, nor knowledge, where there is neither *I*, nor *thou*, nor
*he*, where there is neither subject, nor object, nor relation, "there,
who is seen by whom?" — such persons have gone beyond everything to
"where words cannot go nor mind", gone to that which the Shrutis declare
as "Not this, not this"; but for those who cannot, or will not reach
this state, there will inevitably remain the triune vision of the one
undifferentiated Brahman as nature, soul, and the interpenetrating
sustainer of both — Ishvara. So, when Prahlâda forgot himself, he found
neither the universe nor its cause; all was to him one Infinite,
undifferentiated by name and form; but as soon as he remembered that he
was Prahlada, there was the universe before him and with it the Lord of
the universe — "the Repository of an infinite number of blessed
qualities". So it was with the blessed Gopis. So long as they had lost
sense of their own personal identity and individuality, they were all
Krishnas, and when they began again to think of Him as the One to be
worshipped, then they were Gopis again, and immediately

तासामाविरभूच्छौरिः स्मयमानमुखाम्बुजः।  
पीताम्बरधरः स्त्रग्वी साक्षान्मन्मथमन्मथः॥

(*Bhagavata*) — "Unto them appeared Krishna with a smile on His lotus
face, clad in yellow robes and having garlands on, the embodied
conqueror (in beauty) of the god of love."

Now to go back to our Acharya Shankara: "Those", he says, "who by
worshipping the qualified Brahman attain conjunction with the Supreme
Ruler, preserving their own mind — is their glory limited or unlimited?
This doubt arising, we get as an argument: Their glory should be
unlimited because of the scriptural texts, 'They attain their own
kingdom', 'To him all the gods offer worship', 'Their desires are
fulfilled in all the worlds'. As an answer to this, Vyasa writes,
'Without the power of ruling the universe.' Barring the power of
creation etc. of the universe, the other powers such as Animâ etc. are
acquired by the liberated. As to ruling the universe, that belongs to
the eternally perfect Ishvara. Why? Because He is the subject of all the
scriptural texts as regards creation etc., and the liberated souls are
not mentioned therein in any connection whatsoever. The Supreme Lord
indeed is alone engaged in ruling the universe. The texts as to creation
etc. all point to Him. Besides, there is given the adjective
'ever-perfect'. Also the scriptures say that the powers Anima etc. of
the others are from the search after and the worship of God. Therefore
they have no place in the ruling of the universe. Again, on account of
their possessing their own minds, it is possible that their wills may
differ, and that, whilst one desires creation, another may desire
destruction. The only way of avoiding this conflict is to make all wills
subordinate to some one will. Therefore the conclusion is that the wills
of the lib erated are dependent on the will of the Supreme Ruler."

Bhakti, then, can be directed towards Brahman, only in His personal
aspect. क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् — "The way is more
difficult for those whose mind is attached to the Absolute!" Bhakti has
to float on smoothly with the current of our nature. True it is that we
cannot have; any idea of the Brahman which is not anthropomorphic, but
is it not equally true of everything we know? The greatest psychologist
the world has ever known, Bhagavan Kapila, demonstrated ages ago that
human consciousness is one of the elements in the make-up of all the
objects of our perception and conception, internal as well as external.
Beginning with our bodies and going up to Ishvara, we may see that every
object of our perception is this consciousness plus something else,
whatever that may be; and this unavoidable mixture is what we ordinarily
think of as reality. Indeed it is, and ever will be, all of the reality
that is possible for the human mind to know. Therefore to say that
Ishvara is unreal, because He is anthropomorphic, is sheer nonsense. It
sounds very much like the occidentals squabble on idealism and realism,
which fearful-looking quarrel has for its foundation a mere play on the
word "real". The idea of Ishvara covers all the ground ever denoted and
connoted by the word real, and Ishvara is as real as anything else in
the universe; and after all, the word real means nothing more than what
has now been pointed out. Such is our philosophical conception of
Ishvara.

</div>
