---
title: WORSHIP OF SUBSTITUTES AND IMAGES

---
<div>

[←](the_mantra_om_word_and_wisdom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_chosen_ideal.htm)

  

CHAPTER VIII

## WORSHIP OF SUBSTITUTES AND IMAGES

The next points to be considered are the worship of Pratikas or of
things more or less satisfactory as substitutes for God, and the worship
of Pratimâs or images. What is the worship of God through a Pratika? It
is अब्रह्मणि ब्रह्मदृष्ट्याऽनुसन्धानम् — Joining the mind with devotion
to that which is not Brahman, taking it to be Brahman" — says Bhagavân
Râmânuja. "Worship the mind as Brahman this is internal; and the Âkâsha
as Brahman, this is with regard to the Devas", says Shankara. The mind
is an internal Pratika, the Akasha is an external one, and both have to
be worshipped as substitutes of God. He continues, "Similarly — 'the Sun
is Brahman, this is the command', 'He who worships Name as Brahman' — in
all such passages the doubt arises as to the worship of Pratikas." The
word Pratika means going towards; and worshipping a Pratika is
worshipping something as a substitute which is, in some one or more
respects, like Brahman more and more, but is not Brahman. Along with the
Pratikas mentioned in the Shrutis there are various others to be found
in the Purânas and the Tantras. In this kind of Pratika-worship may be
included all the various forms of Pitri-worship and Deva-worship.

Now worshipping Ishvara and Him alone is Bhakti; the worship of anything
else — Deva, or Pitri, or any other being — cannot be Bhakti. The
various kinds of worship of the various Devas are all to be included in
ritualistic Karma, which gives to the worshipper only a particular
result in the form of some celestial enjoyment, but can neither give
rise to Bhakti nor lead to Mukti. One thing, therefore, has to be
carefully borne in mind. If, as it may happen in some cases, the highly
philosophic ideal, the supreme Brahman, is dragged down by
Pratika-worship to the level of the Pratika, and the Pratika itself is
taken to be the Atman of the worshipper or his Antaryâmin (Inner Ruler),
the worshipper gets entirely misled, as no Pratika can really be the
Atman of the worshipper.

But where Brahman Himself is the object of worship, and the Pratika
stands only as a substitute or a suggestion thereof, that is to say,
where, through the Pratika the omnipresent Brahman is worshipped — the
Pratika itself being idealised into the cause of all, Brahman — the
worship is positively beneficial; nay, it is absolutely necessary for
all mankind until they have all got beyond the primary or preparatory
state of the mind in regard to worship. When, therefore, any gods or
other beings are worshipped in and for themselves, such worship is only
a ritualistic Karma; and as a Vidyâ (science) it gives us only the fruit
belonging to that particular Vidya; but when the Devas or any other
beings are looked upon as Brahman and worshipped, the result obtained is
the same as by the worshipping of Ishvara. This explains how, in many
cases, both in the Shrutis and the Smritis, a god, or a sage, or some
other extraordinary being is taken up and lifted, as it were, out of his
own nature and idealised into Brahman, and is then worshipped. Says the
Advaitin, "Is not everything Brahman when the name and the form have
been removed from it?" "Is not He, the Lord, the innermost Self of every
one?" says the Vishishtâdvaitin. फलम् आदित्याद्युपासनेषु ब्रह्मैव
दास्यति सर्वाध्यक्षत्वात् — "The fruition of even the worship of Adityas
etc. Brahman Himself bestows, because He is the Ruler of all." Says
Shankara in his *Brahma-Sutra-Bhâsya* — ईदृशं चात्र ब्रह्मण उपास्यत्वं
यतः प्रतीकेषु तत्दृष्ट्याध्यारोपणं प्रतिमादिषु इव विष्ण्वादीनाम्। "Here
in this way does Brahman become the object of worship, because He, as
Brahman, is superimposed on the Pratikas, just as Vishnu etc. are
superimposed upon images etc."

The same ideas apply to the worship of the Pratimas as to that of the
Pratikas; that is to say, if the image stands for a god or a saint, the
worship is not the result of Bhakti, and does not lead lo liberation;
but if it stands for the one God, the worship thereof will bring both
Bhakti and Mukti. Of the principal religions of the world we see
Vedantism, Buddhism, and certain forms of Christianity freely using
images; only two religions, Mohammedanism and Protestantism, refuse such
help. Yet the Mohammedans use the grave of their saints and martyrs
almost in the place of images; and the Protestants, in rejecting all
concrete helps to religion, are drifting away every year farther and
farther from spirituality till at present there is scarcely any
difference between the advanced Protestants and the followers of August
Comte, or agnostics who preach ethics alone. Again, in Christianity and
Mohammedanism whatever exists of image worship is made to fall under
that category in which the Pratika or the Pratima is worshipped in
itself, but not as a "help to the vision" (Drishtisaukaryam) of God;
therefore it is at best only of the nature of ritualistic Karmas and
cannot produce either Bhakti or Mukti. In this form of image-worship,
the allegiance of the soul is given to other things than Ishvara, and,
therefore, such use of images, or graves, or temples, or tombs, is real
idolatry; it is in itself neither sinful nor wicked — it is a rite — a
Karma, and worshippers must and will get the fruit thereof.

</div>
