---
title: THE METHOD AND THE MEANS

---
<div>

[←](the_chosen_ideal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Bhakti-Yoga](bhakti-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](../para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion/the_preparatory_renunciation.htm)

  

CHAPTER X

## THE METHOD AND THE MEANS

In regard to the method and the means of Bhakti-Yoga we read in the
commentary of Bhagavan Ramanuja on the *Vedanta-Sutras*: "The attaining
of That comes through discrimination, controlling the passions,
practice, sacrificial work, purity, strength, and suppression of
excessive joy." Viveka or discrimination is, according to Ramanuja,
discriminating, among other things, the pure food from the impure.
According to him, food becomes impure from three causes: (1) by the
nature of the food itself, as in the case of garlic etc.; (2) owing to
its coming from wicked and accursed persons; and (3) from physical
impurities, such as dirt, or hair, etc. The Shrutis say, When the food
is pure, the Sattva element gets purified, and the memory becomes
unwavering", and Ramanuja quotes this from the Chhândogya Upanishad.

The question of food has always been one of the most vital with the
Bhaktas. Apart from the extravagance into which some of the Bhakti sects
have run, there is a great truth underlying this question of food. We
must remember that, according to the Sankhya philosophy, the Sattva,
Rajas, and Tamas, which in the state of homogeneous equilibrium form the
Prakriti, and in the heterogeneous disturbed condition form the universe
— are both the substance and the quality of Prakriti. As such they are
the materials out of which every human form has been manufactured, and
the predominance of the Sattva material is what is absolutely necessary
for spiritual development. The materials which we receive through our
food into our body-structure go a great way to determine our mental
constitution; therefore the food we eat has to be particularly taken
care of. However, in this matter, as in others, the fanaticism into
which the disciples invariably fall is not to be laid at the door of the
masters.

And this discrimination of food is, after all, of secondary importance.
The very same passage quoted above is explained by Shankara in his
Bhâshya on the Upanishads in a different way by giving an entirely
different meaning to the word Âhâra, translated generally as food.
According to him, "That which is gathered in is Ahara. The knowledge of
the sensations, such as sound etc., is gathered in for the enjoyment of
the enjoyer (self); the purification of the knowledge which gathers in
the perception of the senses is the purifying of the food (Ahara). The
word 'purification-of-food' means the acquiring of the knowledge of
sensations untouched by the defects of attachment, aversion, and
delusion; such is the meaning. Therefore such knowledge or Ahara being
purified, the Sattva material of the possessor it — the internal organ —
will become purified, and the Sattva being purified, an unbroken memory
of the Infinite One, who has been known in His real nature from
scriptures, will result."

These two explanations are apparently conflicting, yet both are true and
necessary. The manipulating and controlling of what may be called the
finer body, viz the mood, are no doubt higher functions than the
controlling of the grosser body of flesh. But the control of the grosser
is absolutely necessary to enable one to arrive at the control of the
finer. The beginner, therefore, must pay particular attention to all
such dietetic rules as have come down from the line of his accredited
teachers; but the extravagant, meaningless fanaticism, which has driven
religion entirely to the kitchen, as may be noticed in the case of many
of our sects, without any hope of the noble truth of that religion ever
coming out to the sunlight of spirituality, is a peculiar sort of pure
and simple materialism. It is neither Jnâna, nor Bhakti, nor Karma; it
is a special kind of lunacy, and those who pin their souls to it are
more likely to go to lunatic asylums than to Brahmaloka. So it stands to
reason that discrimination in the choice of food is necessary for the
attainment of this higher state of mental composition which cannot be
easily obtained otherwise.

Controlling the passions is the next thing to be attended to. To
restrain the Indriyas (organs) from going towards the objects of the
senses, to control them and bring them under the guidance of the will,
is the very central virtue in religious culture. Then comes the practice
of self-restraint and self-denial. All the immense possibilities of
divine realisation in the soul cannot get actualised without struggle
and without such practice on the part of the aspiring devotee. "The mind
must always think of the Lord." It is very hard at first to compel the
mind to think of the Lord always, but with every new effort the power to
do so grows stronger in us. "By practice, O son of Kunti, and by
non-attachment is it attained", says Shri Krishna in the Gita. And then
as to sacrificial work, it is understood that the five great sacrificed
(To gods, sages, manes, guests, and all creatures.) (Panchamahâyajna)
have to be performed as usual.

Purity is absolutely the basic work, the bed-rock upon which the whole
Bhakti-building rests. Cleansing the external body and discriminating
the food are both easy, but without internal cleanliness and purity,
these external observances are of no value whatsoever. In the list of
qualities conducive to purity, as given by Ramanuja, there are
enumerated, Satya, truthfulness; Ârjava, sincerity; Dayâ, doing good to
others without any gain to one's self; Ahimsâ, not injuring others by
thought, word, or deed; Anabhidhyâ, not coveting others' goods, not
thinking vain thoughts, and not brooding over injuries received from
another. In this list, the one idea that deserves special notice is
Ahimsa, non-injury to others. This duty of non-injury is, so to speak,
obligatory on us in relation to all beings. As with some, it does not
simply mean the non-injuring of human beings and mercilessness towards
the lower animals; nor, as with some others, does it mean the protecting
of cats and dogs and feeding of ants with sugar — with liberty to injure
brother-man in every horrible way! It is remarkable that almost every
good idea in this world can be carried to a disgusting extreme. A good
practice carried to an extreme and worked in accordance with the letter
of the law becomes a positive evil. The stinking monks of certain
religious sects, who do not bathe lest the vermin on their bodies should
be killed, never think of the discomfort and disease they bring to their
fellow human beings. They do not, however, belong to the religion of the
Vedas!

The test of Ahimsa is absence of jealousy. Any man may do a good deed or
make a good gift on the spur of the moment or under the pressure of some
superstition or priestcraft; but the real lover of mankind is he who is
jealous of none. The so-called great men of the world may all be seen to
become jealous of each other for a small name, for a little fame, and
for a few bits of gold. So long as this jealousy exists in a heart, it
is far away from the perfection of Ahimsa. The cow does not eat meat,
nor does the sheep. Are they great Yogis, great non-injurers
(Ahimsakas)? Any fool may abstain from eating this or that; surely that
gives him no more distinction than to herbivorous animals. The man who
will mercilessly cheat widows and orphans and do the vilest deeds for
money is worse than any brute even if he lives entirely on grass. The
man whose heart never cherishes even the thought of injury to any one,
who rejoices at the prosperity of even his greatest enemy, that man is
the Bhakta, he is the Yogi, he is the Guru of all, even though he lives
every day of his life on the flesh of swine. Therefore we must always
remember that external practices have value only as helps to develop
internal purity. It is better to have internal purity alone when minute
attention to external observances is not practicable. But woe unto the
man and woe unto the nation that forgets the real, internal, spiritual
essentials of religion and mechanically clutches with death-like grasp
at all external forms and never lets them go. The forms have value only
so far as they are expressions of the life within. If they have ceased
to express life, crush them out without mercy.

The next means to the attainment of Bhakti-Yoga is strength (Anavasâda).
"This Atman is not to be attained by the weak", says the Shruti. Both
physical weakness and mental weakness are meant here. "The strong, the
hardy" are the only fit students. What can puny, little, decrepit things
do? They will break to pieces whenever the mysterious forces of the body
and mind are even slightly awakened by the practice of any of the Yogas.
It is "the young, the healthy, the strong" that can score success.
Physical strength, therefore, is absolutely necessary. It is the strong
body alone that can bear the shock of reaction resulting from the
attempt to control the organs. He who wants to become a Bhakta must be
strong, must be healthy. When the miserably weak attempt any of the
Yogas, they are likely to get some incurable malady, or they weaken
their minds. Voluntarily weakening the body is really no prescription
for spiritual enlightenment.

The mentally weak also cannot succeed in attaining the Atman. The person
who aspires to be a Bhakta must be cheerful. In the Western world the
idea of a religious man is that he never smiles, that a dark cloud must
always hang over his face, which, again, must be long drawn with the
jaws almost collapsed. People with emaciated bodies and long faces are
fit subjects for the physician, they are not Yogis. It is the cheerful
mind that is persevering. It is the strong mind that hews its way
through a thousand difficulties. And this, the hardest task of all, the
cutting of our way out of the net of Maya, is the work reserved only for
giant wills.

Yet at the same time excessive mirth should be avoided (Anuddharsha).
Excessive mirth makes us unfit for serious thought. It also fritters
away the energies of the mind in vain. The stronger the will, the less
the yielding to the sway of the emotions. Excessive hilarity is quite as
objectionable as too much of sad seriousness, and all religious
realisation is possible only when the mind is in a steady, peaceful
condition of harmonious equilibrium.

It is thus that one may begin to learn how to love the Lord.

</div>
