+++
title = "kautukasaMgha"

+++
The train ground to a stop and we stepped out into the cold silence
swathed in armor saying “kambalvantaM na bAdhate shItam”. None could
recognize us beneath our armor. Since our mind was conditioned to see S
we did not notice M though he passed us a couple of times in the
entirely empty station. Finally, we realized that there was something
unusual in seeing M, where he was not supposed to be, and stepped
forward to greet him almost startling the ghost out of him. He said S
had asked him to pick us up as she was still unable to achieve her
objectives in sUpakala. When we reached there and our eyes adjusted to
the light we were surprised to see CA and RC in the saMgha. S remarked:
“If only we had ST around how these struggles in the sUpagR^iha would
have literally melted away. All we seem to achieving look like the
legendary balls made large by Bhajji in that well known spoof”. We
agreed: “We wish those for the Hindu politicians”. And then wondered
aloud: “ST could have well come; for after all ekanetra is lost in the
saMbhoga of his abhisArikA like gaurivIti in the realm of the asura-s.
By the way how did you manage to assemble this impressive saMgha ?” S:
“I decided we should make it a point to keep out boring people so that
we can have all the fun as we want.” RC: “Wow that sounds elitist :-)”.
S: “You know, let the rest of the Hindus enjoy Bollywood or Hollywood or
what ever the secular nonsense they want to do. We ensconce ourselves
from the rest in our guhyasamAja”. R interjected: “But let’s have the
music anyhow; who knows what thoughts it might inspire of distant times
and places”. We: “So what were you up to in the guhyasamAja?” R:
“Certainly we spent a while on Megaphragma’ neurons. I have closely
observed some of the smallest of their ilk in the Indian species
described by the great but forgotten B.R. Subba Rao in the 1960s.
Apparently they were first discovered before that the intrepid
Ramakrishna Ayyar in the 1930s, but apparently he did not describe them
fully.” We: “Ramakrishna Ayyar had suggested an interesting three way
biotic association between cattle, dipterans and the wasp Bembex lunata.
I recall you were revisiting it – where you able to to confirm it?”. R:
“Certainly, they seem to be statistically significantly more frequent
in the vicinity of cattle than elsewhere. However, I could not get a
general count for all the biting flies in our observing grounds due to
the updrava of the dasyu-s.”

S asked us of our ontology for dharma. We course had to cite kaNAda:
dharma-visheSha-prasUtAd dravya-guNa-karma-sAmAnya-visheSha-samavAyAnAM
padArthAnAM sAdharmya-vaidharmAbhyAM tattvaj\~nAnAn niHshreyasam ||

S pointed to a translation of this by Matilal: “The ‘supreme good’ (i.e.
niHshreyasa) is achieved through the knowledge of reality resulting from
a special merit arrived at through the inductive method of agreement and
difference of properties of the six categories, namely, substance,
quality, action, generality, particularity and inherence.”

We would say that this is a pretty good approximation of what kaNAda
conveys in his sUtra; of course kaNAda had earlier pointed out that:
“dharma is that which brings about upliftment in life (abhyudaya) and
the supreme good (niHshreyasa).” This might be contrasted with the view
of the mImAmsa sUtra-s, which define dharma as that which is denoted as
the object or the supreme good by vaidika injunctions. Thus, in the
vaisheShika the arrow runs from the dharma to the veda – the veda is an
authority because the saMhitA-s teach dharma rather than the other way
around. This point apart, after some explanation, it became clear that
for all of us in the room the sUtra, which we cited in full above is
what largely jibes with our thinking.  
S: “So the vaisheShika you advocate is in its direction somewhat
different from the course it took over the ages. Probably in large part
influenced by the attacks of the bauddha-s, advaitin-s and the
philosophical facets of sAMkhya. You would advocate a more
science-centric vaisheShika.”

We: “Yes. The path of vaisheShika that we take is a continuation of the
tradition that expresses itself in the medical saMhitA of charaka. A
practical application of the theories of vaisheShika to understand
nature. It also incorporates the scientific side of sAMkhya, which does
not entirely conflict with vaisheShika, i.e. the portions that are
downstream of sAMkhyan paramANu-vAda. At the end of the day we have
always held out for navya-darshana that might incorporate certain
elements of mImAMsa, such as nirIshvara-vAda, along with vaisheShika. In
this particular regard the original vaisheShika of kaNAda was very close
– it was indeed nirIshvara. As per the yukti dIpikA of the
sAMkhyavAdin-s the very idea of Ishvara came into the vaisheShika realm
due the the shaiva-s – since, from an early period vaisheShika was
closely associated with the pAshupata-s and their successors the
saiddhAntika-s.”

CP: “So would you see the vaisheShika of bhaTTa jayanta as having
already taken this turn, perhaps a negative one. Certainly, it seems so
at least for udayana. But upon your goading I came to study the bhaTTa
more closely and agree that he was certainly more important to Hindu
thought than the status usually accorded to AdishaMkara in this regard.
But looking at his discussion of punarjanmavAda the bhaTTa would seem as
bad or worse – in a sense he is making a mess of his otherwise splendid
performance. But may be we can call him as one who clearly defined
Hindudom”

We: “bhaTTa jayanta has his issues, especially his need reconcile
Ishvara and punarjanma into the system. However, I must confess my
sympathies for the bhaTTa in particular because he was like us an
atharvaNa-shAkhAdhyAyin and defends the place of the AV with some force.
We agree that he is one of the clearest in the self-definition of the
followers of dharma, defending the the overall place of the tantra-s
beside the original shruti. His work also illustrates how the Astika-s
really viewed the tAthagata-s – a sharp contrast to the spite seen in
say tAranAtha’s history. We may sympathetically interpret his
Ishvara-vAda as just a terminology for the prAdhAna-kAraNa for the
collisions between the particles to initiate the emergence of the
universe. We also tend to look for the many positives in jayanta though
his vaisheShika was already in the path of the “philosophy”-heavy turn
it had taken. For example, we see his position against the anAdi
apauruSheyatva of the shruti as a corrective to mImAmsa. He states that
the value of the veda as shruti is primarily due to it being spoken by
reliable people, the inspired Arya seers, and not due its eternality. He
clarifies that there are texts like the medical saMhitA-s whose validity
rests on experimental results rather than authority. While his
justification of the reliability of the R^iShi-s using inspiration of
prajApati appears facile from our viewpoint, it is not fatal and can be
reinterpretted. It is not that he is entirely bereft of the science of
vaisheShika: after all in explain sound he stresses the point that
kaNAda’s theories present a superior understanding of the natural world
to that of bhaTTa kumArila. He also presents advances to the theory of
sound over that of the mImAmsaka-s by explaining transmission sound
waves through media by initiation of vibrations. Again, ironically in
the section leading to punarjanma and IshvaravAda he gives an account of
the molecular constitution of a living body, like that of humans, and
clarifies that it is no different in the basis of construction from
other material dravya-s.

RC: Are the similarities between mythologies due to monophyly,
convergence, lateral transfer or simply the result of spurious pattern
matching on our part?  
For a hilarious extreme case let us consider the motifs we in the room
tended to see in the English neo-mythology Harry Potter and go back to
that question:  
\-The battle between the snake-guild or snakes (Slytherins) and the
sword-wielding wizards (Gryffindor): the battle between the nAga-s and
the sword-wielding vidyAdhara-s in the bR^ihatkatha tradition, or the
multi-generational battle between the nAga-s and the kuru-s in the frame
story of the bhArata.  
\-Six Weasley brothers of which one dies leaving 5 behind. 6 “karNAdi”
brothers of which five survive.  
\-Of the six Weasleys one is on the side of the enemies: karNa of the 6
karNAdi brothers is on the enemy side.  
\-Two Weasley brothers are twins and specialist wonder workers: Twin
mAdreya-s sons of wonder-working ashvins (purudaMsasa)  
\-One of the twins dies: One of the Dioscuri, Castor is mortal while
Polydeuces is immortal.  
\-Ginny: Transfunctional goddess.  
\-Potter’s Slytherin connection : the nAga as a kauravya-s; iravAn and
the supremely powerful babruvAhana half nAga/half kauravya.  
\-Albus Dumbledore: bhIShma pitAmaha; nAginI: the killer of parIkShit;
Hagrid: ghaTotkacha; Inferni: vetAla-s; horcrux and mahirAvaNa-s
“horcrux”; the sword of Gryffindor: the vidyAdhara’s magical sword and
many more that we are now forgetting.

CP: Surely this comparative mythology stuff sounds like a whole lot of
nonsense ?

Some of us: Yet, why does the motif of the war of the “wizards and
snakes” and so many scattered motifs reappear in an English neo-epic.

CA: There is no statistical test to support this gibberish you all are
getting into\!

We: O CA of pretty smiles taking that statistical line has cause such
delusion to so many in my science. You know what I am talking
about.There are certain problems where statistics can give a positive
answer, but an insignificant result does not always mean lack of
relationship.

R: Talking of all this what happened to your story “mantranAyaka” of
which you had narrated some parts ?

We: Well, when we read the above-named English neomythology at our
mother’s suggestion, we realized that stories should be done by real
writers, even though there is apparently an audience for such stories
and let it pass. At the end of the day even we were inspired the tales
of somadeva, rAjA bhojadeva and padmagupta.

CP and S: You mentioned that bhoja-deva’s work had tilted your opinion
towards the existence of actual mechanical devices in place of wizardry.
What was the story from which you and R derived the airplane for the
script of that play?

We: We were not being too original we were merely imitating the tales of
somadeva, daNDin and (specifically in our case) their Tamil counter
part.

CP: The airplanes often come in the context of the dohada-s of women; I
wonder if in this day and age when there are real airplanes women have
dohada-s of flying.

…  
The story of the aeronauts of kA\~nchIpuraM (vide somadeva, kShemendra
and the Tamil author whose name is lost):  
naravAhanadatta had a dream one night of an extraordinarily beautiful
girl named karpUrikA in the city of karpUrasaMbhava. He with his friend
gomukha set out to meet her. On the way the reached a village which was
known as hemapura. After sometime they realized that hemapura was
entirely a village of speechless robots. The men and women who were
around in the marketplace were all robots moving in a clockwork manner
controlled by an unseen being. Then they went to the central palace of
hemapura, where they saw a single conscious being, who was served like a
king by his robotic servants. In response to naravAhanadatta’s inquiries
he said his name was rAjyadhara and narrated the following story: He
lived in the city of kA\~nchipuraM in the drAviDa country, which was
ruled by the king bAhubala, along with his brother prANadhara. They had
mastered the lore of making robots and machines promulgated by the
dAnava maya and his daughter, the asurI somaprabhA. Of the brothers,
prANadhara was a ladies man and squandered both his and his brothers
wealth on several public women. Having become bankrupt, he made a
yantra, which by means of a wire would introduce two robotic geese into
the treasury and steal jewels with their beaks. The king soon came to
know of this and set up guards to catch the thieves. Seeing the robotic
geese entering the treasury they cut the wire by which it was operated.
Immediately, prANadhara felt the tension sag in his controlling pin and
knew that they would be caught as thieves. So he told rAjyadhara that
they should flee kA\~nchI using the vimAna he had made. But by the time
prANadhara loaded his family into his airplane, there was no space for
rAjyadhara. Nevertheless, prANadhara took off and his plane carried him
800 yojana-s away to a city in northern India. But rAjyadhara had made
his own vAta-yantra-vimAna, which on its first flight took him 200
yojana-s and in a second flight took him another 200 yojana-s placing
him in the middle of some abandoned village. There he made several
robots and populated the village making it the hemapura, where
naravAhanadatta had reached in his quest for karpUrikA. After resting
for a day at hemapura, naravAhanadatta wanted to move ahead, when
rAjyadhara offered him his vimAna to fly him over the coast of west
India to karpUrasaMbhava. On landing there, he and gomukha eventually
located karpUrikA the daughter of the ruler of karpUrasaMbhava and
naravAhanadatta married her. When naravAhanadatta wanted to return he
found that his aircraft was too small. His father-in-law offered to fly
him back by means of the flying saucer (yantra chakra) of his new
engineer. Soon naravAhanadatta realized that this was none other than
prANadhara and took of on his large craft. They first landed in hemapura
where prANadhara gifted his brother some real female companions and then
they headed back to kaushAMbhI. There naravAhanadatta added karpUrikA to
his harem to join ratnaprabhA and madanama\~nchukA. Then prANadhara flew
back to the king of karpUrasaMbhava to inform him that his daughter had
safely reached. Eventually, he went to the kaushAMbhI and settled under
the patronage of naravAhanadatta. There prANadhara is supposed to have
made several planes for him and his wives. Thus, naravAhanadatta is
supposed to enjoyed his aerial journeys as though in preparation for
this ascent to the position of the lord of the wizards, which forms the
next part of his adventures.

M: So now I can see where you guys got the zombie analogy long before
Chalmers.

Thus we returned to the deep speculations on the teachings of the dUtI.
