+++
title = "Squaring of the circle by Srinivasa Ramanujan"

+++
[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-Hwk9xyvIQA0/TvGRx5OZJzI/AAAAAAAACUo/Jkc33wxOAGw/s400/ramanujam.png)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/E5aCuEwBdE6ig15rleHMedMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Geometric constructions have a special effect on us because they depict
visually the Platonic abstractions that often underlie the laws of
nature. So in a sense a construction is a mapping of natural laws on the
canvas of Platonic space. So, to certain minds they are inherently
synesthetic, and allow lesser minds, such as ours, to grapple with
enormously complex formulations when expressed by other modes. We are of
the opinion that the earliest expression of this idea goes back to the
tradition of the yajurveda in which the lakShaNa-s of chiti-s and vedi-s
are layed out. We have our favorites among constructions, which have a
supremely elevating effect: e.g. the trisection of the angle using the
conchoid of Nicomedes; the construction of an ellipse by folding a
circle through a point; the approximations for squaring of a circle. Of
these the squaring of the circle is central to the construction of an
AhavanIya and gArhapatya of equal area and a multiple approximations are
suggested by different yajurvedic traditions. Similar constructions to
these yajurvedic attempts are seen in the Rhind papyrus and the work of
Anaxagoras. Several millennia later the 26 year old Ramanujan supplied
one of the best approximations for the squaring of the circle – the one
shown above. With this he gets a fraction for approximating pi as
355/113 – one which would have made his yajurvedic ancestor proud.

One of the emergent laws of nature concerning rivers states that the
length of course of the river to the distance from its mouth to source
tends to approach pi. This approach comes closer to pi if the substrate
through which the river flows is uniform in composition and topography.
So it might be seen in a sense as a natural law whose Platonic
representation might be shown as the squaring of a circle. At another
level the area of the square is a visualization of pi (since it is a
unit circle and as alluded to in the sulba sUtra-s we apprehend area
more easily as squares). Now, this quantity pi is ever present in
natural laws acting at various levels from deep to shallow: The
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, the inverse square law of force
between electrical charges, the Kepler’s third law or the normal
distribution in statistics. In this regard we might conclude by citing
Eugene Wigner:  
*“There is a story about two friends, who were classmates in high
school, talking about their jobs. One of them became a statistician and
was working on population trends. He showed a reprint to his former
classmate. The reprint started, as usual, with the Gaussian distribution
and the statistician explained to his former classmate the meaning of
the symbols for the actual population, for the average population, and
so on. His classmate was a bit incredulous and was not quite sure
whether the statistician was pulling his leg. “How can you know that?”
was his query. “And what is this symbol here?” “Oh,” said the
statistician, “this is pi.” “What is that?” “The ratio of the
circumference of the circle to its diameter.” “Well, now you are pushing
your joke too far,” said the classmate, “surely the population has
nothing to do with the circumference of the circle.” Naturally, we are
inclined to smile about the simplicity of the classmate’s approach.
Nevertheless, when I heard this story, I had to admit to an eerie
feeling because, surely, the reaction of the classmate betrayed only
plain common sense.”*

But to us the vision of geometric construction, much more than algebra,
brings home the fundamental symmetry in the action of the natural laws
such as the above by linking it to the primary constant of the circle,
which is perfectly symmetric. So at least we would not be so dismayed by
the appearance of pi. Nevertheless, we should remark that when we first
studied the normal distribution and quantum mechanics many years ago in
our youth the appearance of pi respectively in the bell curve and the
uncertainty principle sparked a reaction similar to that of the
character in Wigner’s tale, but in our case it was followed by what
seemed to us a profound philosophical realization.
