+++
title = "Buitreraptor"

+++
[![Posted by
Picasa](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbp.gif)](http://picasa.google.com/blogger/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/400/Buitreraptor.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/640/Buitreraptor.jpg)

The discovery of a remarkably complete dromeosaur from the 90 million
year old Cretaceous beds of Patagonia, Buitreraptor, is bring to fore
many issues that concern the events close to the emergence of birds. As
the only group of dinosaurs that survived the K-T extinction event the
birds have received intense attention. But now it is becoming clear that
most of their well-known adaptations were already present in various
forms in the theropod dinosaurs from which they arose. In the 1990s the
discovery of Rahonavis in Madagascar suggested that it was an early
branching sickle-clawed bird. Around the same time a fragmentary large
dromeosaur, Unenlagia was uncovered in Argentina and was suggested to
have links to Rahonavis. It combined peculiar features of both birds and
dromeosaurs. Then earlier this year
[Neuquenraptor](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/02/neuquenraptor-argentinus-and.html)
was reported suggesting the unambigous presence of a dromeosaurs in the
Southern continents and showed features that linked them with their
sister group the Troodontids into a monophyletic clade the
Deinonychosaurs as proposed by Sereno earlier. Earlier, Rauhut’s group
had reported a few fragmentary dental and pedal elements that had
suggested presence of the dromeosaurs in Sudan, Africa. However, the
discovery of the Buitreraptor reported last week and the accompanying
analysis of this rather complete dromeosaur is dramatic. It suggests
that the “Southern forms” i.e. Rahonavis, Unenlagia, Neuquenraptor and
Buitreraptor, form a monophyletic basal lineage that sets them apart
from the two “Northern clades”, namely the Sinorthinosaurs (the Chinese
forms) and the classic dromeosaurs and velociraptorids forming the other
clade. Importantly, this work suggests that Unenlagia and Neuquenraptor
are probably synonymous, and Unenlagia (based on some unpublished
material of Novas’s new fossils) shares along with Buitreraptor a long
snout that is unusual for a dromeosaur. The authors interpret the
phylogeny to imply that the origin of Dromeosaurs happened in the
Jurassic before the continents drifted apart with the forms diverging in
differnt local continental fragments. However there are other more
interesting subtle variations possible.

More importantly the grouping of Rahonavis with the Unenlagia-like forms
suggests that there were flying dromeosaurs in at least 2 of the clades:
Rahonavis in the basal clade and
[Microraptor](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/02/adaptive-radiation-of-avian-and-para.html)
in the more derived clade. In the sister group of the Dromeosaurs,
Epidendrosaurus , too there is some evidence for aerodynamic abilities.
The birds right from Archaeopteryx and Jeholopteryx have flight
abilities. The simplest interpretation I would imagine for this
distribution of flight related features was that a primitive form of
flight was already developed in the common ancetors of the birds,
dromeosaurs, troodontids and Epidendrosaurus in the least. Thus Gregory
Paul’s idea of a more ancient flying precursor with secondary reversals
to non-flying forms in course of maniraptoran evolution seems to be even
more plausible now. Dial’s incline assisted climbing theory provides a
model by which the early maniraptorans may have evolved the precursors
for aerodynamic abilities.

Finally this raises the possibility that dromeosaurs could have actually
flown from one continent to another during the early days of their
breakup, thus making the geographic point of origin unclear.

[](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/02/neuquenraptor-argentinus-and.html)
