+++
title = "yakShiNi and R^ikShakarNi"

+++
Having been trapped with the ghoraprakR^iti we sought to escape on that
rainy day. After the passage through the kAlaChidras the many paths and
had been sealed and there was a single path winding through naraka. The
old bystanders such as Dom, Vidrum, Damar and Blackie were all faintly
heard from behind an oppressive screen of darkness. Some were crying as
though being tortured by a turushka, others were laughing
uncontrollably, as though they had imbibed bhang, others were yelling as
though they were jostling in kAma. On the sides of the path were rotting
corpses and dermestid beetles making short work of them. There were
skulls and femurs scattered around. There were jackals and hyaenas
yelling out their moans. We kept walking like a pAshupata had shut off
his senses to the surroundings. There we saw a corpse of the most
beautiful lolanayanA and then we passed the carcass of shvetamohinI
which as being consumed by a varAha. Then we saw a crooked stump on
which sat a vetAla which laughed horribly. Shortly after that the great
gandharva vishvAvasu passed our path. He pointed to the crooked stump
and laughed and flew away.

The we saw a slight clearing. There we stopped and saw the aweful
R^ikShakarNi. We invoked her with the mighty mantra and said that blood
was her offering. She was of nightly hue and had four arms. Her hair was
tied up into an erect knot and she had 3 blazing eyes with the ears of a
bear. Her breasts were rising and she caused all kinds of rasas to
tingle the body. Then she extended her palm and from that arose a
yakShiNi. In the embrace of the yakShiNi we flew to the higher realms.
