+++
title = "Royal kumAra worshippers"

+++
The Shunga coins: The late Maurya and Shunga period has the square coins
of the Ujjain series bearing the image of kumAra. They installed some
idols of kumAra in Mathura (175-50 BC).

**The Shakas:** The Shaka king Ayalisha (Azilises-I) has kumAra on his
coin. Another Indianized Shaka mentions construction of a well in the
name of skanda. The exact date of this inscription is unclear: mentioned
as year 201 in some era.

The Kushanas: The kumAra coins, especially Huvishka’s with the legends:
skanda kumAra vishAkha or skanda kumAra mahAsena vishAkha. Constructed
ShaShThi and kumAra temples in Mathura (\~100 AD).  
  
The yaudheya republic of Punjab/Haryana was administered by its leaders
in the name of brAhmaNya deva, kArttikeya. There are many yaudheya coins
with 6 headed kumAra, kumAra and ShaShThi and one headed kumAra
(100-330).

ikShvAkus of Andhra: several kings named after kArttikeya namely
skandashrI, skandasAgara and skanda-vishAkha. One queen is named
ShaShThishrI. Associated with the ikShvAkus were governors who were also
kumAra worshippers. These included: skanda-shItakiraNa of the hiraNyaka
clan, skandagopa of the puShyaskandIya family, senapati kumAra the
commander of the army stationed at maNgalAraNaya. Their inscriptions
states that they were devotees of mahAsena and were able to build a
temple to sharva due to the grace of kArttikeya (270-330 AD).

The nalas of Orissa: The nalas are a little known dynasty with
considerable local power in Orissa ruling from their capital of puShkari
(Near modern day Nawarangpur). In two of their surviving copper plates
from Kesaribeda (rAjA arthapati) and Rithapur (rAjA bhavadatta-varman)
we find the the header describing their line as
“maheshvara-mahAsenAtisR^iShTa rAjya vibhavaH”. Thus they believed
their dynasty had come to power due to the grace of the great god
kArttikeya. One of the kings in the dynasty whose name appears on some
inscriptions is named skandavarman supporting their kaumAra devotion
(300-400 AD).

gupta empire: kumAra and ShaShThi are shown in several gupta coins.
Multiple gupta kings are named kumAragupta (after kumAra) and one
skandagupta (skanda), both the first kumAragupta and skandagupta were
great heroes of the Hindus, who protected India from the Huns. There is
a at least one cave temple of the guptas which contains a giant image of
kArttikeya (320-550 AD).

Pallavas: The names of several pallava kings bear the epithets of
kumAra. Their early major king was skandavarman the performer of many
vedic sacrifices, including the horse sacrifice. His grandson was named
skandashishya who expanded the Pallava domain. Following him there are
many rulers with names like skandavarman and kumAra-viShNu. Another king
nR^isimha- varman rAjasimha of the pallavas compares himself in valor to
kumAra the wielder of the shakti in an inscription in the kailAshanatha
temple in Kanchipuram. A pallava king nandivarman mentions a grant to a
kaumAra Acharya at a temple at Nellore (275-901 AD).

**Kadambas:** This brahminical dynasty arose after an arrogant Pallava
horseman insulted the brahmin scholar mayUrasharman studying at the
university in Kanchi. He took to war against the pallavas and founded
his own kingdom in Maharashtra, Andhra and TN. One of his surviving
inscription states that he was anointed rAjan by ShaDAnana. His or his
successor’s Iranian general shAphara built a kumAra shrine (now lost) in
Gandhara (now in the terrorist state). They took their name after the
holy tree of kumAra and his female gana lohitAyani-the kadamba plant. A
king of this line had the name kumAravarman (345-565 AD).

Chalukyas: The plates of the chAlukyas chartered by kIrtivarman indicate
that kumAra was their patron deity and is said to have provided them
with the boon of founding a long-lived dynasty (Mid-500 AD).
viShNuvardhana I also mentions in an inscription that he was rendered
prosperous by mahAsena who had crushed the dAnavas. There are some
Chalukya gold coins with kumAra icons known from 600s minted by the king
vikramAditya son of pulakeshin II and the famous kumAra temples of
Bezwada, Humkarashankari and Chebrole built by yuddhamalla and other
chAlukyas.

After this period kumAra suddenly goes out of vogue, especially in north
India, and also over the large part of south India, except for the folk
cult in the Dravida country. The early kaumara tantra’s development
corresponds to the period when there were several royal patrons of
kumAra worship. These tantras were largely forgotten and lost there
after. The revival of the technical kaumara srotas in South India
occurred circa 900-1000 ACE when the kaumAra tantrics from Bengal
arrived in Bellary and established the kumAra tapovanas for the worship
of the 6-headed deva.
