+++
title = "The latest Jihad"

+++
We were having a chat with R and her aunt about the recent attacks on
the Indian capital. Are the Hindus going react at least now asked her
aunt. I opined it was unlikely. In the past the west used to ask the
Hindus to show restraint when ever one of their Moslem stooges caused
mayhem in India. When Mumbai was similarly bombed, the US actively
obstructed justice by destroying the evidence collected by the Indian
police. Then, when the Moslems hijacked a plane, attacked the Indian
parliament, attacked a Gujarati temple and slew Hindus in each of these
events, the Indian government hardly did anything and the west asked
them again to show restraint. When the Hindus decided to put the Moslems
in place after their heinous crime in the railway station, the West
blamed the Hindus and turned the whole incident into an event of Hindus
tormenting Moslems. After all Hindus were merely administering the
Moslems a taste of their own pill, especially given that the elected
government did hardly anything to protect Hindus from the Turushkas.

Some theorists like shri Kosla Vepa explain that West is aiming at
creating an alternative power center of Sunnis in the form of the
sub-continental Moslems. In this process they are aiming at killing many
proverbial birds with one stone: 1) Contain the Hindus, because Hindus
are the only real alternative independent system to the Western models
and models Oriental models of East asiatic countries. 2) Weaken the
Hindu cultural hold on Asia. 3) Use the Islamic states as a foothold to
reach China and destroy Russia 4) Use these Moslems as an outlet valve
and counter-balance for the Western activities concerning the Middle
East.

Unfortunately for India, having bitten the bait of Westernization, the
India elite, especially the Hindu women are getting corrupted by Western
model and losing the Hindu ardor that kept them alive. This, I rate as
the biggest problem because it prevents Hindus from reviving their
ardor, the one with which they fought the Moslem and Christian predators
of India in the past. This is evident from the fact that the
undiscerning Hindus have elected to power an Italian Christian ruler for
the country (working via her secular Sikh stooge).
