+++
title = "On The Mytholinguistics Of War [Partxa01]"
date = "November 30, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/11/article.png?w=404)

In many ways, it is not at all a controversial thing to assert that War
is rather fundamental to the Indo-European View of the Universe. One of
the first mythemes that almost everybody tends to identify when they
begin their journey along the skeins of comparative Indo-European
mythography – is that of the ‘Chaoskampf’, the War of the Gods against
the Demons. And we are absolutely not surprised by this, considering the
eminently violent nature of the world of our Ancestors. Which, to be
sure, they were often rather \*actively\* contributing to. Not just the
Bronze Age (or Copper Age) ones, either – but the Iron Age, and indeed,
the Modern Age ones as well. The Information Age is little different,
except for the strength and saliency with which ancient Indo-European
(and, more especially, pointedly, \*Vedic\*) ideas around Knowledge,
Thought, and above all, Speech, as mighty weapons (even capable of
reshaping reality itself) have re-emerged.

But while we often are all too aware of the notion that War is something
that happens within our universe, and is in a certain sense inavoidable
due to the conduct and the caprice of the denizen-dwellers therein …
What we often \*miss\* by viewing both War and the World this way – as
something which happens within the world, and as a place wherein which
war can occur (amidst, presumably, other things also) – is the
\*Immanence\* of War to the Cosmos, in the embedded mytho-linguistic
World-View of the Indo-Europeans.

You may have heard the phrase “Existence is a Struggle” – but to our
Ancestors, this appears to have had quite a wealth (often captured) of
meaning to it beyond the plain, ordinary, and simple manner in which the
modern-ite would presumably take it.

Allow me to demonstrate – utilizing not only the usual rubricae of
linguistics and mythology, but also our somewhat experimental discipline
of ‘mytholinguistics’ \[wherein we augment the directly, scientifically
attestable former field with insights drawn from the latter\] to show
you what I mean.

My thought upon this line was first aroused when looking into the Old
Norse concept of “Orlog”. This is often (mis)understood to simply mean a
man’s fate or destiny; and as we shall see, there is \*indeed\* an
element of it to that … but the \*better\* way to approach the concept,
is via the analysis of its etymology: a combination of earlier words
meaning ‘up/out’ \[carrying the figurative connotation here of
‘supernal’\] and ‘law’ \[also in the sense of ‘precedent’ or ‘how
something unfolds’\]. So here we have an Old Norse term that is quite
strongly cognate in its meanings with how we approach “Rta” in Hinduism,
or Dikaiosune in the Ancient Greek – which should surprise nobody, the
notion of the Divine Order, of Cosmic Law, is quite literally
foundational to the Indo-European mythoreligion and its perception.

And yet, what I have found curious is the semantic shift in its meaning
which has transpired with a surprising degree of uniformity across the
later Germanic languages.

Whether in Dutch (‘Oorlog’), Norwegian or Danish \[‘Orlog’ – and
interestingly, in both cases, often with a Naval emphasis\], Frisian
\[‘Orloach’\], Old English \[‘Orlege’\], or Low German \[‘Orlog’\], what
we find is that this term has come to mean “War”.

Now, it should be noted here that there is a supposition that the
etymological process here as applies the Dutch actually involves a
combination of the ‘Orlog’ we have already met, and another very similar
earlier Germanic phrase \[‘uzlaga’ vs ‘uzleugo’\] in which the latter
particle refers to an oath. I feel that even leaving aside the rather …
curious suggestion that the more recent word would take only the “Or”
portion from “Orlog”, and the “Log” portion from somewhere else, rather
than deriving “Oorlog” from “Orlog” as would seem eminently more
straightforward – the linkage between the Law, the precedency and
unfolding of Order on the one hand, and an Oath, the speaking aloud of
what binds one \*as part of\* and \*through\* the Law , is clearly
apparent. At the very least, it is a doublet of meaning, if not a
figurative demonstration of the ‘fate’ of the oath-bound men to be
thrust into combat. \[I would also have thought the more logical
‘alternative’ origin-point for the ‘Log’ in “Oorlog” would be terms
derived from PIE “Lewg”, as in, Suffering, Mourning, Pain – therefore
connoting “Oorlog” as being what is of and the cause of such things. But
I digress\].

The ‘mytholinguistic’ explanation I have customarily advanced for this
chain of derivation and subtle yet salient shift in semantic
interpolation, is quite a simple one. It is a ‘long-term’ illustration,
via etymology and therefore encoded in the fabric of our communication
and our world(-view and otherwise) that the ‘active expression’ of the
Divine Order within our Universe , and therefore our Fate – the Fate of
All – is … War. It is the precedency value of what has gone before, it
is the unfolding value of the application of that Law to the both
present and future path of the Universe. Something which should, again,
be utterly unsurprising considering what eventually happens at Vigrid,
in the Nordic Eschatology / Ekpyrosis-Prelude , the War At The End Of
Time.

Yet it is rarely good comparative mythography to endeavour to work too
far nor fast from but a single data-point – even if it has crafted unto
itself almost a relative clustered constellation through time and space
about the North Sea area. And it was therefore not the Germanic
mytholinguistics above and aforementioned which seriously crystallized
the concept presently under discussion within the bounds of my mind –
but rather, my happening across by chance of a most curious Sanskrit
term:भूतात्मन् \[‘BhutAtman’\].

Now, this term itself is comprised also of two components. Bhuta, which
is one of those fascinatingly fustrating far-furroughing fields of
meaning so difficult to precisely pin down, has a general connotation of
“Being” \[with which it shares an etymological root\]. And while that
might \*sound\* simple enough, the way it’s used doesn’t just mean
“Being” as we might say in English, but also “Has-Been” … as in “Ghost”
\[‘Bhuta’, as in ‘BhutaGana’\], or “Past”, “Has Happened”, “Become”;
“Being” as in “Existing”, “Real”, “Present”, “True”, “Spirit”; and
indeed “Being” as in “World” – which makes a bit more sense when you
consider it alongside terms like “Bhutala”, meaning “Earth” or “Ground”.
It turns up in more figurative usage also to refer to that which makes
\*up\* ‘Being’ – for example, the Five Elements \[‘PanchaBhuta’\], and
relates to all of ‘Creation’ more generally. As applies where we’re
about to head later with the term, it’s worth mentioning that Shaivite
theonyms such as Bhuteshvara, Bhutanath\[‘Lord/Emperor of the Bhutas’\]
are translated in multiple not entirely coterminous ways dependent upon
context and text – sometimes meaning Lord of the
World/Universe/Existence/Existing, sometimes meaning Lord of (all the)
Elements \[and constituent/component forces of Creation/the Cosmos\],
sometimes meaning Lord of All Beings or Lord of Spirits, and sometimes
meaning Lord of the Ghosts.

‘Atman’, meanwhile, means the ‘soul’ of something – its ‘essence’, its
‘nature’, its ‘character’, its ‘animating force’ \[as in, ‘Breath’\].

So, what do we have when we put these two terms together?

Well, apparently, “War”.

There are a number of ways to interpret how this meaning has been
arrived at. One of which, which we shall be looking at in more expansive
detail in the sequel to this article, hinges around the identification
of “BhutAtman” as a Shaivite ‘quality’ or ‘characteristic’. But we shall
leave that to one side for now.

‘BhutAtman’ is a ‘dvandva’ – a ‘compound’ wherein two words are put
together to convey something through their direct concatenation which
would not be immediately connoted were they parsed merely sequentially
within a sentence. On one level, then, you could approach it as being
‘Matter’ or ‘Material Universe’, and ‘Animating Principle of’,
respectively. The ‘dvandva’, therefore, is putting the two together to
refer to all that is both physically and metaphysically here. However,
there is another interpretation – that putting next to one another such
‘unlike’ things as crude matter and a soul, a metaphysical life-force,
is inexorably going to lead on to ‘conflict’, hence the connotation. But
I do not think that is the best explanation for what is going on here.
\[Perhaps also because, on a subconscious level, I am recollecting that
Purusha & Prakriti in a \*universal\* context … are rather happily
married – quite (mytho)literally; indeed, both Deities \*do\* have a
seriously strong ‘War’ association\] Another attested definition for
the term is something along the lines of ‘the nature of all beings’ –
and \*that\*, I think, is much closer to the mark. Along with another
which has been cited, of ‘the foundational principle’ \[of
being/existence/the universe entire\].

All of these interpretations, as is the case with many a good Sanskrit
phrasing , flow back together into one another; and help to explain the
one-word translation in particular – “War” – which I have elected to
focus upon. “War” as the ‘Animating Force/Principle’ \[‘Atman’\] of the
Universe \[‘Bhuta’\] ; “War” as the ‘Nature/Character/Essence’
\[‘Atman’\] of Beings \[“Bhuta”\] ; “War”, therefore, as the Nature of
the Universe, and the essential spark of life which exists within its
actively-existing denizens – thus helping also to perpetuate it as the
nature of their environs through their actions resulting therefrom.
\[There is a follow-up piece I intend also to write covering the strong
correlation of ‘Anger’ and Breath-of-Life in Indo-European
mytholinguistics (Which goes also, via ‘smoke’, with the ‘burning’ of
life and fury … which can, indeed, burn one out rather faster – the
dose, it seems, may make the poison in some of these cases) – but,
again, I shall hold onto that thought … or be held, seized by it, for
the moment.\]

Now as for why this matters – there are many further things which we
could potentially say here. But I shall attempt to avoid the temptation
to ruminate too broadly upon these in what is supposed to be toward the
terminus of this brief tableau.

It is tempting to look at all of the above, and most especially the more
direct elements to do with warfare within the ‘Vedic’ & ‘Eddic’
denominations in particular, and take what we might perhaps term an
euhemeric view of proceedings. That is to say, making the presumption
that all of this embedded conceptry is simply the reflexive expression
of the nature of the world around our ancestors several thousand years
ago … wherein warfare really \*was\* a constant and viscerally personal
experience for many. Especially due to the habitual pastimes of the
Indo-Europeans right across the Expanse, of seeing the world by turning
up places and setting fire to them \[seriously, as I’ve noted a few
times before, we can literally tell when the Indo-Europeans turn up in
various parts of, say, Anatolia, due to the fine depositional layer of
carbon in settlement-sites … resultant from the previous settlement
having been burned down during the welcoming/raiding party\].

And this is, for what it’s worth, not entirely untrue nor invalid as a
\*partial\* perspective. There are reasons to suspect that some cited
instances of great heroes or even mighty Gods making war upon the
strange-named and strange-looking vaguely anthropomorphic sorts over
yonder with the cattle we’d rather like – may indeed be recollections,
or stylized representations, or even just ‘resonant’ on general
principle with, actual historical encounters at the point of the spear.
The Iliad is probably the best-known (mytho)historical example; and it
has also been suggested that an array of the instances of ‘Dasyus’ being
smote down upon in the course of the RigVeda may refer to conflicts
against the Dahae \[oddly enough, another Indo-Iranian people\] by the
Vedic Aryans. The Zoroastrians, meanwhile, \*certainly\* seem to
remember the localized course and combatants of \*their\* religious
civil war through the corresponding heretical inversions of and
additions to Indo-Iranian mythology they promulgated in its wake.

It can also be suggested – and, again, this is not necessarily an
entirely worthless line of supposition – that certain mythologized
conflicts are reflective of natural phenomena or other such disasters;
although the example which instantly springs to mind, of Zeus contra
Typhon, is a bit of an odd one, because there it is perhaps the case
that the myth ‘found a home’ under Mt. Etna – i.e. a pre-existing
Indo-European myth around the Striker/Thunderer contra the Demon-Dragon
was then affixed and located to an active Volcano, rather than the
Volcano being recorded and recalled as a Demon-Dragon.

But I do not think – and I am fully aware that my religious
fundamentalist zealot helm is \*firmly\* on for this one, with
accompanying mono-opthalic \[or, perhaps, tryambhaktam\] vision – that
these ancient myths, still much less their salient principles and the
surrounding eth(n)oi and values-systems we have addeuced from them,
would have survived for much of a span (let alone, in the Vedic Hindu
case, some four thousand years and counting – more, if we are going
right the way back to the Urheimat ! ) , if all that was recorded
therein was a distant ancestral memory of “Man vs Man” \[or, rather, vs
pointedlly \*not\* “Men” – a we shall explore in a later piece in this
series, there’s a ‘recognition’ of similarity and seeing yourself in
another implicit in the labeling of the being in front of you as ‘Man’,
that does not, in several senses of the term, easily nor
historically-appropriately, extend to various \[non-I.E.\]
adversary-peoples\] , or “Man vs Nature” \[and leaving aside the far
greater and more profound man \*with\*, \*of\*, \*apart of\* (instead of
“apart from”) Nature depth of sentiment known to our Ancestors\] … well,
it’d be like asking the average American today about the Seven Years’
War – vitally important, really, in explaining how they came to exist
and who and what they are, but so breathtakingly remote in terms of both
time and headspace that the vast majority have probably never given it a
second glance, if they’ve even really heard of it. In short, yesterday’s
apocalyptic historical conflict, fades from memory and therefore from
view with such alacrity that it can hardly be expected to stand the far
more enduring test of Mythic Time. \[There are some exceptions to this,
of course – two hundred years on, Napoleon still looms large … but that
is, at least partially, because He is arguably the visage of a Deity
\[see my previous writing upon \*that\* subject\], and has almost
entered into the folk-consciousness of the Anglosphere as an adversary
as a result. \]

At the absolute veer-y least, these myths and their principles keep
being told and keep having a resonancy for their hearers … because we
see ways in which they are applicable to the world around us of today,
or the recent past and/or near future. Think people making use of Sun
Tzu’s Art of War in structuring their corporate \[a body of men in
competition with others, which perhaps explains part of Thorstein
Veblen’s observations upon the sort of person now found ‘leading’ them\]
conduct.

But I believe that it’s far \*deepa\* than that. That the reason we can
find saliency and coterminity between these Myths and the Principles
found within them, and our own experiences (well, some of us, at any
rate) – is not because they have something to say about our lives, in
all their petty and petite human-anthill scale details and decrepitude …
but rather, because the stories, the narratives, the encounters, the
customs, the \*culminations\* of our lives have something to say about,
have some reflection and refraction of, what is contained within the
relevant Mythology. \*It\*, rather than \*I\* is at the \*true\* center
of our realm(s).

\[This, incidentally, and on what might appear to be a side-tangent, is
part of the explanation for why some people just really don’t like/get
Lord of the Rings and claim it’s inapplicable, boring, unrelatable
word-walls in place of literature. Now, I do not mean to comment one way
or ‘tuther on Tolkien’s prose – but as applies the former portion, they
are not incorrect \*in reference to themselves\*, at any rate. If you
cannot see something \*resonant\* and \*relevant\* in an Epic to
yourself and your travails and aspirations, to \*your story\* – then
assuming for the moment that it is not a perception issue, it is
probably precisely because there \*is\* little of direct relevancy to
you contained therein, because you are not living an epic, let alone
Epic style of life. Even as a minor figure within one.\]

And the reasoning for \*that\* – why it is that there is such a strong
degree of coterminity between Myth and Reality, which means that we can
see the former radiating out into our particular, personal, subjective
latter … is partially because the Myths \*tell us\* something about
Reality. But it is \*also\* because the Myths \*are\* Reality. Something
which I mean in \*both\* immediately applicable senses – that the
relationship between ‘myth’ and ‘real’ is not an oppositional duality,
but of unity, identicality in essence and in function \[subject to the
conceptry around “Mythic Truth” and the caveats upon “Scriptural
Literalism” as Lazy Theology/Ontology/Philosophy-in-General\] ; and that
what is contained \*within\* this Mythic Understanding is the essential
Nature \[‘Atman’, we might perhaps suggest as a translated term\] which
Reality gives expression \[‘Bhuta’\] to.

So therefore, when we speak of an encoding within our mytholinguistics
of the notion that War is fundamental in the Indo-European cosmological
perspective … we mean quite literally that. In the Sanskrit term we have
looked at, we see War as the ‘seed’ and ‘animating force’ and
‘character’ of the Universe. In the Nordic/Germanic suite of words we
have parsed, we see War as the ‘order’, the ‘unfolding’, the ‘fate’ of
the World.  
