+++
title = "On The Devaluation Of Relics And Thexa0Past"
date = "November 18, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/11/scythian_gold_artifact_3.jpg?w=770)

You ever notice how we’ve turned the term “Relic” from one of reverence
into a pejorative?

It’s probably reflective of how many modern mindsets tend to regardthe
Past as not something to be learned from, or venerated, or indeed kept
alive – but instead something to be abrogated, abjured … brushed under
the rug, and in many cases “best left forgotten”.

So elements \[or, indeed, people\] which are themselves \*from\* the
Past, are thus denigrated – thought of, implicitly, as “obsolete” rather
than “wondrous”; and regarded with suspicion or outright scorn when they
dare grace us with their ‘presence’.

Part of this, of course, is due to the pace of both technological and
societal change. Consumer goods which were designed for the marketplace
five – and more especially, ten \[‘quelle horreur’\] – years ago are
often not fit for purpose a few years, or occasionally even a span as
short as a few months after their release and purchase … whether due to
having been superseded by the latest model with improved and different
functionality \[think mobile phones, which have come a huge way since
mine was made to the point that internet, social media, apps, cameras
better than some \*actual cameras\*, and gigs upon gigs of internal
storage are now standard\], or because the goods in question these days
aren’t really designed to last for that long before breaking down so you
have to buy another to replace it.

We therefore have a somewhat justified suspicion of the nature and
quality of ‘older’ goods then, I guess. Even though in many cases, much
older material may actually be more durable or even situationally
superior to its latter-day equivalents/descendents \[something something
MiGs with ‘obsolete’ vacuum transistors being laughed at by American
technicians who neglected to realize that same would render the jets
unaffected by a nuclear blast’s electro-magnetic pulse…\].

But even if we accept a preference for newer technology and consumer
goods, this doesn’t mean that older means nor mechanisms are, or should
be (outright) obsolete. Text-messaging hasn’t replaced face-to-face
conversation or the letter; Twitter \[despite the best efforts of a
certain President\] is yet to truly suborn the political Press Release
\[even though, to be sure, these are far more often emailed out to
hopefully-hungry journalists rather than shoved under the doors of
Parliamentary Press Gallery members by overworked Press Secretaries, as
in Days of Yore\].

And perhaps more worryingly, the movements to more wholesale adoptions
of “new” in eschewment of “old”, can lead on to all manner of undesired
and unforseen consequences \[the present-day social
isolation/atomization resultant from the modern workplace being a
cubicle with a computer in it, for instance; or the way in which the
aforementioned phones-with-email etc. now mean that many workers are
effectively “on-call” for \*well\* more than their on-paper hours and
even into remote holidays and hard-won family-time. There are entire
books written, meanwhile, about how social media is helping to subtly
re-program and re-wire the brains of younger people towards more
ADHD-looking neural functioning\].

Alongside this, we have the people – well, the sorts of people, anyway
-to whom “Relic” is most often applied as a term of abuse. The kind of
person who appears as if they are mentally affixed to a different era,
or who quite literally hails from such a time and place, and has
travelled to us via the latter part of the much-vaunted “space-time
continuum”.

It is understandable that certain attitudes and aptitudes much more
common in our collective \[or individual\] pasts might be looked upon
with disdain here in the shared Present. The demand for specialized
slave-wranglers \[outside, arguably, of some HR departments and
recruitment firms where there’s a certain crossover of skill-set\], and
the spouters of a belief in particular races filling the aforementioned
quotas on the basis of pre-ordained “superiority” as found in select
Biblical verses, for instance, is … not exactly high and nor should it
be. Quite the contrary in fact.

But by simply writing off every person, construct, or important item
which might happen to hail from a time \[and perhaps a place\] much
distinct from our own as a “Relic”, in the sense of something to be
consigned to a museum \[and the shift of Museum from ‘place you go to
see things and learn about the past’ through to ‘dusty, musty place
which is functionally an un-checked archive where things go to be
forgotten” – an Oubliette, in other words – is another example of this
sad trend in action and in askance\] or otherwise discarded due to its
temporal incongruity … well, that’s problematic and dangerous, as well.

How are we to know what kernels of ancient wisdom might yet prove
relevant in our contemporary situations? Particularly if it’s all
consigned to the figurative \[or, heinously, literal\] ash-heap? What if
something is ‘perennial’ or ‘timeless’ instead of being so temporally
fixed as to insta-decay upon exposure to Modernity and Modern scorn?

And what if, in some instances at least, “Old Ways” actually ARE better
than what we practice at present? \[the cap on the exploitation of the
common labourer at 40 hours a week would be one instantly obvious
example – steadily erodied in no small measure over these last few
decades thanks to technological ‘progress’ and changing
societal/economic ‘expectations’ to the contrary of actual human life\]

Once upon a time, to designate something a ‘Relic’ meant to observe its
status as something of immense value. A precious artefact of a bygone
age, when craftsmanship was quite likely superior to the present – and
representing an ethos which made the society which produced it,
frequently even to our modern eyes, a ‘great’ one. \[I know that Ancient
Athens is uh … hagiographized to a considerable extent these days, and
that this is the same city-state which saw little issue with
slave-holding and making the sort of geopolitical belligerance upon its
various neighbours that would make even the late Cold War United States
blush – but it is hard to imagine a tighter time-period or geographic
area to have produced an equivalent or greater amount of beauty and
worthwhile thought, literature, heroic deeds and all the rest of it than
Athens at its height.\]

Indeed, such a thing might quite literally be Holy, and not simply due
to its potentially immense age.

But now, it means the opposite. Something “worthless” in our
contemporary context – or worse, which is actively harmful and garishly
out of place \[well, out-of-time in at least two or possibly three
senses of the phrase\].

I believe that this is, in no small part, because the Present,
Modernity, and much of that which goes with each, is overtly
\*threatened\* by the Past, and its implicit challenge \[to either live
up to its standards, or to exceed them – and especially ‘on its own
terms’\].

Hence the popularity of “Relic’ as a pejorative. Because to simply and
sneeringly label something ‘obsolete’ purely based on its age or the
ethos of its construction, is to avoid actually engaging with the thing
itself – and seeing whether it, too, might have a viable … nay, VALUABLE
.. place among our Present.
