+++
title = "An Oath-Breaker Is Rendered Less Than A Man – The Hittite Military Oathxa0Example"
date = "November 6, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/11/9166.jpg?w=677)

For various reasons, I found myself reading a bit about Hittite oaths –
and two points struck out at me. The first, is that there’s so much
going on in these that is fairly instantly recognizable to us from other
Indo-European metaphysical-legal corpuses – and perhaps I may write more
upon this in the not too distant future.

But the second, is that there’s something … distinctly \*modern-day\*
familiar in some of these injunctions, as well. Partially because the
overall approach is something broadly akin to “cross my heart and hope
to die” \[with an emphasis upon the “hope to die \[should I breach the
terms of my oath\]” side of things – often in gruesomely creative ways,
such as the bit wherein the oathbreaker melts like wax in what I can
best describe via reference to Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost
Ark\] … but have a look at this:

“Now there are brought female clothes, a distaff and a spindle and an
arrow is broken, and he speaks as follows: ‘What is this? Aren’t they
women’s clothes? Whoever breaks this oath – may this oath make him a
woman out of a man and his men into women, and may they dress like women
and put on a scarf”

This particular passage has been interpreted in a few ways. One of
which, is that the arrow breaking is symbolic of the weapons of an
oath-breaker being broken. But as soon as I read that, I kinda felt that
… something was being overlooked here.

Insofar as while it \*is\* logical/likely that you’d disarm
oath-breakers in a ritual public humiliation … and while there are
\*further\* obvious symbolic resonances inherent in a man-at-arms, a
warrior, losing exactly these things that make him what he is \[i.e. his
weapons – there is a modern ‘echo’ of this in ritualistic tearing off of
medals in movies etc.\] – I somewhat suspect that something a bit more …
fundamental is being placed up as metaphysical collateral for the Oath
of binding to a Lord, so to speak.

That is to say, in both a literal as well as a metaphorical sense, the
warrior’s ‘manhood’ him/itself. Which is to be ‘broken’/’broken-off’.
\[This is now an appropriate time for wincing in the y-chromosomed
segment of the audience\]

This leads to a further intriguing concept – around the potential
saliency of the Word, the bond, as not just being the essential core
underpinning of the State \[see my previous work around the concept of
“Vrata” / “Vratya” in Sanskrit, and some other efforts pertaining to
Germanic correlates by the same author\], but also as being, in effect,
what makes the Man Himself.

A more misogynist view would suggest a corresponding correlate of
‘woman’ as being somewhat archetypally incapable of such loyalty in this
Bronze Age world-view – and therefore, to be reduced to the status of a
woman (rather than, say, an eunuch) is what it means to be an
oathbreaker in this context.

But I do not think that such an interpretation can actually hold – as we
know from various areas in both the Hittite context and other
Indo-European mythoreligious and textual corpuses, there is a \*strong\*
role for Female divinities and human figures in the notions of the
state, the religious Word, and most especially, therefore, both of the
two at once. \[Other than the obvious examples of Female oath-guarantor
deities, and my previous work on the very Indo-European Goddess of
National Identity / Sovereignty – therefore the paramount source of
loyalty itself, Vak in particular demonstrates this role\]

In any case, there is something nostalgic about parsing through so many
of these Bronze Age and subsequent Indo-European texts.

Not because I am claiming I was there at the time, in order to be able
to recall such things \*directly\* – but rather because it keeps
reminding me of being back in high school.
