+++
title = "A Cut Off Horse-Head Delivers Thexa0Message"
date = "November 14, 2019"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/11/images-54.jpg?w=476)

(Y)Our Ancestors, Ladies & Gentlemen!\*

“Most tellingly, perhaps, at the site of Potapovka (N. Krasnoyarsk Dst.,
near Kuybyshev on the N. Volga steppe), a unique burial has been found.6
It contains a human skeleton whose head has been replaced by a horse
head; a human head lies near his feet, along with a bone pipe, and a
cow’s head is placed near his knees. This looks like an archaeological
illustration of the Rgvedic myth of Dadhyañc, whose head was cut off by
Indra and replaced by that of a horse.

The bone pipe reminds, as the excavator has noted, of the RV sentence
referring to the playing of pipes in Yama’s realm, the world of the
ancestors “

Via way of … a bit more explanation, here’s some of the relevant
Shatapatha Brahmana verses \[SB 14-1\] dealing with the subject –

“18. Now Dadhyañk Âtharvana knew this pure essence, this Sacrifice,–how
this head of the Sacrifice is put on again, how this Sacrifice becomes
complete.

19. He then was spoken to by Indra saying, ‘If thou teachest this
    (sacrificial mystery) to any one else, I shall cut off thy head.’
20. Now this was heard by the Asvins,–‘Verily, Dadhyañk Âtharvana knows
    this pure essence, this Sacrifice,–how this head of the Sacrifice is
    put on again, how this Sacrifice becomes complete.’
21. They went up to him and said, ‘We two will become thy pupils.’–‘What
    are ye wishing to learn?’ he asked.–‘This pure essence, this
    Sacrifice,–how this head of the Sacrifice is put on again, how this
    Sacrifice becomes complete,’ they replied.
22. He said, ‘I was spoken to by Indra saying, ‘If thou teachest this to
    any one else, I shall cut off thy head;’ therefore I am afraid lest
    he should indeed cut off my head: I cannot take you as my pupils.’
23. They said, ‘We two shall protect thee from him.’–‘How will ye
    protect me?’ he replied.–They said, ‘When thou wilt have received us
    as thy pupils, we shall cut off thy head and put it aside elsewhere;
    then we shall fetch the head of a horse, and put it on thee:
    therewith thou wilt teach us; and when thou wilt have taught us,
    then Indra will cut off that head of thine; and we shall fetch thine
    own head, and put it on thee again.’–‘So be it,’ he replied.
24. Therefore it is concerning this that the Rishi has said (Rig-v. I,
    116, 12), ‘That Dadhyañk Âtharvana, with a horse’s head, anywise
    spoke forth unto you two the sweet doctrine:’–‘Unrestrainedly he
    spoke this,’ is what is thereby meant.”

Dadhyank is a fascinating figure in His own Rite – and not least because
of the array of latter materials detailing other roles and functions
which He carries out in the mythology \[a personal favourite is His
appearance in the Vayu Purana, wherein He attempts in vain to warn
Daksha that carrying out a sacrifice to the Greatest God … and pointedly
*not* directing this to Shiva, is to court Ruin.\] \[although the
better-known incidence is probably wherein Dadhichi is regarded as
having allowed the use of His spine to form the Vajra of Indra – which,
to my mind, I have wondered if this is some considerable extrapolation
from a RigVedic citation \[RV 6 16 14\] for Dadhyank empowering
\[‘light\[ing\] up’\] the Vritra-Slayer \[in that verse, interestingly,
it is Agni – so, *piety, sacrifice* … a seriously great weapon indeed!\]
in other ways\] – but here, we are simply considering His as a more …
allegorical saliency.

For what is communicated to us in these verses is an incredibly
important set of the metaphysical principles of the holy rite. \[And
while, in particular, this is for a Soma ceremony – I would contend that
in many regards, the most important of them apply equally to other Vedic
rites and rituals, as well\].

A rather frequent element we have encountered, across several
Indo-European cultures and mythoreligious complexes, is the idea that a
holy-man, when he is engaged in his role, is ‘not himself’. But rather,
has been seized \[in German, and with *deliberate* reference to Jung, we
should say he is ergreiffed\] ; and therefore, after a sort, speaks with
the voice of another.

Now, this can be taken in one of two ways – and the answer is likely
both. The first is in a direct and quite literal sense. The concept
being that the appropriately inspired \[and this really is at the heart
of the Furor Poeticus concept\] figure is in such direct communion with
what is On High, that he is speaking, and it is Speaking through him.

The second, is perhaps a little less impressive – but much more
ordinarily useful. And, drawing perhaps upon the concept of Eliadian
‘Eternal Return’ \[it seems … rather curious to say that, given that the
liturgy I am referencing dates from perhaps four thousand years prior to
Eliade’s writings upon the subject, and intrinsically parses the same
concepts\], it means that the officiator of the rite in question, is
adopting the mantle, the guise, the office, the position of another when
carrying out the on-earth simulacrum of a rite first pioneered in the
Heavens.

This is quite useful, as we can see encoded in the above aforementioned
myth – as it means that any perils thusly resultant to the officiator
while he is engaged in the duties in question, are not visited out
directly upon *him*, in an enduring and potentially rather deathlily
injurious sense … but rather, are accrued to the figure he is
temporarily appearing as. And then, when the rite is over, he can become
his former self again having evaded much of the danger which might
otherwise have befallen him.

But speaking of the use of Voices – and in some rites, it is common to
see several Brahmins, each adopting a ‘part’, as it were, in a dramatic,
vocalized re-enactment as central to the performative recitation of the
hymnal in question – it is vitally important to note another element of
Shatapatha Brahmana commentary upon this figure. \[SB 6 4 2 :3\]

“‘Also the sage Dadhyañk, the son of Atharvan, kindled thee;’–Dadhyañk,
the Âtharvana, doubtless is speech; and he did kindle him therefrom;”

This is the explanation given for the earlier mentioned RigVedic verse
wherein Dadhichi empowers the Slayer of Vritra. As we can see, through
*Speech*.

The idea being quite literally communicated *here*, is that it is Speech
which makes the Sacrifice .. well .. a sacrifice. Rather than a rather
ornate bout of pyromania \[although given the RigVedic line it is
explicating is *also* quite directly about turning up and setting *on
fire* the settlements of another kind … well … it’s Veer-y Indo-European
Conduct, even *before* it turns Sacrificial, I’ll put it that way!\] –
whether we mean Speech in this ‘performative’ sense, whereby it is, to
mix metaphors, ‘straight from the horse’s mouth’ \[and also, as it is
secret wisdom being communicated, perhaps ‘horse-sense’ into the bargain
… or bhaga’in\] and via our adoption of this sacred mantle; or whether
we mean it more simply as … well … speech, and potential instruction.

It is, as with so many things in Vedic parlancy – *both, man, both*!

The final point I shall make, in terms of that extrapolation of
principles from this incident in the Vedas, concerns that notion of
‘instruction’ – of teaching, and the transmission of secret knowledge on
down the line.

The Shatapatha Brahmana verses in question go on \[in the rest of 14:1
beyond those sections already quoted\] to give a list of strictures upon
such instruction, which are largely symbolic in nature. And yet, they
come immediately after directly pointing out that Dadhichi’s action was
to *unrestrainedly* pass on the information, the sacred learning and
insight, which he held – albeit while taking a grave personal risk in
the course of so doing.

There are a number of ways to read this, as well. One is that it is the
*particular* material around the *specific* Soma rite which is held to
be so closely guarded … and this, in particular, due to the rather
personal mythopolitics around Lord Indra – or, perhaps more charitably
to Him, due to a duty of Indra to act as a guardian for the conceptuary
and efficious utilization of Soma in general.

Another, is that the strictures around transmission are to represent
something of a ‘compromise’ between ‘nobody is allowed to learn this,
ever’, and a complete openness of the information to all. The subtle yet
important distinction between the “freedom of information”, so to speak,
and the *spread* of information.

The third, is that when teaching, the teacher is, in much the same
manner as previously mentioned for the carrying out of the rite itself,
relying upon the mantle of a prior authority himself – which is,
indeeed, how the later concepts of guru lineage have taken discernible
effect.

But the fourth, is that the material in the Shatapatha Brahmana, as an
explanatory document tentatively dated to perhaps as much as a thousand
years after the compiling of the hymnals upon which it comments – may
have gone off on a bit of a tangent in some particular areas; used to
support injunctions which are not entirely in keeping with the explicit
elements of the myth.

And therefore, the lesson of the tale of Sage Dadhichi teaching the
Asvins this rite and being decapitated by Lord Indra – has been turned
into a set of generalized prohibitions upon actually transmitting
religious knowledge, which take an *understandable* principle around the
caution in how this is done, and then turn it into a generalized set of
prohibitions which don’t seem to necessarily derive directly from the
original source, but rather the later interpolations of symbolic custom.

But, then, I *would* say that, wouldn’t I – I am a Corvid, and therefore
I am enumerated, in some senses, amidst the list of those whom a teacher
should not even look upon when engaged in the sacred acts of instruction
\[itself a bit of a curious one – as given *what is being instructed*,
one would have thought that the manifestation of Pitrs in Corvid form,
as YamaDutas, and the well-renowned Language of the Birds occurrence
across several Indo-European mythoreligious complexes, would mean we’d …
perhaps know it already – or, at least, be regarded with a little more
kindness and renowned amicability/respect 😛 \].

So, there you have it. A few rather important metaphysical principles in
explication, as sparked by my reading about the finding of a horse’s
head turning up unexpectedly in a bed of eternal rest, as linked to a
Godfather.

We shall close with another RigVedic quotation – this time, from an
Ashvins hymnal \[RV I 116 12\] :

” That mighty deed of yours, for gain, O Heroes, as thunder heraldeth
the rain, I publish,  
When, by the horse’s head, Atharvan’s offspring Dadhyac made known to
you the Soma’s sweetness. “

Jai.

\*Note: due to the location of the burial, probably not literally my
ancestors
