---
title: THE PROBLEM OF MODERN INDIA AND ITS SOLUTION

---
<div>

[←](../writings_poems/peace.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm) / [→](ramakrishna.htm)

  

## THE PROBLEM OF MODERN INDIA AND ITS SOLUTION

(The above is a translation of the first
[Bengali](b6024_problem_of_modern_india.pdf) article written by Swami
Vivekananda as an introduction to the *Udbodhana*, when it was started
on the 14th of January, 1899, as the Bengali fortnightly (afterwards
monthly) journal of the Ramakrishna Order.)

The ancient history of India is full of descriptions of the gigantic
energies and their multifarious workings, the boundless spirit, the
combination of indomitable action and reaction of the various forces,
and, above all, the profound thoughtfulness of a godly race. If the word
history is understood to mean merely narratives of kings and emperors,
and pictures of society — tyrannised over from time to time by the evil
passions, haughtiness, avarice, etc., of the rulers of the time,
portraying the acts resulting from their good or evil propensities, and
how these reacted upon the society of that time — such a history India
perhaps does not possess. But every line of that mass of the religious
literature of India, her ocean of poetry, her philosophies and various
scientific works reveal to us — a thousand times more clearly than the
narratives of the life-incidents and genealogies of particular kings and
emperors can ever do — the exact position and every step made in advance
by that vast body of men who, even before the dawn of civilisation,
impelled by hunger and thirst, lust and greed, etc., attracted by the
charm of beauty, endowed with a great and indomitable mental power, and
moved by various sentiments, arrived through various ways and means at
that stage of eminence. Although the heaps of those triumphal flags
which they gathered in their innumerable victories over nature with
which they had been waging war for ages, have, of late, been torn and
tattered by the violent winds of adverse circumstances and become worn
out through age, yet they still proclaim the glory of Ancient India.

Whether this race slowly proceeded from Central Asia, Northern Europe,
or the Arctic regions, and gradually came down and sanctified India by
settling there at last, or whether the holy land of India was their
original native place, we have no proper means of knowing now. Or
whether a vast race living in or outside India, being displaced from its
original abode, in conformity with natural laws, came in the course of
time to colonise and settle over Europe and other places — and whether
these people were white or black, blue-eyed or dark-eyed, golden-haired
or black-haired — all these matters — there is no sufficient ground to
prove now, with the one exception of the fact of the kinship of Sanskrit
with a few European languages. Similarly, it is not easy to arrive at a
final conclusion as to the modern Indians, whether they all are the pure
descendants of that race, or how much of the blood of that race is
flowing in their veins, or again, what races amongst them have any of
that even in them.

However, we do not, in fact, lose much by this uncertainty.

But there is one fact to remember. Of that ancient Indian race, upon
which the rays of civilisation first dawned, where deep thoughtfulness
first revealed itself in full glory, there are still found hundreds of
thousands of its children, born of its mind — the inheritors of its
thoughts and sentiments — ready to claim them.

Crossing over mountains, rivers, arid oceans, setting at naught, as it
were, the obstacles of the distance of space and time, the blood of
Indian thought has flowed, and is still flowing into the veins of other
nations of the globe, whether in a distinct or in some subtle unknown
way. Perhaps to us belongs the major portion of the universal ancient
inheritance.

In a small country lying in the eastern corner of the Mediterranean Sea,
beautiful and adorned by nature, and garlanded by well-formed and
beautiful-looking islands, lived a race of men who were few in number,
but of a very charming aspect, perfectly formed, and strong in muscles
and sinews, light of body, yet possessing steadiness and perseverance,
and who were unrivalled for the creation of all earthly beauties, as
well as endowed with extraordinary practicality and intellect. The other
ancient nations used to call them Yavanas, but they called themselves
Greeks. This handful of a vigorous and wonderful race is a unique
example in the annals of man. Wherever and in whatever nation there has
been, or is, any advance made in earthly science up to the present day —
such as social, martial, political, sculptural, etc. — there the shadow
of ancient Greece has fallen. Let us leave apart the consideration of
ancient times, for even in this modern age, we, the Bengalis, think
ourselves proud and enlightened simply by following the footmarks of
these Yavana Gurus for these last fifty years, illumining our homes with
what light of theirs is reaching us through the European literature.

The whole of Europe nowadays is, in every respect, the disciple of
ancient Greece, and her proper inheritor; so much so that a wise man of
England had said, "Whatever nature has not created, that is the creation
of the Greek mind."

These two gigantic rivers (Aryans and Yavanas), issuing from far-away
and different mountains (India and Greece), occasionally come in contact
with each other, and whenever such confluence takes place, a tremendous
intellectual or spiritual tide, rising in human societies, greatly
expands the range of civilisation and confirms the bond of universal
brotherhood among men.

Once in far remote antiquity, the Indian philosophy, coming in contact
with Greek energy, led to the rise of the Persian, the Roman, and other
great nations. After the invasion of Alexander the Great, these two
great waterfalls colliding with each other, deluged nearly half of the
globe with spiritual tides, such as Christianity. Again, a similar
commingling, resulting in the improvement and prosperity of Arabia, laid
the foundation of modern European civilisation. And perhaps, in our own
day, such a time for the conjunction of these two gigantic forces has
presented itself again. This time their centre is India.

The air of India pre-eminently conduces to quietness, the nature of the
Yavana is the constant expression of power; profound meditation
characterises the one, the indomitable spirit of dexterous activity, the
other; one's motto is "renunciation", the other's "enjoyment". One's
whole energy is directed inwards, the other's, outwards; one's whole
learning consists in the knowledge of the Self or the Subject, the
other's, in the knowledge of the not-Self or the object (perishable
creation); one loves Moksha (spiritual freedom), the other loves
political independence; one is unmindful of gaining prosperity in this
world, the other sets his whole heart on making a heaven of this world;
one, aspiring after eternal bliss, is indifferent to all the ephemeral
pleasures of this life, and the other, doubting the existence of eternal
bliss, or knowing it to be far away, directs his whole energy to the
attainment of earthly pleasures as much as possible.

In this age, both these types of mankind are extinct, only their
physical and mental children, their works and thoughts are existing.

Europe and America are the advanced children of the Yavanas, a glory to
their forefathers; but the modern inhabitants of the land of Bharata are
not the glory of the ancient Aryas. But, as fire remains intact under
cover of ashes, so the ancestral fire still remains latent in these
modern Indians. Through the grace of the Almighty Power, it is sure to
manifest itself in time.

What will accrue when that ancestral fire manifests itself?

Would the sky of India again appear clouded over by waving masses of
smoke springing from the Vedic sacrificial fire? Or is the glory of
Rantideva again going to be revived in the blood of the sacrificed
animals? Are the old customs of Gomedha, Ashvamedha, or perpetuating the
lineage from a husband's brother, and other usages of a like nature to
come back again? Or is the deluge of a Buddhistic propaganda again going
to turn the whole of India into a big monastery? Are the laws of Manu
going to be rehabilitated as of yore? Or is the discrimination of food,
prescribed and forbidden, varying in accordance with geographical
dimensions, as it is at the present day, alone going to have its
all-powerful domination over the length and breadth of the country? Is
the caste system to remain, and is it going to depend eternally upon the
birthright of a man, or is it going to be determined by his
qualification? And again in that caste system, is the discrimination of
food, its touchableness or untouchableness, dependent upon the purity or
the impurity of the man who touches it, to be observed as it is in
Bengal, or will it assume a form more strict as it does in Madras? Or,
as in the Punjab, will all such restrictions be obliterated? Are the
marriages of the different Varnas to take place from the upper to the
lower Varna in the successive order, as in Manu's days, and as it is
still in vogue in Nepal? Or, as in Bengal and other places, are they to
be kept restricted to a very limited number of individuals constituting
one of the several communities of a certain class of the Varna? To give
a conclusive answer to all these questions is extremely difficult. They
become the more difficult of solution, considering the difference in the
customs prevailing in different parts of the country — nay, as we find
even in the same part of the country such a wide divergence of customs
among different castes and families.

Then what is to be?

What we should have is what we have not, perhaps what our forefathers
even had not — that which the Yavanas had; that, impelled by the
life-vibration of which, is issuing forth in rapid succession from the
great dynamo of Europe, the electric flow of that tremendous power
vivifying the whole world. We want that. We want that energy, that love
of independence, that spirit of self-reliance, that immovable fortitude,
that dexterity in action, that bond of unity of purpose, that thirst for
improvement. Checking a little the constant looking back to the past, we
want that expansive vision infinitely projected forward; and we want —
that intense spirit of activity (Rajas) which will flow through our
every vein, from head to foot.

What can be a greater giver of peace than renunciation? A little
ephemeral worldly good is nothing in comparison with eternal good; no
doubt of that. What can bring greater strength than Sattva Guna
(absolute purity of mind)? It is indeed true that all other kinds of
knowledge are but non-knowledge in comparison with Self-knowledge. But I
ask: How many are there in the world fortunate enough to gain that
Sattva Guna? How many in this land of Bharata? How many have that noble
heroism which can renounce all, shaking off the idea of "I and mine"?
How many are blessed enough to possess that far-sight of wisdom which
makes the earthly pleasures appear to be but vanity of vanities? Where
is that broad-hearted man who is apt to forget even his own body in
meditating over the beauty and glory of the Divine? Those who are such
are but a handful in comparison to the population of the whole of India;
and in order that these men may attain to their salvation, will the
millions and millions of men and women of India have to be crushed under
the wheel of the present-day society and religion?

And what good can come out of such a crushing?

Do you not see — talking up this plea of Sattva, the country has been
slowly and slowly drowned in the ocean of Tamas or dark ignorance? Where
the most dull want to hide their stupidity by covering it with a false
desire for the highest knowledge which is beyond all activities, either
physical or mental; where one, born and bred in lifelong laziness, wants
to throw the veil of renunciation over his own unfitness for work; where
the most diabolical try to make their cruelty appear, under the cloak of
austerity, as a part of religion; where no one has an eye upon his own
incapacity, but everyone is ready to lay the whole blame on others;
where knowledge consists only in getting some books by heart, genius
consists in chewing the cud of others' thoughts, and the highest glory
consists in taking the name of ancestors: do we require any other proof
to show that that country is being day by day drowned in utter Tamas?

Therefore Sattva or absolute purity is now far away from us. Those
amongst us who are not yet fit, but who hope to be fit, to reach to that
absolutely pure Paramahamsa state — for them the acquirement of Rajas or
intense activity is what is most beneficial now. Unless a man passes
through Rajas, can he ever attain to that perfect Sâttvika state? How
can one expect Yoga or union with God, unless one has previously
finished with his thirst for Bhoga or enjoyment? How can renunciation
come where there is no Vairâgya or dispassion for all the charms of
enjoyment?

On the other hand, the quality of Rajas is apt to die down as soon as it
comes up, like a fire of palm leaves. The presence of Sattva and the
Nitya or Eternal Reality is almost in a state of juxtaposition — Sattva
is nearly Nitya. Whereas the nation in which the quality of Rajas
predominates is not so long-lived, but a nation with a preponderance of
Sattva is, as it were, immortal. History is a witness to this fact.

In India, the quality of Rajas is almost absent: the same is the case
with Sattva in the West. It is certain, therefore, that the real life of
the Western world depends upon the influx, from India, of the current of
Sattva or transcendentalism; and it is also certain that unless we
overpower and submerge our Tamas by the opposite tide of Rajas, we shall
never gain any worldly good or welfare in this life; and it is also
equally certain that we shall meet many formidable obstacles in the path
of realisation of those noble aspirations and ideals connected with our
after-life.

The one end and aim of the *Udbodhana* is to help the union and
intermingling of these two forces, as far as it lies in its power.

True, in so doing there is a great danger — lest by this huge wave of
Western spirit are washed away all our most precious jewels, earned
through ages of hard labour; true, there is fear lest falling into its
strong whirlpool, even the land of Bharata forgets itself so far as to
be turned into a battlefield in the struggle after earthly enjoyments;
ay, there is fear, too, lest going to imitate the impossible and
impracticable foreign ways, rooting out as they do our national customs
and ideals, we lose all that we hold dear in this life and be undone in
the next!

To avoid these calamities we must always keep the wealth of our own home
before our eyes, so that every one down to the masses may always know
and see what his own ancestral property is. We must exert ourselves to
do that; and side by side, we should be brave to open our doors to
receive all available light from outside. Let rays of light come in, in
sharp-driving showers from the four quarters of the earth; let the
intense flood of light flow in from the West — what of that? Whatever is
weak and corrupt is liable to die — what are we to do with it? If it
goes, let it go, what harm does it do to us? What is strong and
invigorating is immortal. Who can destroy that?

How many gushing springs and roaring cataracts, how many icy rivulets
and ever-flowing streamlets, issuing from the eternal snow-capped peaks
of the Himalayas, combine and flow together to form the gigantic river
of the gods, the Gangâ, and rush impetuously towards the ocean! So what
a variety of thoughts and ideas, how many currents of forces, issuing
from innumerable saintly hearts, and from brains of geniuses of various
lands have already enveloped India, the land of Karma, the arena for the
display of higher human activities! Look! how under the dominion of the
English, in these days of electricity, railroad, and steamboat, various
sentiments, manners, customs, and morals are spreading all over the land
with lightning speed. Nectar is coming, and along with it, also poison;
good is coming, as well as evil. There has been enough of angry
opposition and bloodshed; the power of stemming this tide is not in
Hindu society. Everything, from water filtered by machinery and drawn
from hydrants, down to sugar purified with bone-ash, is being quietly
and freely taken by almost every one, in spite of much show of verbal
protest. Slowly and slowly, by the strong dint of law, many of our most
cherished customs are falling off day by day — we have no power to
withstand that. And why is there no power? Is truth really powerless?
"Truth alone conquers and not falsehood." — Is this Divine Vedic saying
false? Or who knows but that those very customs which are being swept
away by the deluge of the power of Western sovereignty or of Western
education were not real Âchâras, but were Anâchâras after all. This also
is a matter for serious consideration.

बहुजनहिताय बहुजनसुखाय — "For the good of the many, as well as for the
happiness of the many" — in an unselfish manner, with a heart filled
with love and reverence, the *Udbodhana* invites all wise and
large-hearted men who love their motherland to discuss these points and
solve these problems; and, being devoid of the feeling of hatred or
antagonism, as well as turning itself away from the infliction of
abusive language directed towards any individual, or society, or any
sect, it offers its whole self for the service of all classes.

To work we have the right, the result is in the hands of the Lord. We
only pray: "O Thou Eternal Spirit, make us spiritual; O Thou Eternal
Strength, make us strong; O Thou Mighty One, make us mighty."

</div>
