---
title: 'RAMAKRISHNA: HIS LIFE AND SAYINGS'

---
<div>

[←](the_problem_of_modern_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm) / [→](the_paris_congress.htm)

  

## RAMAKRISHNA: HIS LIFE AND SAYINGS

([Translation](b6007_ramakrishna.pdf) of a review of *Ramakrishna: His
Life and Sayings* by Prof. Max Müller, contributed to the *Udbodhana*,
14th March, 1899.)

Among the Sanskrit scholars of the West, Professor Max Müller takes the
lead. The Rig-Veda Samhitâ, the whole of which no one could even get at
before, is now very neatly printed and made accessible to the public,
thanks to the munificent generosity of the East India Company and to the
Professor's prodigious labours extending over years. The alphabetical
characters of most of the manuscripts, collected from different parts of
India, are of various forms, and many words in them are inaccurate. We
cannot easily comprehend how difficult it is for a foreigner, however
learned he may be, to find out the accuracy or inaccuracy of these
Sanskrit characters, and more especially to make out clearly the meaning
of an extremely condensed and complicated commentary. In the life of
Professor Max Müller, the publication of the Rig-Veda is a great event.
Besides this, he has been dwelling, as it were, and spending his whole
lifetime amidst ancient Sanskrit literature; but notwithstanding this,
it does not imply that in the Professor's imagination India is still
echoing as of old with Vedic hymns, with her sky clouded with
sacrificial smoke, with many a Vasishtha, Vishvâmitra, Janaka, and
Yâjnavalkya, with her every home blooming with a Gârgi or a Maitreyi and
herself guided by the Vedic rules or canons of Grihya-Sutra.

The Professor, with ever-watchful eyes, keeps himself well-informed of
what new events are occurring even in the out-of-the-way corners of
modern India, half-dead as she is, trodden down by the feet of the
foreigner professing an alien religion, and all but bereft of her
ancient manners, rites, and customs. As the Professor's feet never
touched these shores, many Anglo-Indians here show an unmixed contempt
for his opinions on the customs, manners, and codes of morality of the
Indian people. But they ought to know that, even after their lifelong
stay, or even if they were born and brought up in this country, except
any particular information they may obtain about that stratum of society
with which they come in direct contact, the Anglo-Indian authorities
have to remain quite ignorant in respect of other classes of people; and
the more so, when, of this vast society divided into so many castes, it
is very hard even among themselves for one caste to properly know the
manners and peculiarities of another.

Some time ago, in a book, named, *Residence in India*, written by a
well-known Anglo-Indian officer, I came across such a chapter as "Native
Zenana Secrets". Perhaps because of that strong desire in every human
heart for knowledge of secrets, I read the chapter, but only to find
that this big Anglo-Indian author is fully bent upon satisfying the
intense curiosity of his own countrymen regarding the mystery of a
native's life by describing an *affaire d'amour*, said to have
transpired between his sweeper, the sweeper's wife, and her paramour!
And from the cordial reception given to the book by the Anglo-Indian
community, it seems the writer's object has been gained, and he feels
himself quite satisfied with his work "God-speed to you, dear friends!"
— What else shall we say? Well has the Lord said in the Gita:

ध्यायतो विषयान्पुंसः सङ्गस्तेषूपजायते ।  
सङ्गात्संजायते कामः कामात्क्रोधोऽभिजायते ॥

—"Thinking of objects, attachment to them is formed in a man. From
attachment longing, and from longing anger grows."

Let such irrelevant things alone. To return to our subject: After all,
one wonders at Professor Max Müller's knowledge of the social customs
and codes of law, as well as the contemporaneous occurrences in the
various provinces of present-day India; this is borne out by our own
personal experiences.

In particular, the Professor observes with a keen eye what new waves of
religion are rising in different parts of India, and spares no pains in
letting the Western world not remain in the dark about them. The Brâhmo
Samaj guided by Debendranâth Tagore and Keshab Chandra Sen, the Ârya
Samaj established by Swami Dayânanda Sarasvati, and the Theosophical
movement — have all come under the praise or censure of his pen. Struck
by the sayings and teachings of Shri Ramakrishna published in the two
well-established journals, the *Brahmavâdin* and the *Prabuddha
Bhârata,* and reading what the Brahmo preacher, Mr. Pratâp Chandra
Mazumdâr, wrote about Shri Ramakrishna, ("Paramahamsa Sreemat
Ramakrishna" — *Theistic Quarterly Review*, October, 1879.) he was
attracted by the sage's life. Some time ago, a short sketch of Shri
Ramakrishna's life ("A Modern Hindu Saint" — January, 1896.) also
appeared in the well-known monthly journal of England, *The Imperial and
Asiatic Quarterly Review*, contributed by Mr. C. H. Tawney, M.A., the
distinguished librarian of the India House. Gathering a good deal of
information from Madras and Calcutta, the Professor discussed Shri
Ramakrishna's life and his teachings in a short article ("A Real
Mahâtman.") in the foremost monthly English journal, *The Nineteenth
Century*. There he expressed himself to the effect that this new sage
easily won his heart by the originality of his thoughts, couched in
novel language and impregnate with fresh spiritual power which he
infused into India when she was merely echoing the thoughts of her
ancient sages for several centuries past, or, as in recent times, those
of Western scholars. He, the Professor, had read often India's religious
literature and thereby well acquainted himself with the life-stories of
many of her ancient sages and saints; but is it possible to expect such
lives again in this age in this India of modern times? Ramakrishna's
life was a reply in the affirmative to such a question. And it brought
new life by sprinkling water, as it were, at the root of the creeper of
hope regarding India's future greatness and progress, in the heart of
this great-souled scholar whose whole life has been dedicated to her.

There are certain great souls in the West who sincerely desire the good
of India, but we are not aware whether Europe can point out another
well-wisher of India who feels more for India's well-being than
Professor Max Müller. Not only is Max Müller a well-wisher of India, but
he has also a strong faith in Indian philosophy and Indian religion.
That Advaitism is the highest discovery in the domain of religion, the
Professor has many times publicly admitted. That doctrine of
reincarnation, which is a dread to the Christian who has identified the
soul with the body, he firmly believes in because of his having found
conclusive proof in his own personal experience. And what more, perhaps,
his previous birth was in India; and lest by coming to India, the old
frame may break down under the violent rush of a suddenly aroused mass
of past recollections — is the fear in his mind that now stands foremost
in the way of his visit to this country. Still as a worldly man, whoever
he may be, he has to look to all sides and conduct himself accordingly.
When, after a complete surrender of all worldly interests, even the
Sannyasin, when performing any practices which he knows to be purest in
themselves, is seen to shiver in fear of public opinion, simply because
they are held with disapproval by the people among whom he lives; when
the consideration of gaining name and fame and high position, and the
fear of losing them regulate the actions of even the greatest ascetic,
though he may verbally denounce such consideration as most filthy and
detestable — what wonder then that the man of the world who is
universally honoured, and is ever anxious not to incur the displeasure
of society, will have to be very cautious in ventilating the views which
he personally cherishes. It is not a fact that the Professor is an utter
disbeliever in such subtle subjects as the mysterious psychic powers of
the Yogis.

It is not many years since Professor Max Müller "felt called upon to say
a few words on certain religious movements, now going on in India" —
"which has often and not unjustly, been called a country of
philosophers"— which seemed to him "to have been very much
misrepresented and misunderstood at home". In order to remove such
misconceptions and to protest against "the wild and overcharged accounts
of saints and sages living and teaching at present in India, which had
been published and scattered broadcast in Indian, American, and English
papers"; and "to show at the same time that behind such strange names as
Indian Theosophy, and Esoteric Buddhism, and all the rest, there was
something real something worth knowing" — or in other words, to point
out to the thoughtful section of Europe that India was not a land
inhabited only by "quite a new race of human beings who had gone through
a number of the most fearful ascetic exercises", to carry on a lucrative
profession by thus acquiring the powers of working such "very silly
miracles" as flying through the air like the feathered race, walking on
or living fishlike under the water, healing all sorts of maladies by
means of incantations, and, by the aid of occult arts fabricating gold,
silver, or diamond from baser materials, or by the power of Siddhis
bestowing sturdy sons to rich families — but that men, who had actually
realised in their life great transcendental truths, who were real
knowers of Brahman, true Yogis, real devotees of God, were never found
wanting in India: and, above all, to show that the whole Aryan
population of India had not as yet come down so low as to be on the same
plane as the brute creation, that, rejecting the latter, the living Gods
in human shape, they "the high and the low" were, day and night, busy
licking the feet of the first-mentioned performers of silly juggleries,
— Professor Max Müller presented Shri Ramakrishna's life to the learned
European public, in an article entitled "A Real Mahâtman", which
appeared in *The Nineteenth Century* in its August number, 1896.

The learned people of Europe and America read the article with great
interest and many have been attracted towards its subject, Shri
Ramakrishna Deva, with the result that the wrong ideas of the civilised
West about India as a country full of naked, infanticidal, ignorant,
cowardly race of men who were cannibals and little removed from beasts,
who forcibly burnt their widows and were steeped in all sorts of sin and
darkness — towards the formation of which ideas, the Christian
missionaries and, I am as much ashamed as pained to confess, some of my
own countrymen also have been chiefly instrumental — began to be
corrected. The veil of the gloom of ignorance, which was spread across
the eyes of the Western people by the strenuous efforts of these two
bodies of men, has been slowly and slowly rending asunder. "Can the
country that has produced a great world-teacher like Shri Bhagavân
Ramakrishna Deva be really full of such abominations as we have been
asked to believe in, or have we been all along duped by interested
organised bodies of mischief-makers, and kept in utter obscurity and
error about the real India?"— Such a question naturally arises in the
Western mind.

When Professor Max Müller, who occupies in the West the first rank in
the field of Indian religion, philosophy, and literature, published with
a devoted heart a short sketch of Shri Ramakrishna's life in *The
Nineteenth Century* for the benefit of Europeans and Americans, it is
needless to say that a bitter feeling of burning rancour made its
appearance amongst those two classes of people referred to above.

By improper representation of the Hindu gods and goddesses, the
Christian missionaries were trying with all their heart and soul to
prove that really religious men could never be produced from among their
worshippers; but like a straw before a tidal wave, that attempt was
swept away; while that class of our countrymen alluded to above, which
set itself to devise means for quenching the great fire of the rapidly
spreading power of Shri Ramakrishna, seeing all its efforts futile, has
yielded to despair. What is human will in opposition to the divine?

Of course from both sides, unintermittent volleys of fierce attack were
opened on the aged Professor's devoted head; the old veteran, however,
was not the one to turn his back. He had triumphed many times in similar
contests. This time also he has passed the trial with equal ease. And to
stop the empty shouts of his inferior opponents, he has published, by
way of a warning to them, the book, *Ramakrishna: His Life and Sayings*,
in which he has collected more complete information and given a fuller
account of his life and utterances, so that the reading public may get a
better knowledge of this great sage and his religious ideas — the sage
"who has lately obtained considerable celebrity both in India and
America where his disciples have been actively engaged in preaching his
gospel and winning converts to his doctrines even among Christian
audiences". The Professor adds, "This may seem very strange, nay, almost
incredible to us. . . .Yet every human heart has its religious
yearnings; it has a hunger for religion, which sooner or later wants to
be satisfied. Now the religion taught by the disciples of Ramakrishna
comes to these hungry souls without any untoward authority", and is
therefore, welcomed as the "free elixir of life". . . "Hence, though
there may be some exaggeration in the number of those who are stated to
have become converted to the religion of Ramakrishna, ... there can be
no doubt that a religion which can achieve such successes in our time,
while it calls itself with perfect truth the oldest religion and
philosophy of the world, viz the Vedanta, the end or highest object of
the Vedas, deserves our careful attention."

After discussing, in the first part of the book, what is meant by the
Mahatman, the Four Stages of Life, Ascetic Exercises or Yoga, and after
making some mention about Dayananda Sarasvati, Pavhâri Bâbâ,
Debendranath Tagore, and Rai Shâligrâm Sâheb Bahadur, the leader of the
Râdhâswami sect, the Professor enters on Shri Ramakrishna's life.

The Professor greatly fears lest the Dialogic Process — the
transformation produced in the description of the facts as they really
happened by too much favourableness or unfavourableness of the narrator
towards them — which is invariably at work in all history as a matter of
inevitable course, also influences this present sketch of life. Hence
his unusual carefulness about the collection of facts. The present
writer is an insignificant servant of Shri Ramakrishna. Though the
materials gathered by him for Ramakrishna's life have been well-pounded
in the mortar of the Professor's logic and impartial judgment, still he
(Max Müller) has not omitted to add that there may be possible "traces
of what I call the Dialogic Process and the irrepressible miraculising
tendencies of devoted disciples" even in "his unvarnished description of
his Master". And, no doubt, those few harsh-sweet words which the
Professor has said in the course of his reply to what some people, with
the Brâhmo-Dharma preacher, the Rev. Pratap Chandra Mazumdar, at their
head, wrote to him in their anxiety to make out a "not edifying side" of
Ramakrishna's character — demand thoughtful consideration from those
amongst us of Bengal who, being full of jealousy, can with difficulty
bear the sight of others' weal.

Shri Ramakrishna's life is presented in the book in very brief and
simple language. In this life, every word of the wary historian is
weighed, as it were, before being put on paper; those sparks of fire,
which are seen here and there to shoot forth in the article, "A Real
Mahatman", are this time held in with the greatest care. The Professor's
boat is here plying between the Scylla of the Christian missionaries on
the one hand, and the Charybdis of the tumultuous Brahmos on the other.
The article, "A Real Mahatman" brought forth from both the parties many
hard words and many carping remarks on the Professor. It is a pleasure
to observe that there is neither the attempt made here to retort on
them, nor is there any display of meanness — as the refined writers of
England are not in the habit of indulging in that kind of thing — but
with a sober, dignified, not the least malignant, yet firm and
thundering voice, worthy of the aged scholar, he has removed the charges
that were levelled against some of the uncommon ideas of the
great-soured sage — swelling forth from a heart too deep for ordinary
grasp.

And the charges are, indeed, surprising to us. We have heard the great
Minister of the Brahmo Samaj, the late revered Âchârya Shri Keshab
Chandra Sen, speaking in his charming way that Shri Ramakrishna's
simple, sweet, colloquial language breathed a superhuman purity; though
in his speech could be noticed some such words as we term obscene, the
use of those words, on account of his uncommon childlike innocence and
of their being perfectly devoid of the least breath of sensualism,
instead of being something reproachable, served rather the purpose of
embellishment — yet, this is one of the mighty charges!

Another charge brought against him is that his treatment of his wife was
barbarous because of his taking the vow of leading a Sannyasin's life!
To this the Professor has replied that he took the vow of Sannyasa with
his wife's assent, and that during the years of his life on this earth,
his wife, bearing a character worthy of her husband, heartily received
him as her Guru (spiritual guide) and, according to his instructions,
passed her days in infinite bliss and peace, being engaged in the
service of God as a lifelong Brahmachârini. Besides, he asks, "Is love
between husband and wife really impossible without the procreation of
children?" "We must learn to believe in Hindu honesty" — in the matter
that, without having any physical relationship, a Brahmachari husband
can live a life of crystal purity, thus making his Brahmacharini wife a
partner in the immortal bliss of the highest spiritual realisation,
Brahmânanda — "however incredulous we might justly be on such matters in
our own country". May blessings shower on the Professor for such worthy
remarks! Even he, born of a foreign nationality and living in a foreign
land, can understand the meaning of our Brahmacharya as the only way to
the attainment of spirituality, and belies that it is not even in these
days rare in India, whilst the hypocritical heroes of our own household
are unable to see anything else than carnal relationship in the
matrimonial union! "As a man thinketh in his mind, so he seeth outside."

Again another charge put forward is that "he did not show sufficient
moral abhorrence of prostitutes". To this the Professor's rejoinder is
very very sweet indeed: he says that in this charge Ramakrishna "does
not stand quite alone among the founders of religion! " Ah! How sweet
are these words — they remind one of the prostitute Ambâpâli, the object
of Lord Buddha's divine grace, and of the Samaritan woman who won the
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Yet again, another charge is that he did not hate those who were
intemperate in their habits. Heaven save the mark! One must not tread
even on the shadow of a man, because he took a sip or two of drink — is
not that the meaning? A formidable accusation indeed! Why did not the
Mahâpurusha kick away and drive off in disgust the drunkards, the
prostitutes, the thieves, and all the sinners of the world! And why did
he not, with eyes closed, talk in a set drawl after the
never-to-be-varied tone of the Indian flute-player, or talk in
conventional language concealing his thoughts! And above all, the
crowning charge is why did he not "live *maritalement*" all his life!

Unless life can be framed after the ideal of such strange purity and
good manners as set forth by the accusers, India is doomed to go to
ruin. Let her, if she has to rise by the help of such ethical rules!

The greater portion of the book has been devoted to the collection of
the sayings, rather than to the life itself. That those sayings have
attracted the attention of many of the English-speaking readers
throughout the world can be easily inferred from the rapid sale of the
book. The sayings, falling direct from his holy lips, are impregnate
with the strongest spiritual force and power, and therefore they will
surely exert their divine influence in every part of the world. "For the
good of the many, for the happiness of the many" great-souled men take
their birth; their lives and works are past the ordinary human run, and
the method of their preaching is equally marvellous.

And what are we doing? The son of a poor Brahmin, who has sanctified us
by his birth, raised us by his work, and has turned the sympathy of the
conquering race towards us by his immortal sayings — what are we doing
for him? Truth is not always palatable, still there are times when it
has to be told: some of us do understand that his life and teachings are
to our gain, but there the matter ends. It is beyond our power even to
make an attempt to put those precepts into practice in our own lives,
far less to consign our whole body and soul to the huge waves of harmony
of Jnâna and Bhakti that Shri Ramakrishna has raised. This play of the
Lord, those who have understood or are trying to understand, to them we
say, "What will mere understanding do? The proof of understanding is in
work. Will others believe you if it ends only in verbal expressions of
assurance or is put forward as a matter of personal faith? Work argues
what one feels; work out what you feel and let the world see." All ideas
and feelings coming out of the fullness of the heart are known by their
fruits — practical works.

Those who, knowing themselves very learned, think lightly of this
unlettered, poor, ordinary temple-priest, to them our submission is:
"The country of which one illiterate temple-priest, by virtue of his own
strength, has in so short a time caused the victory of the ancient
Sanâtana Dharma of your forefathers to resound even in lands far beyond
the seas — of that country, you are the heroes of heroes, the honoured
of all, mighty, well-bred, the learned of the learned — how much
therefore must you be able to perform far more uncommon, heroic deeds
for the welfare of your own land and nation, if you but will its Arise,
therefore, come forward, display the play of your superior power within,
manifest it, and we are standing with offerings of deepest veneration in
hand ready to worship you. We are ignorant, poor, unknown, and
insignificant beggars with only the beggar's garb as a means of
livelihood; whereas you are supreme in riches and influence, of mighty
power, born of noble descent, centres of all knowledge and learning! Why
not rouse yourselves? Why not take the lead? Show the way, show us that
example of perfect renunciation for the good of the world, and we will
follow you like bond-slaves!"

On the other hand, those who are showing unjustified signs of causeless,
rancorous hostilities out of absolute malice and envy — natural to a
slavish race — at the success and the celebrity of Shri Ramakrishna and
his name — to them we say, "Dear friends, vain are these efforts of
yours! If this infinite, unbounded, religious wave that has engulfed in
its depths the very ends of space — on whose snow-white crest shineth
this divine form in the august glow of a heavenly presence — if this be
the effect brought about by our eager endeavours in pursuit of personal
name, fame, or wealth, then, without your or any others' efforts, this
wave shall in obedience to the insuperable law of the universe, soon die
in the infinite womb of time, never to rise again! But if, again, this
tide, in accordance with the will and under the divine inspiration of
the One Universal Mother, has begun to deluge the world with the flood
of the unselfish love of a great man's heart, then, O feeble man, what
power cost thou possess that thou shouldst thwart the onward progress of
the Almighty Mother's will? "

</div>
