---
title: 'KNOWLEDGE: ITS SOURCE AND ACQUIREMENT'

---
<div>

[←](the_paris_congress.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm) / [→](modern_india.htm)

  

## KNOWLEDGE: ITS SOURCE AND ACQUIREMENT

(Translated from a [Bengali](b6031_gyanarjan.pdf) contribution by Swami
Vivekananda to the *Udbodhana*, 12th February, 1899.)

Various have been the theories propounded as regards the primitive
source of knowledge. We read in the Upanishads that Brahmâ, who was the
first and the foremost among the Devas, held the key to all knowledge,
which he revealed to his disciples and which, being handed down in
succession, has been bequeathed as a legacy to the subsequent age.
According to the Jains, during an indefinite period of cycle of Time,
which comprises between one thousand and two thousand billions of
"oceans" of years, are born some extraordinary, great, perfected beings
whom they call Jinas, and through them the door to knowledge is now and
shell opened to human society. Likewise Buddhism believes in, and
expects at regular intervals, the appearance of the Buddhas, that is,
persons possessed of infinite universal wisdom. The same is the reason
also of the introduction of Incarnations of God by the Paurânika Hindus,
who ascribe to them, along with other missions, the special function of
restoring the lost spiritual knowledge by its proper adjustment to the
needs of the time. Outside India, we find the great-souled Zoroaster
bringing down the light of knowledge from above to the mortal world. So
also did Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed, who, possessed of heavenly
authority, proclaim to fallen humanity the tidings of divine wisdom in
their own unique ways.

Brahma is the name of a high position among the Devas, to which every
man can aspire by virtue of meritorious deeds. Only a selected few can
become Jinas, while others can never attain to Jinahood; but they can
only go so far as to gain the state of Mukti. The state of being a
Buddha is open to one and all without distinction. Zoroaster, Moses,
Jesus, and Mohammed are great personalities who incarnated themselves
for the fulfilment of some special mission; so also did the Incarnations
of God mentioned by the Pauranika sages. For others to look up to that
seat of these divine personages with a longing eye is madness.

Adam got his knowledge through the tasting of the forbidden fruit. Noah
was taught social science by the grace of Jehovah. In India, the theory
is that every science has its presiding deity; their founders are either
Devas or perfected beings; from the most menial arts as that of a
cobbler to the most dignified office of the spiritual guide, everything
depends on the kind intervention of the gods or supreme beings. "No
knowledge is possible without a teacher." There is no way to the
attainment of knowledge unless it is transmitted through an apostolic
succession from disciple to disciple, unless it comes through the mercy
of the Guru and direct from his mouth.

Then again, the Vedantic and other philosophers of the Indian schools
hold that knowledge is not to be acquired from without. It is the innate
nature of the human soul and the essential birthright of every man. The
human soul is the repository of infinite wisdom; what external agency
can illuminate it? According to some schools, this infinite wisdom
remains always the same and is never lost; and man is not ordinarily;
conscious of this, because a veil, so to speak, has fallen over it on
account of his evil deeds, but as soon as the veil is removed it reveals
itself. Others say that this infinite wisdom, though potentially present
in a human soul, has become contracted through evil deeds and it becomes
expanded again by the mercy of God gained by good deeds. We also read in
our scriptures various other methods of unfolding this inborn infinite
power and knowledge, such as devotion to God, performance of work
without attachment, practicing the eightfold accessories of the Yoga
system, or constant dwelling on this knowledge, and so on. The final
conclusion, however, is this, that through the practice of one or more
or all of these methods together man gradually becomes conscious of his
inborn real nature, and the infinite power and wisdom within, latent or
veiled, becomes at last fully manifest.

On the other side, the modern philosophers have analysed the human mind
as the source of infinitely possible manifestations and have come to the
conclusion that when the individual mind on the one hand, and favourable
time, place, and causation on the other can act and react upon one
another, then highly developed consciousness of knowledge is sure to
follow. Nay, even the unfavourableness of time and place can be
successfully surmounted by the vigour and firmness of the individual.
The strong individual, even if he is thrown amidst the worst conditions
of place or time, overcomes them and affirms his own strength. Not only
so, all the heavy burdens heaped upon the individual, the acting agent,
are being made lighter and lighter in the course of time, so that any
individual, however weak he may be in the beginning, is sure to reach
the goal at the end if he assiduously applies himself to gain it. Look
at the uncivilised and ignorant barbarians of the other day! How through
close and studious application they are making long strides into the
domains of civilisation, how even those of the lower strata are making
their way and are occupying with an irresistible force the most exalted
positions in it! The sons of cannibal parents are turning out elegant
and educated citizens; the descendants of the uncivilised Santals,
thanks to the English Government, have been nowadays meeting in
successful competition our Bengali students in the Indian Universities.
As such, the partiality of the scientific investigators of the present
day to the doctrine of hereditary transmission of qualities is being
gradually diminished.

There is a certain class of men whose conviction is that from time
eternal there is a treasure of knowledge which contains the wisdom of
*everything* past, present, and future. These men hold that it was their
own forefathers who had the sole privilege of having the custody of this
treasure. The ancient sages, the first possessors of it, bequeathed in
succession this treasure and its true import to their descendants only.
They are, therefore, the only inheritors to it; as such, let the rest of
the world worship them.

May we ask these men what they think should be the condition of the
other peoples who have not got such forefathers? "Their condition is
doomed", is the general answer. The more kind-hearted among them is
perchance pleased to rejoin, "Well, let them come and serve us. As a
reward for such service, they will be born in our caste in the next
birth. That is the only hope we can hold out to them." "Well, the
moderns are making many new and original discoveries in the field of
science and arts, which neither you dreamt of, nor is there any proof
that your forefathers ever had knowledge of. What do you say to that?"
"Why certainly our forefathers knew all these things, the knowledge of
which is now unfortunately lost to us. Do you want a proof? I can show
you one. Look! Here is the Sanskrit verse . . . . . " Needless to add
that the modern party, who believes in direct evidence only, never
attaches any seriousness to such replies and proofs.

Generally, all knowledge is divided into two classes, the Aparâ,
secular, and the Parâ, spiritual. One pertains to perishable things, and
the other to the realm of the spirit. There is, no doubt, a great
difference these two classes of knowledge, and the way to the attainment
of the one may be entirely different from the way to the attainment of
the other. Nor can it be denied that no one method can be pointed out as
the sole and universal one which will serve as the key to all and every
door in the domain of knowledge. But in reality all this difference is
only one of degree and not of kind. It is not that secular and spiritual
knowledge are two opposite and contradictory things; but they are the
same thing — the same infinite knowledge which is everywhere fully
present from the lowest atom to the highest Brahman — they are the same
knowledge in its different stages of gradual development. This one
infinite knowledge we call secular when it is in its lower process of
manifestation, and spiritual when it reaches the corresponding higher
phase.

"All knowledge is possessed exclusively by some extraordinary great men,
and those special personages take birth by the command of God, or in
conformity to a higher law of nature, or in some preordained order of
Karma; except through the agency of these great ones, there is no other
way of attaining knowledge." If such a view be correct and certain,
there seems to be no necessity for any individual to strive hard to find
any new and original truth — all originality is lost to society for want
of exercise and encouragement; and the worst of all is that, society
tries to oppose and stop any attempt in the original direction, and thus
the faculty of the initiative dies out. If it is finally settled that
the path of human welfare is for ever chalked out by these omniscient
men, society naturally fears its own destruction if the least deviation
be made from the boundary line of the path, and so it tries to compel
all men through rigid laws and threats of punishment to follow that path
with unconditional obedience. If society succeeds in imposing such
obedience to itself by confining all men within the narrow groove of
these paths, then the destiny of mankind becomes no better than that of
a machine. If every act in a man's life has been all previously
determined, then what need is there for the culture of the faculty of
thought — where is the field for the free play of independent thought
and action? In course of time, for want of proper use, all activity is
given up, all originality is lost, a sort of Tâmasika dreamy
lifelessness hovers over the whole nation, and headlong it goes down and
down. The death of such a nation is not far to seek.

On the other hand, if the other extreme were true that that society
prospers the most which is not guided by the injunctions of such
divinely-inspired souls, then civilisation, wisdom, and prosperity —
deserting the Chinese, Hindus, Egyptians, Babylonians, Iranians, Greeks,
Romans, and other great nations of ancient and modern times, who have
always followed the path laid down by their sages — would have embraced
the Zulus, the Kafirs, the Hottentots, and the aboriginal tribes of the
Andamans and the Australian islands who have led a life of guideless
independence.

Considering all these points, it must be admitted that though the
presence of knowledge everywhere in every individual is an eternal
truism, yet the path pointed out by the great ones of the earth has the
glory peculiar to it, and that there is a peculiar interest attached to
the transmission of knowledge through the succession of teachers and
their disciples. Each of them has its place in the development of the
sum total of knowledge; and we must learn to estimate them according to
their respective merits. But, perhaps, being carried away by their
over-zealous and blind devotion to their Masters, the successors and
followers of these great ones sacrifice truth before the altar of
devotion and worship to them, and misrepresent the true meaning of the
purpose of those great lives by insisting on personal worship, that is,
they kill the principle for the person.

This is also a fact of common experience that when man himself has lost
all his own strength, he naturally likes to pass his days in idle
remembrance of his forefathers' greatness. The devoted heart gradually
becomes the weakest in its constant attempt to resign itself in every
respect to the feet of its ancestors, and at last a time comes when this
weakness teaches the disabled yet proud heart to make the vainglory of
its ancestors' greatness as the only support of its life. Even if it be
true that your ancestors possessed all knowledge, which has in the
efflux of time been lost to you, it follows that you, their descendants,
must have been instrumental in this disappearance of knowledge, and now
it is all the same to you whether you have it or not. To talk of having
or losing this already lost knowledge serves no useful purpose at
present. You will have to make new efforts, to undergo troubles over
again, if you want to recover it.

True, that spiritual illumination shines of itself in a pure heart, and,
as such, it is not something acquired from without; but to attain this
purity of heart means long struggle and constant practice. It has also
been found, on careful inquiry in the sphere of material knowledge, that
those higher truths which have now and then been discovered by great
scientific men have flashed like sudden floods of light in their mental
atmosphere, which they had only to catch and formulate. But such truths
never appear in the mind of an uncultured and wild savage. All these go
to prove that hard Tapasyâ, or practice of austerities in the shape of
devout contemplation and constant study of a subject is at the root of
all illumination in its respective spheres.

What we call extraordinary, superconscious inspiration is only the
result of a higher development of ordinary consciousness, gained by long
and continued effort. The difference between the ordinary and the
extraordinary is merely one of degree in manifestation. Conscious
efforts lead the way to superconscious illumination.

Infinite perfection is in every man, though unmanifested. Every man has
in him the potentiality of attaining to perfect saintliness, Rishihood,
or to the most exalted position of an Avatâra, or to the greatness of a
hero in material discoveries. It is only a question of time and adequate
well-guided investigation, etc., to have this perfection manifested. In
a society where once such great men were born, there the possibility of
their reappearance is greater. There can be no doubt that a society with
the help of such wise guides advances faster than the one without it.
But it is equally certain that such guides will rise up in the societies
that are now without them and will lead them to equally rapid progress
in the future.

</div>
