---
title: MODERN INDIA

---
<div>

[←](knowledge_its_source_and_acquirement.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_education_that_india_needs.htm)

  

## MODERN INDIA

(*Translated from a [Bengali](b6171_modern_india.pdf) contribution to
the Udbodhana, March 1899*)

The Vedic priests base their superior strength on the knowledge of the
sacrificial Mantras. (Vedic hymns uttered by the priests to invoke the
Devas at the time of sacrifice.) By the power of these Mantras, the
Devas are made to come down from their heavenly abodes, accept the drink
and food offerings, and grant the prayers of the Yajamânas. (The men who
perform sacrifices.) The kings as well as their subjects are, therefore,
looking up to these priests for their welfare during their earthly life.
Raja Soma (The name of the Soma plant as commonly found in the Vedas.
The priests offered to the Devas the juice of this plant at the time of
sacrifice.) is worshipped by the priest and is made to thrive by the
power of his Mantras. As such, the Devas, whose favourite food is the
juice of the Soma plant offered in oblation by the priest, are always
kind to him and bestow his desired boons. Thus strengthened by divine
grace, he defies all human opposition; for what can the power of mortals
do against that of the gods? Even the king, the centre of all earthly
power, is a supplicant at his door. A kind look from him is the greatest
help; his mere blessing a tribute to the State, pre-eminent above
everything else.

Now commanding the king to be engaged in affairs fraught with death and
ruin, now standing by him as his fastest friend with kind and wise
counsels, now spreading the net of subtle, diplomatic statesmanship in
which the king is easily caught — the priest is seen, oftentimes, to
make the royal power totally subservient to him. Above all, the worst
fear is in the knowledge that the name and fame of the royal forefathers
and of himself and his family lie at the mercy of the priest's pen. He
is the historian. The king might have paramount power; attaining a great
glory in his reign, he might prove himself as the father and mother in
one to his subjects; but if the priest is not appeased, his sun of glory
goes down with his last breath for ever; all his worth and usefulness
deserving of universal approbation are lost in the great womb of time,
like unto the fall of gentle dew on the ocean. Others who inaugurated
the huge sacrifices lasting over many years, the performers of the
Ashvamedha and so on — those who showered, like incessant rain in the
rainy season, countless wealth on the priests — their names, thanks to
the grace of priests, are emblazoned in the pages of history. The name
of Priyadarshi Dharmâshoka, (The name given to the great king, Asoka,
after he embraced Buddhism) the beloved of the gods, is nothing but a
name in the priestly world, while Janamejaya, (The performer of the
great snake-sacrifice of Mahâbhârata.) son of Parikshit, is a household
word in every Hindu family.

To protect the State, to meet the expenses of the personal comforts and
luxuries of himself and his long retinue, and, above all, to fill to
overflowing the coffers of the all-powerful priesthood for its
propitiation, the king is continually draining the resources of his
subjects, even as the sun sucks up moisture from the earth. His especial
prey — his milch cows — are the Vaishyas.

Neither under the Hindu kings, nor under the Buddhist rule, do we find
the common subject-people taking any part in expressing their voice in
the affairs of the State. True, Yudhishthira visits the houses of
Vaishyas and even Shudras when he is in Vâranâvata; true, the subjects
are praying for the installation of Râmachandra to the regency of
Ayodhyâ; nay, they are even criticising the conduct of Sitâ and secretly
making plans for the bringing about of her exile: but as a recognised
rule of the State they have no direct voice in the supreme government.
The power of the populace is struggling to express itself in indirect
and disorderly ways without any method. The people have not as yet the
conscious knowledge of the existence of this power. There is neither the
attempt on their part to organise it into a united action, nor have they
got the will to do so; there is also a complete absence of that
capacity, that skill, by means of which small and incoherent centres of
force are united together, creating insuperable strength as their
resultant.

Is this due to want of proper laws? — no, that is not it. There are
laws, there are methods, separately and distinctly assigned for the
guidance of different departments of government, there are laws laid
down in the minutest detail for everything, such as the collection of
revenue, the management of the army, the administration of justice,
punishments and rewards. But at the root of all, is the injunction of
the Rishi — the word of divine authority, the revelation of God coming
through the inspired Rishi. The laws have, it can almost be said, no
elasticity in them. Under the circumstances, it is never possible for
the people to acquire any sort of education by which they can learn to
combine among themselves and be united for the accomplishment of any
object for the common good of the people, or by which they can have the
concerted intellect to conceive the idea of popular right in the
treasures collected by the king from his subjects, or even such
education by which they can be fired with the aspiration to gain the
right of representation in the control of State revenues and
expenditure. Why should they do such things? Is not the inspiration of
the Rishi responsible for their prosperity and progress?

Again, all those laws are in books. Between laws as codified in books
and their operation in practical life, there is a world of difference.
One Ramachandra is born after thousands of Agnivarnas[1](#fn1) pass
away! Many kings show us the life of Chandâshoka[2](#fn2); Dharmâshokas
are rare! The number of kings like Akbar, in whom the subjects find
their life, is far less than that of kings like Aurangzeb who live on
the blood of their people!

Even if the kings be of as godlike nature as that of Yudhishthira,
Ramachandra, Dharmashoka, or Akbar under whose benign rule the people
enjoyed safety and prosperity, and were looked after with paternal care
by their rulers, the hand of him who is always fed by another gradually
loses the power of taking the food to his mouth. His power of
self-preservation can never become fully manifest who is always
protected in every respect by another. Even the strongest youth remains
but a child if he is always looked after as a child by his parents.
Being always governed by kings of godlike nature, to whom is left the
whole duty of protecting and providing for the people, they can never
get any occasion for understanding the principles of self-government.
Such a nation, being entirely dependent on the king for everything and
never caring to exert itself for the common good or for self-defence,
becomes gradually destitute of inherent energy and strength. If this
state of dependence and protection continues long, it becomes the cause
of the destruction of the nation, and its ruin is not far to seek.

Of course, it can be reasonably concluded that, when the government a
country, is guided by codes of laws enjoined by Shâstras which are the
outcome of knowledge inspired by the divine genius of great sages, such
a government must lead to the unbroken welfare of the rich and the poor,
the wise and the ignorant, the king and the subjects alike. But we have
seen already how far the operation of those laws was, or may be,
possible in practical life. The voice of the ruled in the government of
their land — which is the watchword of the modern Western world, and of
which the last expression has been echoed with a thundering voice in the
Declaration of the American Government, in the words, "That the
government of the people of this country must be by the people and for
the good of the people" — cannot however be said to have been totally
unrecognised in ancient India. The Greek travellers and others saw many
independent small States scattered all over this country, and references
are also found to this effect in many places of the Buddhistic
literature. And there cannot be the least doubt about it that the germ
of self-government was at least present in the shape of the village
Panchâyat, (Literally, "government by five", in which the village-men
sit together and decide among themselves, all disputes.) which is still
to be found in existence in many places of India. But the germ remained
for ever the germ; the seed though put in the ground never grew into a
tree. This idea of self-government never passed beyond the embryo state
of the village Panchayat system and never spread into society at large.

In the religious communities, among Sannyasins in the Buddhist
monasteries, we have ample evidence to show that self-government was
fully developed. Even now, one wonders to see how the power of the
Panchayat system of the principles of self-government, is working
amongst the Nâgâ Sannyasins — what deep respect the "Government by the
Five" commands from them, what effective individual rights each Naga can
exercise within his own sect, what excellent working of the power of
organisation and concerted action they have among themselves!

With the deluge which swept the land at the advent of Buddhism, the
priestly power fell into decay and the royal power was in the ascendant.
Buddhist priests are renouncers of the world, living in monasteries as
homeless ascetics, unconcerned with secular affairs. They have neither
the will nor the endeavour to bring and keep the royal power under their
control through the threat of curses or magic arrows. Even if there were
any remnant of such a will, its fulfilment has now become an
impossibility. For Buddhism has shaken the thrones of all the
oblation-eating gods and brought them down from their heavenly
positions. The state of being a Buddha is superior to the heavenly
positions of many a Brahmâ or an Indra, who vie with each other in
offering their worship at the feet of the Buddha, the God-man! And to
this Buddhahood, every man has the privilege to attain; it is open to
all even in this life. From the descent of the gods, as a natural
consequence, the superiority of the priests who were supported by them
is gone.

Accordingly, the reins of that mighty sacrificial horse — the royal
power — are no longer held in the firm grasp of the Vedic priest; and
being now free, it can roam anywhere by its unbridled will. The centre
of power in this period is neither with the priests chanting the Sâma
hymns and performing the Yajnas according to the Yajur-Veda; nor is the
power vested in the hands of Kshatriya kings separated from each other
and ruling over small independent States. But the centre of power in
this age is in emperors whose unobstructed sway extend over vast areas
bounded by the ocean, covering the whole of India from one end to the
other. The leaders of this age are no longer Vishvâmitra or Vasishtha,
but emperors like Chandragupta, Dharmashoka, and others. There never
were emperors who ascended the throne of India and led her to the
pinnacle of her glory such as those lords of the earth who ruled over
her in paramount sway during the Buddhistic period. The end of this
period is characterised by the appearance of Râjput power on the scene
and the rise of modern Hinduism. With the rise of Rajput power, on the
decline of Buddhism, the sceptre of the Indian empire, dislodged from
its paramount power, was again broken into a thousand pieces and wielded
by small powerless hands. At this time, the Brâhminical (priestly) power
again succeeded in raising its head, not as an adversary as before, but
this time as an auxiliary to the royal supremacy.

During this revolution, that perpetual struggle for supremacy between
the priestly and the royal classes, which began from the Vedic times and
continued through ages till it reached its climax at the time of the
Jain and Buddhist revolutions, has ceased for ever. Now these two mighty
powers are friendly to each other; but neither is there any more that
glorious Kshatra (warlike) velour of the kings, nor that spiritual
brilliance which characterised the Brahmins; each has lost his former
intrinsic strength. As might be expected, this new union of the two
forces was soon engaged in the satisfaction of mutual self-interests,
and became dissipated by spending its vitality on extirpating their
common opponents, especially the Buddhists of the time, and on similar
other deeds. Being steeped in all the vices consequent on such a union,
e.g., the sucking of the blood of the masses, taking revenge on the
enemy, spoliation of others' property, etc., they in vain tried to
imitate the Râjasuya and other Vedic sacrifices of the ancient kings,
and only made a ridiculous farce of them. The result was that they were
bound hand and foot by a formidable train of sycophantic attendance and
its obsequious flatteries, and being entangled in an interminable net of
rites and ceremonies with flourishes of Mantras and the like, they soon
became a cheap and ready prey to the Mohammeden invaders from the West.

That priestly power which began its strife for superiority with the
royal power from the Vedic times and continued it down the ages, that
hostility against the Kshatra power, Bhagavân Shri Krishna succeeded by
his super-human genius in putting a stop to, at least for the tired
being, during his earthly existence. That Brâhmanya power was almost
effaced from its field of work in India during the Jain and Buddhist
revolutions, or, perhaps, was holding its feeble stand by being
subservient to the strong antagonistic religions. That Brahmanya power,
since this appearance of Rajput power, which held sway over India under
the Mihira dynasty and others, made its last effort to recover its lost
greatness; and in its effort to establish that supremacy, it sold itself
at the feet of the fierce hordes of barbarians newly come from Central
Asia, and to win their pleasure introduced in the land their hateful
manners and customs. Moreover, it, the Brahmanya; power, solely devoting
itself to the easy means to dupe ignorant barbarians, brought into vogue
mysterious rites and ceremonies backed by its new Mantras and the like;
and in doing so, itself lost its former wisdom, its former vigour and
vitality, and its own chaste habits of long acquirement. Thus it turned
the whole Âryâvarta into a deep and vast whirlpool of the most vicious,
the most horrible, the most abominable, barbarous customs; and as the
inevitable consequence of countenancing these detestable customs and
superstitions, it soon lost all its own internal strength and stamina
and became the weakest of the weak. What wonder that it should be broken
into a thousand pieces and fall at the mere touch of the storm of
Mussulman invasions from the West! That great Brahmanya power fell — who
knows, if ever to rise again?

The resuscitation of the priestly power under the Mussulman rule was, on
the other hand, an utter impos sibility. The Prophet Mohammed himself
was dead against the priestly class in any shape and tried his best for
the total destruction of this power by formulating rules and injunctions
to that effect. Under the Mussulman rule, the king himself was the
supreme priest; he was the chief guide in religious matters; and when he
became the emperor, he cherished the hope of being the paramount leader
in all matters over the whole Mussulman world. To the Mussulman, the
Jews or the Christians are not objects of extreme detestation; they are,
at the worst, men of little faith. But not so the Hindu. According to
him, the Hindu is idolatrous, the hateful Kafir; hence in this life he
deserves to be butchered; and in the next, eternal hell is in store for
him. The utmost the Mussulman kings could do as a favour to the priestly
class — the spiritual guides of these Kafirs — was to allow them somehow
to pass their life silently and wait for the last moment. This was again
sometimes considered too, much kindness! If the religious ardour of any
king was a little more uncommon, there would immediately follow
arrangements for a great Yajna by way of Kafir-slaughter!

On one side, the royal power is now centred in kings professing a
different religion and given to different customs. On the other, the
priestly power has been entirely displaced from its influential position
as the controller and lawgiver of the society. The Koran and its code of
laws have taken the place of the Dharma Shâstras of Manu and others. The
Sanskrit language has made room for the Persian and the Arabic. The
Sanskrit language has to remain confined only to the purely religious
writings and religious matters of the conquered and detested Hindu, and,
as such, has since been living a precarious life at the hands of the
neglected priest. The priest himself, the relic of the Brahmanya power,
fell back upon the last resource of conducting only thecomparatively
unimportant family ceremonies, such as the matrimonial etc., and that
also only so long and as much as the mercy of the Mohammedan rulers
permitted.

In the Vedic and the adjoining periods, the royal power could not
manifest itself on account of the grinding pressure of the priestly
power. We have seen how, during the Buddhistic revolution, resulting in
the fall of the Brahminical supremacy, the royal power in India reached
its culminating point. In the interval between the fall of the
Buddhistic and the establishment of the Mohammedan empire, we have seen
how the royal power was trying to raise its head through the Rajputs in
India, and how it failed in its attempt. At the root of this failure,
too, could be traced the same old endeavours of the Vedic priestly class
to bring back and revive with a new life their original (ritualistic)
days.

Crushing the Brahminical supremacy under his feet the Mussulman king was
able to restore to a considerable extent the lost glories of such
dynasties of emperors as the Maurya, the Gupta, the Andhra, and the
Kshâtrapa. (The Persian governors of Âryâvarta and Gujarat.)

Thus the priestly power — which sages like Kumârila, Shankara, and
Râmânuja tried to re-establish, which for some time was supported by the
sword of the Rajput power, and which tried to rebuild its structure on
the fall of its Jain and Buddhist adversaries — was under Mohammedan
rule laid to sleep for ever, knowing no awakening. In this period, the
antagonism or warfare is not between kings and priests, but between
kings and kings. At the end of this period, when Hindu power again
raised its head, and, to some extent, was successful in regenerating
Hinduism through the Mahrattas and the Sikhs, we do not find much play
of the priestly power with these regenerations. On the contrary, when
the Sikhs admitted any Brahmin into their sect, they, at first,
compelled him publicly to give up his previous Brahminical signs and
adopt the recognised signs of their own religion.

In this manner, after an age-long play of action and reaction between
these two forces, the final victory of the royal power was echoed on the
soil of India for several centuries, in the name of foreign monarchs
professing an entirely different religion from the faith of the land.
But at the end of this Mohammedan period, another entirely new power
made its appearance on the arena and slowly began to assert its prowess
in the affairs of the Indian world.

This power is so new, its nature and workings are so foreign to the
Indian mind, its rise so inconceivable, and its vigour so insuperable
that though it wields the suzerain power up till now, only a handful of
Indians understand what this power is.

We are talking of the occupation of India by England.

From very ancient times, the fame of India's vast wealth and her rich
granaries has enkindled in many powerful foreign nations the desire for
conquering her. She has been, in fact, again and again conquered by
foreign nations. Then why should we say that the occupation of India by
England was something new and foreign to the Indian mind?

From time immemorial Indians have seen the mightiest royal power tremble
before the frown of the ascetic priest, devoid of worldly desire, armed
with spiritual strength — the power of Mantras (sacred formulas) and
religious lore — and the weapon of curses. They have also seen the
subject people silently obey the commands of their heroic all-powerful
suzerains, backed by their arms and armies, like a flock of sheep before
a lion. But that a handful of Vaishyas (traders) who, despite their
great wealth, have ever crouched awe stricken not only before the king
but also before any member of the royal family, would unite, cross for
purposes of business rivers and seas, would, solely by virtue of their
intelligence and wealth, by degrees make puppets of the long-established
Hindu and Mohammedan dynasties; not only so, but that they would buy as
well the services of the ruling powers of their own country and use
their valour and learning as powerful instruments for the influx of
their own riches — this is a spectacle entirely novel to the Indians, as
also the spectacle that the descendants of the mighty nobility of a
country, of which a proud lord, sketched by the extraordinary pen of its
great poet, says to a common man, "Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a
nobleman?" would, in no distant future, consider it the zenith of human
ambition to be sent to India as obedient servants of a body of
merchants, called The East India Company — such a sight was, indeed, a
novelty unseen by India before!

According to the prevalence, in greater or lesser degree, of the three
qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas in man, the four castes, the
Brahmin, Kashatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra, are everywhere present at all
times, in all civilised societies. By the mighty hand of time, their
number and power also vary at different times in regard to different
countries. In some countries the numerical strength or influence of one
of these castes may preponderate over another; at some period, one of
the classes may be more powerful than the rest. But from a careful study
of the history of the world, it appears that in conformity to the law of
nature the four castes, the Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra do,
in every society, one after another in succession, govern the world.

Among the Chinese, the Sumerians, the Babylonians, the Egyptians, the
Chaldeans, the Areas, the Iranians, the Jews, the Arabs — among all
these ancient nations, the supreme power of guiding society is, in the
first period of their history, in the hands of the Brahmin or the
priest. In the second period, the ruling power is the Kshatriya, that
is, either absolute monarchy or oligarchical government by a chosen body
of men. Among the modern Western nations, with England at their head,
this power of controlling society has been, for the first time, in the
hands of the Vaishyas or mercantile communities, made rich through the
carrying on of commerce.

Though Troy and Carthage of ancient times and Venice and similar other
small commercial States of comparatively modern times became highly
powerful, yet, amongst them, there was not the real rising of the
Vaishya power in the proper sense of the term.

Correctly speaking, the descendants of the royal family had the sole
monopoly of the commerce of those old days by employing the common
people and their servants under them to carry on the trade; and they
appropriated to themselves the profits accruing from it. Excepting these
few men, no one was allowed to take any part or voice an opinion even in
the government of the country and kindred affairs. In the oldest
countries like Egypt, the priestly power enjoyed unmolested supremacy
only for a short period, after which it became subjugated to the royal
power and lived as an auxiliary to it. In China, the royal power,
centralised by the genius of Confucius, has been controlling and guiding
the priestly power, in accordance with its absolute will, for more than
twenty-five centuries; and during the last two centuries, the
all-absorbing Lamas of Tibet, though they are the spiritual guides of
the royal family, have been compelled to pass their days, being subject
in every way to the Chinese Emperor.

In India, the royal power succeeded in conquering the priestly power and
declaring its untrammelled authority long after the other ancient
civilised nations had done so; and therefore the inauguration of the
Indian Empire came about long after the Chinese, Egyptian, Babylonian,
and other Empires had risen. It was only with the Jewish people that the
royal power, though it tried hard to establish its supremacy over the
priestly, had to meet a complete defeat in the attempt. Not even the
Vaishyas attained the ruling power with the Jews. On the other hand, the
common subject people, trying to free themselves from the shackles of
priestcraft, were crushed to death under the internal commotion of
adverse religious movements like Christianity and the external pressure
of the mighty Roman Empire.

As in the ancient days the priestly power, in spite of its
long-continued struggle, was subdued by the more powerful royal power,
so, in modern times, before the violent blow of the newly-risen Vaishya
power, many a kingly crown has to kiss the ground, many a sceptre is for
ever broken to pieces. Only those few thrones which are allowed still to
exercise some power in some of the civilised countries and make a
display of their royal pomp and grandeur are all maintained solely by
the vast hordes of wealth of these Vaishya communities — the dealers in
salt, oil, sugar, and wine — and kept up as a magnificent and an
imposing front. and as a means of glorification to the really governing
body behind, the Vaishyas.

That mighty newly-risen Vaishya power — at whose command, electricity
carries messages in an instant from one pole to another, whose highway
is the vast ocean, with its mountain-high waves, at whose instance,
commodities are being carried with the greatest ease from one part of
the globe to another, and at whose mandate, even the greatest monarchs
tremble — on the white foamy crest of that huge wave the all-conquering
Vaishya power, is installed the majestic throne of England in all its
grandeur.

Therefore the conquest of India by England is not a conquest by Jesus or
the Bible as we are often asked to believe. Neither is it like the
conquest of India by the Moguls and the Pathans. But behind the name of
the Lord Jesus, the Bible, the magnificent palaces, the heavy tramp of
the feet of armies consisting of elephants, chariots, cavalry, and
infantry, shaking the earth, the sounds of war trumpets, bugles, and
drums, and the splendid display of the royal throne, behind all these,
there is always the virtual presence of England — that England whose war
flag is the factory chimney, whose troops are the merchantmen, whose
battlefields are the market-places of the world, and whose Empress is
the shining Goddess of Fortune herself! It is on this account I have
said before that it is indeed an unseen novelty, this conquest of India
by England. What new revolution will be effected in India by her clash
with the new giant power, and as the result of that revolution what new
transformation is in store for future India, cannot be inferred from her
past history.

I have stated previously that the four castes, Brahmin, Kshatriya,
Vaishya, and Shudra do, in succession, rule the world. During the period
of supreme authority exercised by each of these castes, some acts are
accomplished which conduce to the welfare of the people, while others
are injurious to them.

The foundation of the priestly power rests on intellectual strength, and
not on the physical strength of arms. Therefore, with the supremacy of
the priestly power, there is a great prevalence of intellectual and
literary culture. Every human heart is always anxious for communication
with, and help from, the supersensuous spiritual world. The entrance to
that world is not possible for the generality of mankind; only a few
great souls who can acquire a perfect control over their sense-organs
and who are possessed with a nature preponderating with the essence of
Sattva Guna are able to pierce the formidable wall of matter and come
face to face, as it were, with the supersensuous — it is only they who
know the workings of the kingdom that bring the messages from it and
show the way to others. These great souls are the priests, the primitive
guides, leaders, and movers of human societies.

The priest knows the gods and communicates with them; he is therefore
worshipped as a god. Leaving behind the thoughts of the world, he has no
longer to devote himself to the earning of his bread by the sweat of his
brow. The best and foremost parts of all food and drink are due as
offerings to the gods; and of these gods, the visible proxies on earth
are the priests. It is through their mouths that they partake of the
offerings. Knowingly or unknowingly, society gives the priest abundant
leisure, and he can therefore get the opportunity of being meditative
and of thinking higher thoughts. Hence the development of wisdom and
learning originates first with the supremacy of the priestly power.
There stands the priest between the dreadful lion — the king — on the
one hand, and the terrified flock of sheep — the subject people — on the
other. The destructive leap of the lion is checked by the controlling
rod of spiritual power in the hands of the priest. The flame of the
despotic will of the king, maddened in the pride of his wealth and men,
is able to burn into ashes everything that comes in his way; but it is
only a word from the priest, who has neither wealth nor men behind him
but whose sole strength is his spiritual power, that can quench the
despotic royal will, as water the fire.

With the ascendancy of the priestly supremacy are seen the first advent
of civilisation, the first victory of the divine nature over the animal,
the first mastery of spirit over matter, and the first manifestation of
the divine power which is potentially present in this very slave of
nature, this lump of flesh, to wit, the human body. The priest is the
first discriminator of spirit from matter, the first to help to bring
this world in communion with the next, the first messenger from the gods
to man, and the intervening bridge that connects the king with his
subjects. The first offshoot of universal welfare and good is nursed by
his spiritual power, by his devotion to learning and wisdom, by his
renunciation, the watchword of his life and, watered even by the flow of
his own life-blood. It is therefore that in every land it was he to whom
the first and foremost worship was offered. It is therefore that even
his memory is sacred to us!

There are evils as well. With the growth of life is sown simultaneously
the seed of death. Darkness and light always go together. Indeed, there
are great evils which, if not checked in proper time, lead to the ruin
of society. The play of power through gross matter is universally
experienced; everyone sees, everyone understands, the mighty
manifestation of gross material force as displayed in the play of
battle-axes and swords, or in the burning properties of fire and
lightning. Nobody doubts these things, nor can there ever be any
question about their genuineness. But where the repository of power and
the centre of its play are wholly mental, where the power is confined to
certain special words, to certain special modes of uttering them, to the
mental repetition of certain mysterious syllables, or to other similar
processes and applications of the mind, there light is mixed with shade,
there the ebb and flow naturally disturb the otherwise unshaken faith,
and there even when things are actually seen or directly perceived,
still sometimes doubts arise as to their real occurrence. Where
distress, fear, anger, malice, spirit of retaliation, and the like
passions of man, leaving the palpable force of arms, leaving the gross
material methods to gain the end in view which every one can understand,
substitute in their stead the mysterious mental processes like
Stambhana, Uchchâtana, Vashikarana, and Mârana[3](#fn3) for their
fructification — there a cloud of smoky indistinctness, as it were,
naturally envelops the mental atmosphere of these men who often live and
move in such hazy worlds of obscure mysticism. No straight line of
action presents itself before such a mind; even if it does, the mind
distorts it into crookedness. The final result of all this is
insincerity — that very limited narrowness of the heart — and above all,
the most fatal is the extreme intolerance born of malicious envy at the
superior excellence of another.

The priest naturally says to himself: "Why should I part with the power
that has made the Devas subservient to me, has given me mastery over
physical and mental illnesses, and has gained for me the service of
ghosts, demons, and other unseen spirits? I have dearly bought this
power by the price of extreme renunciation. Why should I give to others
that to get which I had to give up my wealth, name, fame, in short, all
my earthly comforts and happiness?" Again, that power is entirely
mental. And how many opportunities are there of keeping it a perfect
secret! Entangled in this wheel of circumstances, human nature becomes
what it inevitably would: being used to practice constant
self-concealment, it becomes a victim of extreme selfishness and
hypocrisy, and at last succumbs to the poisonous consequences which they
bring in their train. In time, the reaction of this very desire to
concealment rebounds upon oneself. All knowledge, all wisdom is almost
lost for want of proper exercise and diffusion, and what little remains
is thought to have been obtained from some supernatural source; and,
therefore, far from making fresh efforts to go in for originality and
gain knowledge of new sciences, it is considered useless and futile to
attempt even to improve the remnants of the old by cleansing them of
their corruptions. Thus lost to former wisdom, the former indomitable
spirit of self- reliance, the priest, now glorifying himself merely in
the name of his forefathers, vainly struggles to preserve untarnished
for himself the same glory, the same privilege, the same veneration, and
the same supremacy as was enjoyed by his great forefathers.
Consequently, his violent collision with the other castes.

According to the law of nature, wherever there is an awakening of a new
and stronger life, there it tries to conquer and take the place of the
old and the decaying. Nature favours the dying out of the unfit and the
survival of the fittest. The final result of such conflict between the
priestly and the other classes has been mentioned already.

That renunciation, self-control, and asceticism of the priest which
during the period of his ascendancy were devoted to the pursuance of
earnest researches of truth are on the eve of his decline employed anew
and spent solely in the accumulation of objects of self-gratification
and in the extension of privileged superiority over others. That power,
the centralization of which in himself gave him all honour and worship,
has now been dragged down from its high heavenly position to the lowest
abyss of hell. Having lost sight of the goal, drifting aimless, the
priestly power is entangled, like the spider, in the web spun by itself.
The chain that has been forged from generation to generation with the
greatest care to be put on others' feet is now tightened round its own
in a thousand coils, and is thwarting its own movement in hundreds of
ways. Caught in the endless thread of the net of infinite rites,
ceremonies, and customs, which it spread on all sides as external means
for purification of the body and the mind with a view to keeping society
in the iron grasp of these innumerable bonds — the priestly power, thus
hopelessly entangled from head to foot, is now asleep in despair! There
is no escaping out of it now. Tear the net, and the priesthood of the
priest is shaken to its foundation! There is implanted in every man,
naturally, a strong desire for progress; and those who, finding that the
fulfilment of this desire is an impossibility so long as one is
trammelled in the shackles of priesthood, rend this net and take to the
profession of other castes in order to earn money thereby — them, the
society immediately dispossesses of their priestly rights. Society has
no faith in the Brahminhood of the so-called Brahmins who, instead of
keeping the Shikhâ, (The sacred tuft or lock of hair left on the crown
of the head at tonsure.) part their hair, who, giving up their ancient
habits and ancestral customs, clothe themselves in semi European dress
and adopt the newly introduced usages from the West in a hybrid fashion.
Again, in those parts of India, wherever this new-comer, the English
Government, is introducing new modes of education and opening up new
channels for the coming in of wealth, there hosts of Brahmin youths are
giving up their hereditary priestly profession and trying to earn their
livelihood and become rich by adopting the callings of other castes,
with the result that the habits and customs of the priestly class,
handed down from their distant forefathers, are scattered to the winds
and are fast disappearing from the land.

In Gujarat, each secondary sect of the Brahmins is divided into two
subdivisions, one being those who still stick to the priestly
profession, while the other lives by other professions. There only the
first subdivisions, carrying on the priestly profession, are called
"Brâhmanas", and though the other subdivisions are by lineage
descendants from Brahmin fathers, yet the former do not link themselves
in matrimonial relation with the latter. For example, by the name of
"Nâgara Brâhmana" are meant only those Brahmins who are priests living
on alms; and by the name "Nâgara" only are meant those Brahmins who have
accepted service under the Government, or those who have been carrying
on the Vaishya's profession. But it appears that such distinctions will
not long continue in these days in Gujarat. Even the sons of the "Nagara
Brahmanas" are nowadays getting English education, and entering into
Government service, or adopting some mercantile business. Even orthodox
Pandits of the old school, undergoing pecuniary difficulties, are
sending their sons to the colleges of the English universities or making
them choose the callings of Vaidyas, Kâyasthas, and other non-Brahmin
castes. If the current of affairs goes on running in this course, then
it is a question of most serious reflection, no doubt, how long more
will the priestly class continue on India's soil. Those who lay the
fault of attempting to bring down the supremacy of the priestly class at
the door of any particular person or body of persons other than
themselves ought to know that, in obedience to the inevitable law of
nature, the Brahmin caste is erecting with its own hands its own
sepulchre; and this is what ought to be. It is good and appropriate that
every caste of high birth and privileged nobility should make it its
principal duty to raise its own funeral pyre with its own hands.
Accumulation of power is as necessary as its diffusion, or rather more
so. The accumulation of blood in the heart is an indispensable condition
for life; its non-circulation throughout the body means death. For the
welfare of society, it is absolutely necessary at certain times to have
all knowledge and power concentrated in certain families or castes to
the exclusion of others, but that concentrated power is focussed for the
time being, only to be scattered broadcast over the whole of society in
future. If this diffusion be withheld, the destruction of that society
is, without doubt, near at hand.

On the other side, the king is like the lion; in him are present both
the good and evil propensities of the lord of beasts. Never for a moment
his fierce nails are held back from tearing to pieces the heart of
innocent animals, living on herbs and grass, to allay his thirst for
blood when occasion arises; again, the poet says, though himself
stricken with old age and dying with hunger, the lion never kills the
weakest fox that throws itself in his arms for protection. If the
subject classes, for a moment, stand as impediments in the way of the
gratification of the senses of the royal lion, their death knell is
inevitably tolled; if they humbly bow down to his commands, they are
perfectly safe. Not only so. Not to speak of ancient days, even in
modern times, no society can be found in any country where the
effectiveness of individual self-sacrifice for the good of the many and
of the oneness of purpose and endeavour actuating every member of the
society for the common good of the whole have been fully realised. Hence
the necessity of the kings who are the creations of the society itself.
They are the centres where all the forces of society, otherwise loosely
scattered about, are made to converge, and from which they start and
course through the body politic and animate society.

As during the Brâhminical supremacy, at the first stage is the awakening
of the first impulse for search after knowledge, and later the continual
and careful fostering of the growth of that impulse still in its infancy
— so, during the Kshatriya supremacy, a strong desire for pleasure
pursuits has made its appearance at the first stage, and later have
sprung up inventions and developments of arts and sciences as the means
for its gratification. Can the king, in the height of his glory, hide
his proud head within the lowly cottages of the poor? Or can the common
good of his subjects ever minister to his royal appetite with
satisfaction?

He whose dignity bears no comparison with anyone else on earth, he who
is divinity residing in the temple of the human body — for the common
man, to cast even a mere glance at his, the king's, objects of pleasure
is a great sin; to think of ever possessing them is quite out of the
question. The body of the king is not like the bodies of other people,
it is too sacred to be polluted by any contamination; in certain
countries it is even believed never to come under the sway of death. A
halo of equal sacredness shines around the queen, so she is scrupulously
guarded from the gaze of the common folk, not even the sun may cast a
glance on her beauty! Hence the rising of magnificent palaces to take
the place of thatched cottages. The sweet harmonious strain of artistic
music, flowing as it were from heaven, silenced the disorderly jargon of
the rabble. Delightful gardens, pleasant groves, beautiful galleries,
charming paintings, exquisite sculptures, fine and costly apparel began
to displace by gradual steps the natural beauties of rugged woods and
the rough and coarse dress of the simple rustic. Thousands of
intelligent men left the toilsome task of the ploughman and turned their
attention to the new field of fine arts, where they could display the
finer play of their intellect in less laborious and easier ways.
Villages lost their importance; cities rose in their stead.

It was in India, again, that the kings, after having enjoyed for some
time earthly pleasures to their full satisfaction, were stricken at the
latter part of their lives with heavy world-weariness, as is sure to
follow on extreme sense-gratification; and thus being satiated with
worldly pleasures, they retired at their old age into secluded forests,
and there began to contemplate the deep problems of life. The results of
such renunciation and deep meditation were marked by a strong dislike
for cumbrous rites and ceremonials and an extreme devotion to the
highest spiritual truths which we find embodied in the Upanishads, the
Gita, and the Jain and the Buddhist scriptures. Here also was a great
conflict between the priestly and the royal powers. Disappearance of the
elaborate rites and ceremonials meant a death-blow to the priest's
profession. Therefore, naturally, at all times and in every country, the
priests gird up their loins and try their best to preserve the ancient
customs and usages, while on the other side stand in opposition kings
like Janaka, backed by Kshatriya prowess as well as spiritual power. We
have dealt at length already on this bitter antagonism between the two
parties.

As the priest is busy about centralising all knowledge and learning at a
common centre, to wit, himself, so the king is ever up and doing in
collecting all the earthly powers and focusing them in a central point,
i.e. his own self. Of course, both are beneficial to society. At one
time they are both needed for the common good of society, but that is
only at its infant stage. But if attempts be made, when society has
passed its infant stage and reached its vigorous youthful condition, to
clothe it by force with the dress which suited it in its infancy and
keep it bound within narrow limits, then either it bursts the bonds by
virtue of its own strength and tries to advance, or where it fails to do
so, it retraces its footsteps and by slow degrees returns to its
primitive uncivilised condition.

Kings are like parents to their subjects, and the subjects are the
kings' children. The subjects should, in every respect, look up to the
king and stick to their king with unreserved obedience, and the king
should rule them with impartial justice and look to their welfare and
bear the same affection towards them as he would towards his own
children. But what rule applies to individual homes applies to the whole
society as well, for society is only the aggregate of individual homes.
"When the son attains the age of sixteen, the father ought to deal with
him as his friend and equal"[4](#fn4) — if that is the rule, does not
the infant society ever attain that age of sixteen? It is the evidence
of history that at a certain time every society attains its manhood,
when a strong conflict ensues between the ruling power and the common
people. The life of the society, its expansion and civilisation, depend
on its victory or defeat in this conflict.

Such changes, revolutionizing society, have been happening in India
again and again, only in this country they have been effected in the
name of religion, for religion is the life of India, religion is the
language of this country, the symbol of all its movements. The Chârvâka,
the Jain, the Buddhist, Shankara, Ramanuja, Kabir, Nânak, Chaitanya, the
Brâhmo Samâj, the Arya Samaj — of all these and similar other sects, the
wave of religion, foaming, thundering, surging, breaks in the front,
while in the rear follows the filling-up of social wants. If all desires
can be accomplished by the mere utterance of some meaningless syllables,
then who will exert himself and go through difficulties to work out the
fulfilment of his desires? If this malady enters into the entire body of
any social system, then that society becomes slothful and indisposed to
any exertion, and soon hastens to it, ruin. Hence the slashing sarcasm
of the Charvakas, who believed only in the reality of sense-perceptions
and nothing beyond. What could have saved Indian society from the
ponderous burden of omnifarious ritualistic ceremonialism, with its
animal and other sacrifices, which all but crushed the very life out of
it, except the Jain revolution which took its strong stand exclusively
on chaste morals and philosophical truth? Or without the Buddhist
revolution what would have delivered the suffering millions of the lower
classes from the violent tyrannies of the influential higher castes?
When, in course of time, Buddhism declined and its extremely pure and
moral character gave place to equally bad, unclean, and immoral
practices, when Indian society trembled under the infernal dance of the
various races of barbarians who were allowed into the Buddhistic fold by
virtue of its universal all-embracing spirit of equality — then
Shankara, and later Ramanuja, appeared on the scene and tried their best
to bring society back to its former days of glory and re-establish its
lost status. Again, it is an undoubted fact that if there had not been
the advent of Kabir, Nanak, and Chaitanya in the Mohammedan period, and
the establishment of the Brahmo Samaj and the Arya Samaj in our own day,
then, by this time, the Mohammedans and the Christians would have far
outnumbered the Hindus of the present day in India.

What better material is there than nourishing food to build up the body
composed of various elements, and the mind which sends out infinite
waves of thought? But if that food which goes to sustain the body and
strengthen the mind is not properly assimilated, and the natural
functions of the body do not work properly, then that very thing becomes
the root of all evil.

The individual's life is in the life of the whole, the individual's
happiness is in the happiness of the whole; apart from the whole, the
individual's existence is inconceivable — this is an eternal truth and
is the bed-rock on which the universe is built. To move slowly towards
the infinite whole, bearing a constant feeling of intense sympathy and
sameness with it, being happy with its happiness and being distressed in
its affliction, is the individual's sole duty. Not only is it his duty,
but in its transgression is his death, while compliance with this great
truth leads to life immortal. This is the law of nature, and who can
throw dust into her ever-watchful eyes? None can hoodwink society and
deceive it for any length of time. However much there may have
accumulated heaps of refuse and mud on the surface of society — still,
at the bottom of those heaps the life-breath of society is ever to be
found pulsating with the vibrations of universal love and self-denying
compassion for all. Society is like the earth that patiently bears
incessant molestations; but she wakes up one day, however long that may
be in coming, and the force of the shaking tremors of that awakening
hurls off to a distance the accumulated dirt of self-seeking meanness
piled up during millions of patient and silent years!

We ignore this sublime truth; and though we suffer a thousand times for
our folly, yet, in our absurd foolishness, impelled by the brute in us,
we do not believe in it. We try to deceive, but a thousand times we find
we are deceived ourselves, and yet we do not desist! Mad that we are, we
imagine we can impose on nature' With our shortsighted vision we think
ministering to the self at any cost is the be-all and end-all of life.

Wisdom, knowledge, wealth, men, strength, prowess and whatever else
nature gathers and provides us with, are all only for diffusion, when
the moment of need is at hand. We often forget this fact, put the stamp
of  "*mine only*" upon the entrusted deposits, and *pari passu*, we sow
the seed of our own ruin!

The king, the centre of the forces of the aggregate of his subjects,
soon forgets that those forces are only stored with him so that he may
increase and give them back a thousandfold in their potency, so that
they may spread over the whole community for its good. Attributing all
Godship to himself, in his pride, like the king Vena[5](#fn5) he looks
upon other people as wretched specimens of humanity who should grovel
before him; any opposition to his will, whether good or bad, is a great
sin on the part of his subjects. Hence oppression steps into the place
of protection — sucking their blood in place of preservation. If the
society is weak and debilitated, it silently suffers all ill-treatment
at the hands of the king, and as the natural consequence, both the king
and his people go down and down and fall into the most degraded state,
and thus become an easy prey to any nation stronger than themselves.
Where the society is healthy and strong, there soon follows a fierce
contest between the king and his subjects, and, by its reaction and
convulsion, are flung away the sceptre and the crown; and the throne and
the royal paraphernalia become like past curiosities preserved in the
museum galleries.

As the result of this contest — as its reaction — is the appearance of
the mighty power of the Vaishya, before whose angry glance the crowned
heads, the lords of heroes, tremble like an aspen leaf on their thrones
— whom the poor as well as the prince humbly follow in vain expectation
of the golden jar in his hands, that like Tantalus's fruit always
recedes from the grasp.

The Brahmin said, "Learning is the power of all powers; that learning is
dependent upon me, I possess that learning, so the society must follow
my bidding." For some days such was the case. The Kshatriya said, "But
for the power of my sword, where would you be, O Brahmin, with all your
power of lore? You would in no time be wiped off the face of the earth.
It is I alone that am the superior." Out flew the flaming sword from the
jingling scabbard — society humbly recognised it with bended head. Even
the worshipper of learning was the first to turn into the worshipper of
the king. The Vaishya is saying, "You, madmen I what you call the
effulgent all-pervading deity is here, in my hand, the ever-shining
gold, the almighty sovereign. Behold, through its grace, I am also
equally all-powerful. O Brahmin! even now, I shall buy through its grace
all your wisdom, learning, prayers, and meditation. And, O great king!
your sword, arms, valour, and prowess will soon be employed, through the
grace of this, my gold, in carrying out my desired objects. Do you see
those lofty and extensive mills? Those are my hives. See, how, swarms of
millions of bees, the Shudras, are incessantly gathering honey for those
hives. Do you know for whom? For me, this me, who in due course of time
will squeeze out every drop of it for my own use and profit."

As during the supremacy of the Brahmin and the Kshatriya, there is a
centralization of learning and advancement of civilization, so the
result of the supremacy of the Vaishya is accumulation of wealth. The
power of the Vaishya lies in the possession of that coin, the charm of
whose clinking sound works with an irresistible fascination on the minds
of the four castes. The Vaishya is always in fear lest the Brahmin
swindles him out of this, his only possession, and lest the Kshatriya
usurps it by virtue of his superior strength of arms. For
self-preservation, the Vaishyas as a body are, therefore, of one mind.
The Vaishya commands the money; the exorbitant interest that he can
exact for its use by others, as with a lash in his hand, is his powerful
weapon which strikes terror in the heart of all. By the power of his
money, he is always busy curbing the royal power. That the royal power
may not anyhow stand in the way of the inflow of his riches, the
merchant is ever watchful. But, for all that, he has never the least
wish that the power should pass on from the kingly to the Shudra class.

To what country does not the merchant go? Though himself ignorant, he
carries on his trade and transplants the learning, wisdom, art, and
science of one country to another. The wisdom, civilization, and arts
that accumulated in the heart of the social body during the Brahmin and
the Kshatriya supremacies are being diffused in all directions by the
arteries of commerce to the different market-places of the Vaishya. But
for the rising of this Vaishya power, who would have carried today the
culture, learning, acquirements, and articles of food and luxury of one
end of the world to the other?

And where are they through whose physical labour only are possible the
influence of the Brahmin, the prowess of the Kshatriya, and the fortune
of the Vaishya? What is their history, who, being the real body of
society, are designated at all times in all countries as "baseborn"? —
for whom kind India prescribed the mild punishments, "Cut out his
tongue, chop off his flesh", and others of like nature, for such a grave
offence as any attempt on their part to gain a share of the knowledge
and wisdom monopolised by her higher classes — those "moving corpses" of
India and the "beasts of burden" of other countries — the Shudras, what
is their lot in life? What shall I say of India? Let alone her Shudra
class, her Brahmins to whom belonged the acquisition of scriptural
knowledge are now the foreign professors, her Kshatriyas the ruling
Englishmen, and Vaishyas, too, the English in whose bone and marrow is
the instinct of trade, so that, only the Shudra-ness —
the-beast-of-burdenness — is now left with the Indians themselves.

A cloud of impenetrable darkness has at present equally enveloped us
all. Now there is neither firmness of purpose nor boldness of
enterprise, neither courage of heart nor strength of mind, neither
aversion to maltreatments by others nor dislike for slavery, neither
love in the heart nor hope nor manliness; but what we have in India are
only deep-rooted envy and strong antipathy against one another, morbid
desire to ruin by hook or by crook the weak, and to lick dog-like the
feet of the strong. Now the highest satisfaction consists in the display
of wealth and power, devotion in self-gratification, wisdom in the
accumulation of transitory objects, Yoga in hideous diabolical
practices, work in the slavery of others, civilisation in base imitation
of foreign nations, eloquence in the use of abusive language, the merit
of literature in extravagant flatteries of the rich or in the diffusion
of ghastly obscenities! What to speak separately of the distinct Shudra
class of such a land, where the whole population has virtually come down
to the level of the Shudra? The Shudras of countries other than India
have become, it seems, a little awake; but they are wanting in proper
education and have only the mutual hatred of men of their own class — a
trait common to Shudras. What avails it if they greatly outnumber the
other classes? That unity, by which ten men collect the strength of a
million, is yet far away from the Shudra; hence, according to the law of
nature, the Shudras invariably form the subject race.

But there is hope. In the mighty course of time, the Brahmin and the
other higher castes, too, are being brought down to the lower status of
the Shudras, and the Shudras are being raised to higher ranks. Europe,
once the land of Shudras enslaved by Rome, is now filled with Kshatriya
valour. Even before our eyes, powerful China, with fast strides, is
going down to Shudra-hood, while insignificant Japan, rising with the
sudden start of a rocket, is throwing off her Shudra nature and is
invading by degrees the rights of the higher castes. The attaining of
modern Greece and Italy to Kshatriya-hood and the decline of Turkey,
Spain, and other countries, also, deserve consideration here.

Yet, a time will come when there will be the rising of the Shudra class,
*with their Shudra-hood*; that is to say, not like that as at present
when the Shudras are becoming great by acquiring the characteristic
qualities of the Vaishya or the Kshatriya, but a time will come when the
Shudras of every country, with their inborn Shudra nature and habits —
not becoming in essence Vaishya or Kshatriya, but remaining as Shudras —
will gain absolute supremacy in every society. The first glow of the
dawn of this new power has already begun to break slowly upon the
Western world, and the thoughtful are at their wits' end to reflect upon
the final issue of this fresh phenomenon. Socialism, Anarchism,
Nihilism,[6](#fn6) and other like sects are the vanguard of the social
revolution that is to follow. As the result of grinding pressure and
tyranny, from time out of mind, the Shudras, as a rule, are either
meanly senile, licking dog-like the feet of the higher class, or
otherwise are as inhuman as brute beasts. Again, at all times their
hopes and aspirations are baffled; hence a firmness of purpose and
perseverance in action they have none.

In spite of the spread of education in the West, there is a great
hindrance in the way of the rising of the Shudra class, and that is the
recognition of caste as determined by the inherence of more or less good
or bad qualities. By this very qualitative caste system which obtained
in India in ancient days, the Shudra class was kept down, bound hand and
foot. In the first place, scarcely any opportunity was given to the
Shudra for the accumulation of wealth or the earning of proper knowledge
and education; to add to this disadvantage, if ever a man of
extraordinary parts and genius were born of the Shudra class, the
influential higher sections of the society forthwith showered titular
honours on him and lifted him up to their own circle. His wealth and the
power of his wisdom were employed for the benefit of an alien caste —
and his own caste-people reaped no benefits of his attainments; and not
only so, the good-for-nothing people, the scum and refuse of the higher
castes, were cast off and thrown into the Shudra class to swell their
number. Vasishtha, Nârada, Satyakâma Jâbâla, Vyâsa, Kripa, Drona, Karna,
and others of questionable parentage[7](#fn7) were raised to the
position of a Brahmin or a Kshatriya, in virtue of their superior
learning or valour; but it remains to be seen how the prostitute,
maidservant, fisherman, or the charioteer[8](#fn8) class was benefited
by these upliftings. Again, on the other hand, the fallen from the
Brahmin, the Kshatriya, or the Vaishya class were always brought down to
fill the ranks of the Shudras.

In modern India, no one born of Shudra parents, be he a millionaire or a
great Pandit, has ever the right to leave his own society, with the
result that the power of his wealth, intellect, or wisdom, remaining
confined within his own caste limits, is being employed for the
betterment of his own community. This hereditary caste system of India,
being thus unable to overstep its own bounds, is slowly but surely
conducing to the advancement of the people moving within the same
circle. The improvement of the lower classes of India will go on, in
this way, so long as India will be under a government dealing with its
subjects irrespective of their caste and position.

Whether the leadership of society be in the hands of those who
monopolise learning or wield the power of riches or arms, the source of
its power is always the subject masses. By so much as the class in power
severs itself from this source, by so much is it sure to become weak.
But such is the strange irony of fate, such is the queer working of
Mâyâ, that they from whom this power is directly or indirectly drawn, by
fair means or foul — by deceit, stratagem, force, or by voluntary gift —
they soon cease to be taken into account by the leading class. When in
course of time, the priestly power totally estranged itself from the
subject masses, the real dynamo of its power, it was overthrown by the
then kingly power taking its stand on the strength of the subject
people; again, the kingly power, judging itself to be perfectly
independent, created a gaping chasm between itself and the subject
people, only to be itself destroyed or become a mere puppet in the hands
of the Vaishyas, who now succeeded in securing a relatively greater
co-operation of the mass of the people. The Vaishyas have now gained
their end; so they no longer deign to count on help from the subject
people and are trying their best to dissociate themselves from them;
consequently, here is being sown the seed of the destruction of this
power as well.

Though themselves the reservoir of all powers, the subject masses,
creating an eternal distance between one another, have been deprived of
all their legitimate rights; and they will remain so as long as this
sort of relation continues.

A common danger, or sometimes a common cause of hatred or love, is the
bond that binds people together. By the same law that herds beasts of
prey together, men also unite into a body and form a caste or a nation
of their own. Zealous love for one's own people and country, showing
itself in bitter hatred against another — as of Greece against Persia,
or Rome against Carthage, of the Arab against the Kafir, of Spain
against the Moor, of France against Spain, of England and Germany
against France, and of America against England — is undoubtedly one of
the main causes which lead to the advancement of one nation over
another, by way of uniting itself in hostilities against another.

Self-love is the first teacher of self-renunciation. For the
preservation of the individual's interest only one looks first to the
well-being of the whole. In the interest of one's own nation is one's
own interest; in the well-being of one's own nation is one's own
well-being. Without the co-operation of the many, most words can by no
means go on — even self-defence becomes an impossibility. The joining of
friendly hands in mutual help for the protection of this self-interest
is seen in every nation, and in every land. Of course, the circumference
of this self-interest varies with different people. To multiply and to
have the opportunity of somehow dragging on a precarious existence, and
over and above this, the condition that the religious pursuits of the
higher castes may not suffer in any way, is of the highest gain and
interest for Indians! For modern India, there is no better hope
conceivable; this is the last rung of the ladder of India's life!

The present government of India has certain evils attendant on it, and
there are some very great and good parts in it as well. Of highest good
is this, that after the fall of the Pâtaliputra Empire till now, India
was never under the guidance of such a powerful machinery of government
as the British, wielding the sceptre throughout the length and breadth
of the land. And under this Vaishya supremacy, thanks to the strenuous
enterprise natural to the Vaishya, as the objects of commerce are being
brought from one end of the world to another, so at the same time, as
its natural sequence, the ideas and thoughts of different countries are
forcing their way into the very bone and marrow of India. Of these ideas
and thoughts, some are really most beneficial to her, some are harmful,
while others disclose the ignorance and inability of the foreigners to
determine what is truly good for the inhabitants of this country.

But piercing through the mass of whatever good or evil there may be is
seen rising the sure emblem of India's future prosperity — that as the
result of the action and reaction between her own old national ideals on
the one hand, and the newly-introduced strange ideals of foreign nations
on the other, she is slowly and gently awakening from her long deep
sleep. Mistakes she will make, let her: there is no harm in that; in all
our actions, errors and mistakes are our only teachers. Who commits
mistaken the path of truth is attainable by him only. Trees never make
mistakes, nor do stones fall into error; animals are hardly seen to
transgress the fixed laws of nature; but man is prone to err, and it is
man who becomes God-on-earth. If our every movement from the nursery to
the death-bed, if our every thought from rising at day-break till
retirement at midnight, be prescribed and laid down for us in minutest
detail by others — and if the threat of the king's sword be brought into
requisition to keep us within the iron grasp of those prescribed rules —
then, what remains for us to think independently for ourselves? What
makes a man a genius, a sage? Isn't it because he thinks, reasons,
wills? Without exercise, the power of deep thinking is lost. Tamas
prevails, the mind gets dull and inert, the spirit is brought down to
the level of matter. Yet, even now, every religious preacher, every
social leader is anxious to frame new laws and regulations for the
guidance of society! Does the country stand in want of rules? Has it not
enough of them? Under the oppression of rules, the whole nation is
verging on its ruin — who stops to understand this?

In the case of an absolute and arbitrary monarchy, the conquered race is
not treated with so much contempt by the ruling power. Under such an
absolute government, the rights of all subjects are equal, in other
words, no one has any right to question or control the governing
authority. So there remains very little room for special privileges of
caste and the like. But where the monarchy is controlled by the voice of
the ruling race, or a republican form of government rules the conquered
race, there a wide distance is created between the ruling and the ruled;
and the most part of that power, which, if employed solely for the
well-being of the ruled classes, might have done immense good to them
within a short time, is wasted by the government in its attempts and
applications to keep the subject race under its entire control. Under
the Roman Emperorship, foreign subjects were, for this very reason,
happier than under the Republic of Rome. For this very reason, St. Paul,
the Christian Apostle, though born of the conquered Jewish race,
obtained permission to appeal to the Roman Emperor, Caesar, to judge of
the charges laid against him (The Acts, xxv. 11.). Because some
individual Englishman may call us "natives" or "riggers" and hate us as
uncivilized savages, we do not gain or lose by that. We, on account of
caste distinctions, have among ourselves far stronger feelings of hatred
and scorn against one another; and who can say that the Brahmins, if
they get some foolish unenlightened Kshatriya king on their side, will
not graciously try again to "cut out the Shudras' tongues and chop off
their limbs"? That recently in Eastern Aryavarta, the different
caste-people seem to develop a feeling of united sympathy amidst
themselves with a view to ameliorating their present social condition —
that in the Mahratta country, the Brahmins have begun to sing paeans in
praise of the "Marâthâ" race — these, the lower castes cannot yet
believe to be the outcome of pure disinterestedness.

But gradually the idea is being formed in the minds of the English
public that the passing away of the Indian Empire from their sway will
end in imminent peril to the English nation, and be their ruin. So, by
any means whatsoever, the supremacy of England must be maintained in
India. The way to effect this, they think, is by keeping uppermost in
the heart of every Indian the mighty prestige and glory of the British
nation. It gives rise to both laughter and tears simultaneously to
observe how this ludicrous and pitiful sentiment is gaining ground among
the English, and how they are steadily extending their *modus operandi*
for the carrying out of this sentiment into practice. It seems as if the
Englishmen resident in India are forgetting that so long as that
fortitude, that perseverance, and that intense national unity of
purpose, by which Englishmen have earned this Indian Empire — and that
ever wide-awake commercial genius aided by science' which has turned
even India, the mother of all riches, into the principal mart of England
— so long as these characteristics are not eliminated from their
national life, their throne in India is unshakable. So long as these
qualities are inherent in the British character, let thousands of such
Indian Empires be lost, thousands will be earned again. But if the flow
of the stream of those qualifier be retarded, shall an Empire be
governed by the mere emblazoning of British prestige and glory?
Therefore when such remarkable traits of character are still predominant
in the English as a nation, it is utterly useless to spend so much
energy and power for the mere preservation of meaningless "prestige". If
that power were employed for the welfare of the subject-people, that,
would certainly have been a great gain for both the ruling and the ruled
races.

It has been said before that India is slowly awakening through her
friction with the outside nations; and as the result of this little
awakening, is the appearance, to a certain extent, of free and
independent thought in modern India. On one side is modern Western
science, dazzling the eyes with the brilliancy of myriad suns and
driving in the chariot of hard and fast facts collected by the
application of tangible powers direct in their incision, on the other
are the hopeful and strengthening traditions of her ancient forefathers,
in the days when she was at the zenith of her glory — traditions that
have been brought out of the pages of her history by the great sages of
her own land and outside, that run for numberless years and centuries
through her every vein with the quickening of life drawn from universal
love — traditions that reveal unsurpassed valour, superhuman genius, and
supreme spirituality, which are the envy of the gods — these inspire her
with future hopes. On one side, rank materialism, plenitude of fortune,
accumulation of gigantic power, and intense sense-pursuits have, through
foreign literature, caused a tremendous stir; on the other, through the
confounding din of all these discordant sounds, she hears, in low yet
unmistakable accents, the heart-rending cries of her ancient gods,
cutting her to the quick. There lie before her various strange luxuries
introduced from the West — celestial drinks, costly well-served food,
splendid apparel, magnificent palaces, new modes of conveyance, new
manners, new fashions dressed in which moves about the well-educated
girl in shameless freedom — all these are arousing unfelt desires.
Again, the scene changes, and in its place appear, with stern presence,
Sitâ, Sâvitri, austere religious vows, fastings, the forest retreat, the
matted locks and orange garb of the semi-naked Sannyasin, Samâdhi and
the search after the Self. On one side is the independence of Western
societies based on self-interest; on the other is the extreme
self-sacrifice of the Aryan society. In this violent conflict, is it
strange that Indian society should be tossed up and down? Of the West,
the goal is individual independence, the language money-making
education, the means politics; of India, the goal is Mukti, the language
the Veda, the means renunciation. For a time, Modern India thinks, as it
were, I am ruining this worldly life of mine in vain expectation of
uncertain spiritual welfare hereafter which has spread its fascination
over one; and again, lo! spellbound she listens — इति संसारे स्फुटतरदोषः
कथमिह मानव तव सन्तोषः — "Here, in this world of death and change, O man,
where is thy happiness?"

On one side, new India is saying, "We should have full freedom in the
selection of husband and wife; be cause the marriage, in which are
involved the happiness and misery of all our future life, we must have
the right to determine according to our own free will." On the other,
old India is dictating, "Marriage is not for sense-enjoyment, but to
perpetuate the race. This is the Indian conception of marriage. By the
producing of children, you are contributing to, and are responsible for,
the future good or evil of the society. Hence society has the right to
dictate whom you shall marry and whom you shall not. That form of
marriage obtains in society which is conducive most to its well-being;
do you give up your desire of individual pleasure for the good of the
many."

On one side, new India is saying, "If we only adopt Western ideas,
Western language, Western food, Western dress, and Western manners, we
shall be as strong and powerful as the Western nations"; on the other,
old India is saying, "Fools! By imitation, other's ideas never become
one's own; nothing, unless earned, is your own. Does the ass in the
lion's skin become the lion?"

On one side, new India is saving, "What the Western nations do is surely
good, otherwise how did they become so great?" On the other side, old
India is saying, "The flash of lightning is intensely bright, but only
for a moment; look out, boys, it is dazzling your eyes. Beware! "

Have we not then to learn anything from the West? Must we not needs try
and exert ourselves for better things? Are we perfect? Is our society
entirely spotless, without any flaw. There are many things to learn, he
must struggle for new and higher things till we die — struggle is the
end of human life. Shri Ramakrishna used to say, "As long as I live, so
long do I learn." That man or that society which has nothing to learn is
already in the jaws of death. Yes, learn we must many things from the
West: but there are fears as well.

A certain young man of little understanding used always to blame the
Hindu Shâstras before Shri Ramakrishna. One day he praised the
Bhagavad-Gita, on which Shri Ramakrishna said, "Methinks, some European
Pandit has praised the Gita, and so he has also followed suit."

O India, this is your terrible danger. The spell of imitating the West
is getting such a strong hold upon you that what is good or what is bad
is no longer decided by reason, judgment, discrimination, or reference
to the Shastras. Whatever ideas, whatever manners the white men praise
or like are good; whatever things they dislike or censure are bad. Alas!
what can be a more tangible proof of foolishness than this?

The Western ladies move freely everywhere, therefore that is good; they
choose for themselves their husbands, therefore that is the highest step
of advancement; the Westerners disapprove of our dress, decorations,
food, and ways of living, therefore they must be very bad; the
Westerners condemn image-worship as sinful, surely then, image-worship
is the greatest sin, there is no doubt of it!

The Westerners say that worshipping a single Deity is fruitful of the
highest spiritual good, therefore let us throw our gods and goddesses
into the river Ganga! The Westerners hold caste distinctions to be
obnoxious, therefore let all the different castes be jumbled into one!
The Westerners say that child-marriage is the root of all evils,
therefore that is also very bad, of a certainty it is!

We are not discussing here whether these customs deserve continuance or
rejection; but if the mere disapproval of the Westerners be the measure
of the abominableness of our manners and customs, then it is our duty to
raise our emphatic protest against it.

The present writer has, to some extent, personal experience of Western
society. His conviction resulting from such experience has been that
there is such a wide divergence between the Western society and the
Indian as regards the primal course and goal of each, that any sect in
India, framed after the Western model, will miss the aim. We have not
the least sympathy with those who, never leaving lived in Western
society and, therefore, utterly ignorant of the rules and prohibitions
regarding the association of men and women that obtain there, and which
act as safeguards to preserve the purity of the Western women, allow a
free rein to the unrestricted intermingling of men and women in our
society.

I have observed in the West also that the children of weaker nations, if
born in England, give themselves out as Englishmen, instead of Greek,
Portuguese, Spaniard, etc., as the case may be. All drift towards the
strong. That the light of glory which shines in the glorious may anyhow
fall and reflect on one's own body, i.e. to shine in the borrowed light
of the great, is the one desire of the weak. When I see Indians dressed
in European apparel and costumes, the thought comes to my mind, perhaps
they feel ashamed to own their nationality and kinship with the
ignorant, poor, illiterate, downtrodden people of India! Nourished by
the blood of the Hindu for the last fourteen centuries, the Parsee is no
longer a "native"! Before the arrogance of the casteless, who pretend to
be and glorify themselves in being Brahmins, the true nobility of the
old, heroic, high-class Brahmin melts into nothingness! Again, the
Westerners have now taught us that those stupid, ignorant, low-caste
millions of India, clad only in loin-cloths, are non-Aryans. They are
therefore no more our kith and kin!

O India! With this mere echoing of others, with this base imitation of
others, with this dependence on others this slavish weakness, this vile
detestable cruelty — wouldst thou, with these provisions only, scale the
highest pinnacle of civilisation and greatness? Wouldst thou attain, by
means of thy disgraceful cowardice, that freedom deserved only by the
brave and the heroic? O India! Forget not that the ideal of thy
womanhood is Sita, Savitri, Dama yanti; forget not that the God thou
worshippest is the great Ascetic of ascetics, the all-renouncing
Shankara, the Lord of Umâ; forget not that thy marriage, thy wealth, thy
life are not for sense-pleasure, are not for thy individual personal
happiness; forget not that thou art born as a sacrifice to the Mother's
altar; forget not that thy social order is but the reflex of the
Infinite Universal Motherhood; forget not that the lower classes, the
ignorant, the poor, the illiterate, the cobbler, the sweeper, are thy
flesh and blood, thy brothers. Thou brave one, be bold, take courage, be
proud that thou art an Indian, and proudly proclaim, "I am an Indian,
every Indian is my brother." Say, "The ignorant Indian, the poor and
destitute Indian, the Brahmin Indian, the Pariah Indian, is my brother."
Thou, too, clad with but a rag round thy loins proudly proclaim at the
top of thy voice: "The Indian is my brother, the Indian is my life,
India's gods and goddesses are my God. India's society is the cradle of
my infancy, the pleasure-garden of my youth, the sacred heaven, the
Varanasi of my old age." Say, brother: "The soil of India is my highest
heaven, the good of India is my good," and repeat and pray day and
night, "O Thou Lord of Gauri, O Thou Mother of the Universe, vouchsafe
manliness unto me! O Thou Mother of Strength, take away my weakness,
take away my unmanliness, and make me a Man!"

1.  [^](#txt1)Agnivarna was a prince of the Solar race, who never used
    to come out of the seraglio, and died of consumption due to
    excessive indulgence.
2.  [^](#txt2)The great king Asoka was at first called Chandashoka, i.e.
    Fierce Asoka, because of his ascending the throne by killing his
    brother and his other cruel deeds. After nine years of reign he
    became a convert to Buddhism and his character underwent a complete
    transformation; he was thenceforth known for his good deeds by the
    name of Dharmashoka, Virtuous Asoka.
3.  [^](#txt3)Suppression of any bodily faculty, thereby causing a
    person's ruin, removing him from a position, subduing and getting
    mastery over him, and killing him by means of magical incantations.
4.  [](#txt4)[^](#txt4)Taken from one of the well-known didactic verses
    of the statesman-Pandit, Chânakya, which runs thus: "Let the father
    treat with tenderness the child till he is five, let him (the
    father) reprove him (the child) for the next ten years; when the son
    attains the age of sixteen, the father ought to deal with him as his
    friend."
5.  [^](#txt5)His story occurs in the Bhâgavata. The King Vena thought
    himself higher than Brahmâ, Vishnu, and Maheshvara, and declared
    accordingly that all worship should be offered to him. The Rishis
    once sought him and tried by good advice to make him give up such
    egoism, but he in return insulted them and ordered them to worship
    him, whereupon, it is said, he was destroyed by the fire of the
    anger of the Rishis.
6.  [^](#txt6)Socialism took its birth in 1835 A.D. The initiator of
    Anarchism was Bakunin, who was born in 1814 A.D. Nihilism was first
    inaugurated in Russia in 1862.
7.  [](#txt7)[^](#txt7)(1) Vasishtha's father was Brahmâ and mother
    unknown. (2) Narada's mother was a maidservant and father
    unknown. (3) Satyakama Jabala's mother was a maidservant, by name
    Jabâlâ, and father unknown. (4) Vyasa's father was a Brahmin sage
    Parâshara, and mother Matsyagandhâ, the virgin daughter of a
    fisherman. (5) Kripa's father was a Brahmin sage, Sharadvân Gautama,
    and mother the goddess Jânapadi. (6) Drona's father was the Brahmin
    sage, Bharadvâja, and mother the goddess Ghritâchi. (7) Karna's
    mother was Kunti, who conceived during her maidenhood, and father
    the god sun. For detailed information vide the accounts of their
    births: for (1), see chapter 174, Âdiparva, Mahabharata, or in
    Rigveda, 7, 33, 11-13; for (2), chapter 6, Skandha I, Srimad
    Bhagavata, for (3) section 4 Prapâthaka iv, Chhândogya Upanishad;
    for (4), (5), (6) and (7) chapters 105, 130, 130 and 111,
    respectively of the Âdiparva of the Mahabharata.
8.  [^](#txt8)In her anxiety to save her reputation, Kunti threw the
    newborn child Karna, into water. A charioteer found the child in his
    pitiable condition and adopted him as his son.

</div>
