---
title: THE EDUCATION THAT INDIA NEEDS

---
<div>

[←](modern_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](our_present_social_problems.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/090_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/123_mary.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/074_honoured_madam.htm)
Addressee [»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/43_madam.htm)

## THE EDUCATION THAT INDIA NEEDS

(Written to Shrimati Saralâ Ghosal, B.A., Editor, *Bhârati*, from
Darjeeling, 24th April, 1897. (Translated from
[Bengali](b7332e4trans_prose_edu.pdf) .)

In reply to your questions about the methods of work, the most important
thing I have to say is that the work should be started on a scale which
would be commensurate with the results desired. I have heard much of
your liberal mind, patriotism, and steady perseverance from my friend
Miss Müller; and the proof of your erudition is evident. I look upon it
as a great good fortune that you are desirous to know what little this
insignificant life has been able to attempt; I shall state it to you
here, as far as I can. But first I shall lay before you my mature
convictions for your deliberation.

We have been slaves for ever, i.e. it has never been given to the masses
of India to express the inner light which is their inheritance. The
Occident has been rapidly advancing towards freedom for the last few
centuries. In India, it was the king who used to prescribe everything
from Kulinism down to what one should eat and what one should not. In
Western countries, the people do everything themselves.

The king now has nothing to say in any social matter; on the other hand,
the Indian people have not yet even the least faith in themselves, what
to say of self-reliance. The faith in one's own Self, which is the basis
of Vedânta, has not yet been even slightly carried into practice. It is
for this reason that the Western method — i.e. first of all, discussion
about the wished-for end, then the carrying it out by the combination of
all the forces — is of no avail even now in this country: it is for this
reason that we appear so greatly conservative under foreign rule. If
this be true, then it is a vain attempt to do any great work by means of
public discussion. "There is no chance of a headache where there is no
head" — where is the public? Besides, we are so devoid of strength that
our whole energy is exhausted if we undertake to discuss anything, none
is left for work. It is for this reason, I suppose, we observe in Bengal
almost always — "Much cry but little wool." Secondly, as I have written
before, I do not expect anything from the rich people of India. It is
best to work among the youth in whom lies our hope — patiently,
steadily, and without noise.

Now about work. From the day when education and culture etc. began to
spread gradually from patricians to plebeians, grew the distinction
between the modern civilisation as of Western countries, and the ancient
civilisation as of India, Egypt, Rome, etc. I see it before my eyes, a
nation is advanced in proportion as education and intelligence spread
among the masses. The chief cause of India's ruin has been the
monopolising of the whole education and intelligence of the land, by
dint of pride and royal authority, among a handful of men. If we are to
rise again, we shall have to do it in the same way, i.e. by spreading
education among the masses. A great fuss has been made for half a
century about social reform. Travelling through various places of India
these last ten years, I observed the country full of social reform
associations. But I did not find one association for them by sucking
whose blood the people known as "gentlemen" have become and continue to
be gentlemen! How many sepoys were brought by the Mussulmans? How many
Englishmen are there? Where, except in India, can be had millions of men
who will cut the throats of their own fathers and brothers for six
rupees? Sixty millions of Mussulmans in seven hundred years of
Mohammedan rule, and two millions of Christians in one hundred years of
Christian rule — what makes it so? Why has originality entirely forsaken
the country? Why are our deft-fingered artisans daily becoming extinct,
unable to compete with the Europeans? By what power again has the German
labourer succeeded in shaking the many-century-grounded firm footing of
the English labourer?

Education, education, education alone! Travelling through many cities of
Europe and observing in them the comforts and education of even the poor
people, there was brought to my mind the state of our own poor people,
and I used to shed tears. What made the difference? Education was the
answer I got. Through education comes faith in one's own Self, and
through faith in one's own Self the inherent Brahman is waking up in
them, while the Brahman in us is gradually becoming dormant. In New York
I used to observe the Irish colonists come — downtrodden,
haggard-looking, destitute of all possessions at home, penniless, and
wooden-headed — with their only belongings, a stick and a bundle of rags
hanging at the end of it, fright in their steps, alarm in their eyes. A
different spectacle in six months — the man walks upright, his attire is
changed! In his eyes and steps there is no more sign of fright. What is
the cause? Our Vedanta says that that Irishman was kept surrounded by
contempt in his own country — the whole of nature was telling him with
one voice, "Pat, you have no more hope, you are born a slave and will
remain so." Having been thus told from his birth, Pat believed in it and
hypnotised himself that he was very low, and the Brahman in him shrank
away. While no sooner had he landed in America than he heard the shout
going up on all sides, "Pat, you are a man as we are. It is man who has
done all, a man like you and me can do everything: have courage!" Pat
raised his head and saw that it was so, the Brahman within woke up.
Nature herself spoke, as it were, "Arise, awake, and stop not till the
goal is reached" (Katha Upanishad, I. ii. 4.)

Likewise the education that our boys receive is very negative. The
schoolboy learns nothing, but has everything of his own broken down —
want of Shraddhâ is the result. The Shraddha which is the keynote of the
Veda and the Vedanta — the Shraddha which emboldened Nachiketâ to face
Yama and question him, through which Shraddha this world moves the
annihilation of that Shraddha! अज्ञश्चाश्रद्दधानश्च संशयात्मा विनश्यति —
"The ignorant, the man devoid of Shraddha, the doubting self runs to
ruin." Therefore are we so near destruction. The remedy now is the
spread of education. First of all, Self-knowledge. I do not mean
thereby, matted hair, staff, Kamandalu, and mountain caves which the
word suggests. What do I mean then? Cannot the knowledge, by which is
attained even freedom from the bondage of worldly existence, bring
ordinary material prosperity? Certainly it can. Freedom, dispassion,
renunciation all these are the very highest ideals, but स्वल्पमप्यस्य
धर्मस्य त्रायते महतो भयात् — "Even a little of this Dharma saves one
from the great fear (of birth and death)." Dualist, qualified-monist,
monist, Shaiva, Vaishnava, Shâkta, even the Buddhist and the Jain and
others — whatever sects have arisen in India —  are all at one in this
respect that infinite power is latent in this Jivatman (individualised
soul); from the ant to the perfect man there is the same Âtman in all,
the difference being only in manifestation. "As a farmer breaks the
obstacles (to the course of water)" (Patanjali's Yoga-Sutra,
Kaivalsapâda, 3). That power manifests as soon as it gets the
opportunity and the right place and time. From the highest god to the
meanest grass, the same power is present in all — whether manifested or
not. We shall have to call forth that power by going from door to door.

Secondly, along with this, education has to be imparted. That is easy to
say, but how to reduce it into practice? There are thousands of
unselfish, kind-hearted men in our country who has renounced every
thing. In the same way as they travel about and give religious
instructions without any remuneration, so at least half of them can be
trained as teachers or bearers of such education as we need most. For
that, we want first of all a centre in the capital of each Presidency,
from whence to spread slowly throughout the whole of India. Two centres
have recently been started in Madras and Calcutta; there is hope of more
soon. Then, the greater part of the education to the poor should be
given orally, time is not yet ripe for schools. Gradually in these main
centres will be taught agriculture, industry, etc., and workshops will
be established for the furtherance of arts. To sell the manufactures of
those workshops in Europe and America, associations will be started like
those already in existence. It will be necessary to start centres for
women, exactly like those for men. But you are aware how difficult that
is in this country. Again, "The snake which bites must take out its own
poison" — and that this is going to be is my firm conviction; the money
required for these works would have to come from the West. And for that
reason, our religion should be preached in Europe and America. Modern
science has undermined the basis of religions like Christianity. Over
and above that, luxury is about to kill the religious instinct itself.
Europe and America are now looking towards India with expectant ewes:
this is the time for philanthropy, this is the time to occupy the
hostile strongholds.

In the West, women rule; all influence and power are theirs. If bold and
talented women like yourself versed in Vedanta, go to England to preach,
I am sure that every year hundreds of men and women will become blessed
by adopting the religion of the land of Bharata. The only woman who went
over from our country was Ramâbâai; her knowledge of English, Western
science and art was limited; still she surprised all. If anyone like you
goes, England will be stirred, what to speak of America! If an Indian
woman in Indian dress preach there the religion which fell from the lips
of the Rishis of India — I see a prophetic vision — there will rise a
great wave which will inundate the whole Western world. Will there be no
women in the land of Maitreyi, Khanâ, Lilâvati, Sâvitri, and
Ubhayabhârati, who will venture to do this? The Lord knows. England we
shall conquer, England we shall possess, through the power of
spirituality. नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनाय — "There is no other way of
salvation." Can salvation ever come by getting up meetings and
societies? Our conquerors must be made Devas by the power of our
spirituality. I am a humble mendicant, an itinerant monk; I am helpless
and alone. What can I do? You have the power of wealth, intellect, and
education; will you forgo this opportunity? Conquest of England, Europe,
and America — this should be our one supreme Mantra at present, in it
lies the well-being of the country. Expansion is the sign of life, and
we must spread over the world with our spiritual ideals. Alas! this
frame is poor, moreover, the physique of a Bengali; even under this
labour a fatal disease has attacked it, but there is the hope:

उत्पत्स्यतेऽस्ति मम कोऽपि समानधर्मा।  
कालो ह्ययं निरवधिर्विपुला च पृथ्वी॥

—"A kindred spirit is or will be born out of the limitless time and
populous earth to accomplish the work" (Bhavabhuti).

About vegetarian diet I have to say this — first, my Master was a
vegetarian; but if he was given meat offered to the Goddess, he used to
hold it up to his head. The taking of life is undoubtedly sinful; but so
long as vegetable food is not made suitable to the human system through
progress in chemistry, there is no other alternative but meat-eating. So
long as man shall have to live a Râjasika (active) life under
circumstances like the present, there is no other way except through
meat-eating. It is true that the Emperor Asoka saved the lives of
millions of animals by the threat of the sword; but is not the slavery
of a thousand years more dreadful than that? Taking the life of a few
goats as against the inability to protect the honour of one's own wife
and daughter, and to save the morsels for one's children from robbing
hands — which of these is more sinful? Rather let those belonging to the
upper ten, who do not earn their livelihood by manual labour, not take
meat; but the forcing of vegetarianism upon those who have to earn their
bread by labouring day and night is one of the causes of the loss of our
national freedom. Japan is an example of what good and nourishing food
can do.

May the All-powerful Vishveshvari inspire your heart!

</div>
