---
title: OUR PRESENT SOCIAL PROBLEMS

---
<div>

[←](the_education_that_india_needs.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](../translation_poems/to_a_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/144_dear.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/145_dhira_mata.htm)  
   Addressee [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/089_mother.htm)

## OUR PRESENT SOCIAL PROBLEMS

(Translated from a [Bengali letter](b8518e4trans_prose_social.pdf)
written to Shrimati Mrinalini Bose from Deoghar (Vaidyanâth), on 23rd
December, 1898.)

स ईशोऽनिर्वचनीयप्रेमस्वरूपः — "The Lord whose nature is unspeakable
love." That this characteristic of God mentioned by Nârada is manifest
and admitted on all hands is the firm conviction of my life. The
aggregate of many individuals is called Samashti (the whole), and each
individual is called Vyashti (a part). You and I — each is Vyashti,
society is Samashti. You, I, an animal, a bird, a worm, an insect, a
tree, a creeper, the earth, a planet, a star — each is Vyashti, while
this universe is Samashti, which is called Virât, Hiranyagarbha, or
Ishvara in Vedânta, and Brahmâ, Vishnu, Devi, etc., in the Purânas.
Whether or not Vyashti has individual freedom, and if it has, what
should be its measure, whether or not Vyashti should completely
sacrifice its own will, its own happiness for Samashti — are the
perennial problems before every society. Society everywhere is busy
finding the solution of these problems. These, like big waves, are
agitating modern Western society. The doctrine which demands the
sacrifice of individual freedom to social supremacy is called socialism,
while that which advocates the cause of the individual is called
individualism.

Our motherland is a glowing example of the results and consequence of
the eternal subjection of the individual to society and forced
self-sacrifice by dint of institution and discipline. In this country
men are born according to Shâstric injunctions, they eat and drink by
prescribed rules throughout life, they go through marriage and kindred
functions in the same way; in short, they even die according to Shastric
injunctions. The hard discipline, with the exception of one great good
point, is fraught with evil. The good point is that men can do one or
two things well with very little effort, having practiced them every day
through generations. The delicious rice and curry which a cook of this
country prepares with the aid of three lumps of earth and a few sticks
can be had nowhere else. With the simple mechanism of an antediluvian
loom, worth one rupee, and the feet put in a pit, it is possible to make
kincobs worth twenty rupees a yard, in this country alone. A torn mat,
an earthen lamp, and that fed by castor oil — with the aid of materials
such as these, wonderful savants are produced in this country alone. An
all-forbearing attachment to an ugly and deformed wife, and a lifelong
devotion to a worthless and villainous husband are possible in this
country alone. Thus far the bright side.

But all these things are done by people guided like lifeless machines.
There is no mental activity, no unfoldment of the heart, no vibration of
life, no flux of hope; there is no strong stimulation of the will, no
experience of keen pleasure, nor the contact of intense sorrow; there is
no stir of inventive genius, no desire for novelty, no appreciation of
new things. Clouds never pass away from this mind, the radiant picture
of the morning sun never charms this heart. It never even occurs to this
mind if there is any better state than this; where it does, it cannot
convince; in the event of conviction, effort is lacking; and even where
there is effort, lack of enthusiasm kills it out.

If living by rule alone ensures excellence, if it be virtue to follow
strictly the rules and customs handed down through generations, say
then, who is more virtuous than a tree, who is a greater devotee, a
holier saint, than a railway train? Who has ever seen a piece of stone
transgress a natural law? Who has ever known cattle to commit sin?

The huge steamer, the mighty railway engine — they are non-intelligent;
they move, turn, and run, but they are without intelligence. And yonder
tiny worm which moved away from the railway line to save its life, why
is it intelligent? There is no manifestation of will in the machine, the
machine never wishes to transgress law; the worm wants to oppose law —
rises against law whether it succeeds or not; therefore it is
intelligent. Greater is the happiness, higher is the Jiva, in proportion
as this will is more successfully manifest. The will of God is perfectly
fruitful; therefore He is the highest.

What is education? Is it book-learning? No. Is it diverse knowledge? Not
even that. The training by which the current and expression of will are
brought under control and become fruitful is called education. Now
consider, is that education as a result of which the will, being
continuously choked by force through generations, is well-nigh killed
out; is that education under whose sway even the old ideas, let alone
the new ones, are disappearing one by one; is that education which is
slowly making man a machine? It is more blessed, in my opinion, even to
go wrong, impelled by one's free will and intelligence than to be good
as an automaton. Again, can that be called society which is formed by an
aggregate of men who are like lumps of clay, like lifeless machines,
like heaped up pebbles? How can such society fare well? Were good
possible, then instead of being slaves for hundreds of years, we would
have been the greatest nation on earth, and this soil of India, instead
of being a mine of stupidity, would have been the eternal fountain-head
of learning.

Is not self-sacrifice, then, a virtue? Is it not the most virtuous deed
to sacrifice the happiness of one, the welfare of one, for the sake of
the many? Exactly, but as the Bengali adage goes, "Can beauty be
manufactured by rubbing and scrubbing? Can love be generated by effort
and compulsion?" What glory is there in the renunciation of an eternal
beggar? What virtue is there in the sense- control of one devoid of
sense-power? What again is the self-sacrifice of one devoid of idea,
devoid of heart, devoid of high ambition, and devoid of the conception
of what constitutes society? What expression of devotedness to a husband
is there by forcing a widow to commit Sati? Why make people do virtuous
deeds by teaching superstitions? I say, liberate, undo the shackles of
people as much as you can. Can dirt be washed by dirt? Can bondage be
removed by bondage? Where is the instance? When you would be able to
sacrifice all desire for happiness for the sake of society, then you
would be the Buddha, then you would be free: that is far off. Again, do
you think the way to do it lies through oppression? "Oh, what examples
or self-denial are our widows! Oh, how sweet is child-marriage! Is
another such custom possible! Can there be anything but love between
husband and wife in such a marriage!" such is the whine going round
nowadays. But as to the men, the masters of the situation, there is no
need of self-denial for them! Is there a virtue higher than serving
others? But the same does not apply to Brâhmins — you others do it! The
truth is that in this country parents and relatives can ruthlessly
sacrifice the best interests of their children and others for their own
selfish ends to save themselves by compromise to society; and the
teaching of generations rendering the mind callous has made it perfectly
easy. He, the brave alone, can deny self. The coward, afraid of the
lash, with one hand wipes his eyes and gives with the other. Of what
avail are such gifts? It is a far cry to love universal. The young plant
should be hedged in and taken care of. One can hope gradually to attain
to universal love if one can learn to love one object unselfishly. If
devotion to one particular Ishta-Deva is attained, devotion to the
universal Virat is gradually possible.

Therefore, when one has been able to deny self for an individual, one
should talk of self-sacrifice for the sake of society, not before. It is
action with desire that leads to action without desire. Is the
renunciation of desire possible if desire did not exist in the
beginning? And what could it mean? Can light have any meaning if there
is no darkness?

Worship with desire, with attachment, comes first. Commence with the
worship of the little, then the greater will come of itself.

Mother, be not anxious. It is against the big tree that the great wind
strikes. "Poking a fire makes it burn better"; "A snake struck on the
head raises its hood" — and so on. When there comes affliction in the
heart, when the storm of sorrow blows all around, and it seems light
will be seen no more, when hope and courage are almost gone, it is then,
in the midst of this great spiritual tempest, that the light of Brahman
within gleams. Brought up in the lap of luxury, lying on a bed of roses
and never shedding a tear, who has ever become great, who has ever
unfolded the Brahman within? Why do you fear to weep? Weep! Weeping
clears the eyes and brings about intuition. Then the vision of diversity
— man, animal, tree — slowly melting away, makes room for the infinite
realisation of Brahman everywhere and in everything. Then —

समं पश्यन् हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम् ।  
न हिनस्त्यात्मनात्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥

— "Verily, seeing the same God equally existent every where, he does not
injure the Self by the self, and so goes to the Supreme Goal" (Gitâ,
XIII. 28).

</div>
