---
title: III 1

---
<div>

[←](002_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](004_sir.htm)

  

[«](002_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/001_sir.htm)  
[«](002_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/001_sir.htm)

## III [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6003e6003.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

THE BARANAGORE MATH,  
*19th Nov., 1888.*

RESPECTED SIR,

I have received the two books sent by you and am filled with joy to read
your wonderfully affectionate letter which betokens your broad, generous
heart. No doubt, it is due to good merit of my previous births that you
show, sir, so much kindness to a mendicant like me who lives on begging.
By sending your gift of the "Vedanta", you have laid under lifelong
obligation not only myself but the whole group of Shri Ramakrishna's
Sannyasins. They all bow down to you in respect. It is not for my own
sake alone that I asked of you the copy of Pânini's grammar; a good deal
of study, in fact, is given to Sanskrit scriptures in this Math. The
Vedas may well be said to have fallen quite out of vogue in Bengal. Many
here in this Math are conversant with Sanskrit, and they have a mind to
master the Samhitâ portions of the Vedas. They are of opinion that what
has to be done must be done to a finish. So, believing that a full
measure of proficiency in the Vedic language is impossible without first
mastering Panini's grammar, which is the best available for the purpose,
a copy of the latter was felt to be a necessity. The grammatical work
*Mugdhabodha*, which we studied in our boyhood, is superior in many
respects to *Laghukaumudi*. You are yourself, however, a deeply learned
man and, therefore, the best judge we can have in this matter. So if you
consider the *Ashtâdhyâyi* (Panini's) to be the most suitable in our
case, you will lay us under a debt of lifelong gratitude by sending the
same (provided you feel it convenient and feel so inclined). This Math
is not wanting in men of perseverance, talent, and penetrative
intellect. I may hope that by the grace of our Master, they will acquire
in a short time Panini's system and then succeed in restoring the Vedas
to Bengal. I beg to send you two photographs of my revered Master and
two parts of some of his teachings as given in his homely style
compiled, and published by a certain gentleman — hoping you will give us
the pleasure of your acceptance. My health is now much improved, and I
expect the blessings of meeting you within two or three months. . . . 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
