---
title: 'VII

  1'

---
<div>

[←](006_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](008_sir.htm)

  

[«](006_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/004_sir.htm)  
[«](006_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/004_sir.htm)

## VII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6010e6007.pdf)* )

*Victory to God!*

BAGHBAZAR, CALCUTTA,  
*4th July, 1889*.

DEAR SIR,

It pleased me highly to know all the news in your letter yesterday. You
have asked me to request Gangadhar to write to you, but I see no chance
thereof, for though they are sending us letters, they do not stop
anywhere for more than two or three days and therefore do not receive
any of ours.

Some relative of my former life (The life he has renounced) has
purchased a bungalow at Simultala (near Baidyanath). The place being
credited with a healthy climate, I stayed there for some time. But the
summer heat growing excessive, I had an attack of acute diarrhoea, and I
have just fled away from the place.

Words fail to describe how strong is the desire in my mind to go to
Varanasi and have my soul blessed by meeting you and sojourning with you
in good converse, but everything rests on His will! I wonder what
linking of heart existed between us, sir, from some previous incarnation
that, receiving as I do the love and affection of not a few men of
wealth and position in this city of Calcutta, I am apt to feel so much
bored by their society, while only through one day's interview my heart
felt charmed enough to accept you as a near relative and friend in
spiritual life! One reason is that you are a favoured servant of God.
Another perhaps is:

तच्चेतसा स्मरति नूनमबोधपूर्वं भावस्थिरानि जननान्तरसौहृदानि ।

(Kalidasa's *Shakuntalam*, Act V: "It must be the memories, unwittingly
recalled, of affinities firmly established in previous incarnations
through depths of heart.")

I am indebted to you for the advice which comes from you as the outcome
of your experience and spiritual practice. It is very true, and I have
also found it so very often, that one has to suffer at times for holding
in one's brain novel views of all sorts.

But with me it is a different malady this time. I have not lost faith in
a benign Providence — nor am I going ever to lose it — my faith in the
scriptures is unshaken. But by the will of God, the last six or seven
years of my life have been full of constant struggles with hindrances
and obstacles of all sorts. I have been vouchsafed the ideal Shâstra; I
have seen the ideal man; and yet fail myself to get on with anything to
the end — this is my profound misery.

And particularly, I see no chance of success while remaining near
Calcutta. In Calcutta live my mother and two brothers. I am the eldest;
the second is preparing for the First Arts Examination, and the third is
young.

They were quite well off before, but since my father's death, it is
going very hard with them — they even have to go fasting at times! To
crown all, some relatives, taking advantage of their helplessness, drove
them away from the ancestral residence. Though a part of it is recovered
through suing at the High Court, destitution is now upon them — a matter
of course in litigation.

Living near Calcutta I have to witness their adversity, and the quality
of Rajas prevailing, my egotism sometimes develops into the form of a
desire that rises to plunge me into action; in such moments, a fierce
fighting ensues in my mind, and so I wrote that the state of my mind was
terrible. Now their lawsuit has come to an end. So bless me that after a
stay here in Calcutta for a few days more to settle matters, I may bid
adieu to this place for ever.

आपूर्यमाणमचलप्रतिष्ठं समुद्रमापः प्रविशन्ति यद्वत् ।  
तद्वत्कामा यं प्रविशन्ति सर्वे स शान्तिमाप्नोति न कामकामी ॥

(The Gitâ, II.70: "Not he that lusteth after objects of desire but he
alone obtaineth peace in whom desires lose themselves like river-water
flowing into the ocean but leaving it unaffected and unmodified in spite
of constant accession.")

Bless me that my heart may wax strong with supreme strength Divine, and
that all forms of Mâyâ may drop off from me for aye: "We have taken up
the Cross, Thou hast laid it upon us and grant us strength that we bear
it unto death. Amen!" — *Imitation of Christ*.

I am now staying in Calcutta. My address is: c/o Balaram Babu, 57
Ramkanta Bose's Street, Baghbazar, Calcutta. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
