---
title: 'VIII

  1'

---
<div>

[←](007_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](009_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/004_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](009_sir.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/004_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](009_sir.htm)

## VIII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6012e6008.pdf)* )

*All Glory to God!*

BARANAGORE, CALCUTTA,  
*7th Aug., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

It is more than a week since I received your letter, but having had
another attack of fever, I could not send a reply all this time, for
which please excuse me. For an interval of a month and a half I kept
well, but I have suffered again for the last ten days; now I am doing
well.

I have certain questions to put, and you, sir, have a wide knowledge of
Sanskrit; so please favour me with answers to the following:

1\. Does any narrative occur about Satyakâma, son of Jabâlâ, and about
Jânashruti, anywhere else in the Vedas excepting the
Upanishads?[2](#fn2)

2\. In most cases where Shankaracharya quotes Smriti in his commentary
on the *Vedânta-Sutras*, he cites the authority of the Mahâbhârata. But
seeing that we find clear proofs about caste being based on
qualification both in the Bhishmaparva of the Mahabharata and in the
stories there of the Ajagara and of Umâ and Maheshvara, has he made any
mention in his writings of this fact?

3\. The doctrine of caste in the *Purusha-Sukta* of the Vedas does not
make it hereditary — so what are those instances in the Vedas where
caste has been made a matter of hereditary transmission?

4\. The Achârya could not adduce any proof from the Vedas to the effect
that the Shudra should not study the Vedas. He only quotes
"यज्ञेऽनवक्लृप्तः" ("The Shudra is not conceived of as a performer of
Yajna or Vedic sacrifices.") (Tai. Samhita, VII. i. 1. 6) to maintain
that when he is not entitled to perform Yajnas, he has neither any right
to study the Upanishads and the like. But the same Acharya contends with
reference to "अथातो ब्रह्मजिज्ञासा", ("Now then commences hence the
inquiry about Brahman.") (*Vedânta-Sutras*, I. i. 1) that the word अथ
here does not mean "subsequent to the study of the Vedas", because it is
contrary to proof that the study of the Upanishad is not permissible
without the previous study of the Vedic Mantras and *Brâhmanas* and
because there is no intrinsic sequence between the Vedic Karma-kânda and
Vedic Janâna-kânda. It is evident, therefore, that one may attain to the
knowledge of Brahman without having studied the ceremonial parts of the
Vedas. So if there is no sequence between the sacrificial practices and
Jnana, why does the Acharya contradict his own statement when it is a
case of the Shudras, by inserting the clause "by force of the same
logic"? Why should the Shudra not study the Upanishad?

I am mailing you, sir, a book named *Imitation of Christ* written by a
Christian Sannyasin. It is a wonderful book. One is astonished to find
that such renunciation, Vairâgya, and Dâsya-Bhakti have existed even
among the Christians. Probably you may have read this book before; if
not, it will give me the greatest pleasure if you will kindly read it.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.
2.  [^](#txt2)Shankarâchârya in his commentary on the Vedanta-Sutras, 1.
    iii. 34-37, interprets the aphorisms to prove that Upanishadic
    wisdom was imparted to Janashruti and Satyakama, only because they
    were not Shudras, as borne out by actual texts. But as these texts
    are doubtful even after Shankaracharya's explanation, Swamiji wants
    to be referred to other similar Vedic texts.

</div>
