---
title: X 1

---
<div>

[←](009_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](011_sir.htm)

  

[«](009_sir.htm) Chronology [»](011_sir.htm)  
[«](009_sir.htm) Addressee [»](011_sir.htm)

## X [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6014e6010.pdf)* )

BAGHBAZAR, CALCUTTA,  
*2nd Sept., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

Some days ago I received your two kind letters. I am very much pleased
to find in you a wonderful harmony of Jnana and Bhakti. Your advice to
me to give up arguing and disputing is very true indeed, and that is
really the goal of life for the individual — "Sundered are the knots of
the heart, torn off are all his doubts, and the seeds of his Karma wear
off, when the sight of the Transcendent One is gained."
(Mundakonapanishad, II. ii. 8.) But then, as my Master used to say, when
a pitcher is being filled (by immersion), it gurgles, but when full, it
is noiseless; know my condition to be the same. Within two or three
weeks perhaps, I shall be able to meet you — may God fulfil that wish! 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
