---
title: XII 1

---
<div>

[←](011_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](013_sir.htm)

  

[«](011_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/01_sir.htm)  
[«](011_sir.htm) Addressee [»](013_sir.htm)

## XII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6016e6012.pdf)* )

BARANAGORE, CALCUTTA,  
*13th Dec., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

I have all particulars from your letter; and from Rakhal's which
followed, I came to know of your meeting. I have received the pamphlet
written by you. A kind of scientific Advaitism has been spreading in
Europe ever since the theory of the conservation of energy was
discovered, but all that is Parinâmavâda, evolution by real
modification. It is good you have shown the difference between this and
Shankara's Vivartavâda (progressive manifestation by unreal
superimposition). I can't appreciate your citing Spencer's parody on the
German transcendentalists; he himself is fed much on their doles. It is
doubtful whether your opponent Gough understands his Hegel sufficiently.
Anyway, your rejoinder is very pointed and thrashing. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
