---
title: XV

---
<div>

[←](014_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](016_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/001_fakir.htm) Chronology
[»](016_sir.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/02_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/03_sir.htm)

## XV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6021e6015.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Shri Ramakrishna!*

ALLAHABAD,  
*5th January, 1890*.

MY DEAR SIR, (Sj. Balaram Bose)

I am very sorry to hear of your illness from your kind note. The gist of
the letter I wrote to you about your change to Baidyanath was that it
would be impossible for a man of weak and extremely delicate physique
like you to live in that place unless you spent a good deal of money. If
change be really advisable for you, and if you have deferred it so long
simply to select a cheaper place and that sort of thing, it is certainly
a matter of regret. . . . Baidyanath is excellent so far as the air is
concerned, but the water is not good, it upsets the stomach. I used to
suffer from acidity every day. I have already written you a letter; have
you got it, or finding it a bearing letter, have you left it to its
fate? In my opinion, if you *have* to go away for a change, the sooner
the better. But, pardon me, you have a tendency to expect that
everything should fit in exactly with your requirements, but
unfortunately, such a state of things is very rare in this world.
"आत्मानं सततं रक्षेत् — One must save oneself under any circumstances."
"Lord have mercy", is all right, but He helps him who helps himself. If
you simply try to save your purse, will the Lord arrange the change for
you by drawing on His ancestral capital? If you think you have so much
reliance on the Lord, don't call in the doctor, please. . . . If that
does not suit you, you should go to Varanasi. I would have already left
this place, but the local gentlemen would not give me leave to depart! .
. . But let me repeat once more, if change is actually decided upon,
please do not hesitate out of miserliness. That would be suicide. And
not even God can save a suicide. Please convey my compliments to Tulasi
Babu and the rest.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
