---
title: XVIII 1

---
<div>

[←](017_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](019_sir.htm)

  

[«](017_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/001_sir.htm)  
[«](017_sir.htm) Addressee [»](019_sir.htm)

## XVIII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6027e6018.pdf)* )

GHAZIPUR,  
*4th Feb., 1890.*

DEAR SIR,

Received your kind note, and through supreme good fortune, I have
obtained an interview with Babaji. A great sage indeed! — It is all very
wonderful, and in this atheistic age, a towering representation of
marvellous power born of Bhakti and Yoga! I have sought refuge in his
grace; and he has given me hope — a thing very few may be fortunate
enough to obtain. It is Babaji's wish that I stay on for some days here,
and he would do me some good. So following this saint's bidding I shall
remain here for some time. No doubt, this will give you also much
pleasure. I don't mention them in a letter, but the facts are very
strange indeed — to be disclosed when we meet. Unless one is face to
face with the life of such men, faith in the scriptures does not grow in
all its real integrity.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
