---
title: XXIX 1

---
<div>

[←](028_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](030_kali.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/07_atul_babu.htm) Chronology
[»](030_kali.htm)  
[«](026_sir.htm) Addressee [»](031_sir.htm)

## XXIX [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6043e6029.pdf)* )

GHAZIPUR,  
*31st March, 1890*.

DEAR SIR,

I haven't been here for the last few days and am again going away today.
I have asked brother Gangadhar to come here; and if he comes, we go over
to you together. For some special reasons, I shall continue to stay in
secret in a village some distance from this place, and there's no
facility for writing any letter from that place, owing to which I could
not reply to your letter so long. Brother Gangadhar is very likely to
come, otherwise the reply to my note would have reached me. Brother
Abhedananda is putting up with Doctor Priya at Varanasi. Another brother
of mine had been with me, but has left for Abhedananda's place. The news
of his arrival has not yet been received, and, his health being bad, I
am rather anxious for his sake. I have behaved very cruelly towards him
— that is, I have harassed him much to make him leave my company.
There's no help, you see; I am so very weak-hearted, so much
overmastered by the distractions of love! Bless me that I may harden.
What shall I say to you about the condition of my mind! Oh, it is as if
the hell-fire is burning there day and night! Nothing, nothing could I
do yet! And this life seems muddled away in vain; I feel quite helpless
as to what to do! The Babaji throws out honeyed words and keeps me from
leaving. Ah, what shall I say? I am committing hundreds of offenses
against you — please excuse them as so many misdoings of a man driven
mad with mental agonies. Abhedananda is suffering from dysentery. I
shall be very much obliged if you will kindly inquire about his
condition and send him down to our Math in case he wants to go there
with our brother who has come from here. My Gurubhais must be thinking
me very cruel and selfish. Oh, what can I do? Who will see deep down
into my mind? Who will know how much I am suffering day and night? Bless
me that I may have the most unflinching patience and perseverance.

With countless greetings, 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Abhedananda is staying in Doctor Priya's house at Sonarpura. My
lumbago is as before. 

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
