---
title: XXXII 1

---
<div>

[←](031_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](033_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/005_tulsiram.htm) Chronology
[»](033_sir.htm)  
[«](031_sir.htm) Addressee [»](033_sir.htm)

## XXXII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6046e6032.pdf)* )

*Victory to Ramakrishna!*

BARANAGORE,  
*10th May, 1890*.

DEAR SIR,

I could not write to you because of various distractions and a relapse
of fever. Glad to learn from Abhedananda's letter that you are doing
well. Gangadhar (Akhandananda) has probably arrived at Varanasi by this
time. King Death happens here to be casting into his jaws these days
many of our friends and own people, hence I am very much taken up.
Perhaps no letter for me has arrived there from Nepal. I know not how
and when Vishvanâtha (the Lord of Kashi) would choose to vouchsafe some
rest to me. Directly the hot weather relaxes a little, I am off from
this place, but I am still at a loss where to go. Do please pray for me
to Vishvanatha that He may grant me strength. You are a devotee, and I
beseech you with the Lord's words coming to my mind, "Those who are the
devoted ones to My devotees, are indeed considered the best of My
devotees." 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
