---
title: XXXIX

---
<div>

[←](038_doctor.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](040_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_4/writings_prose/a_message_of_sympathy_to_a_friend.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/003_alasinga.htm)  
Addressee [»](134_mother.htm)

## XXXIX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6066e6039.pdf)* )

BOMBAY,  
*24th May, 1893*.

DEAR MOTHER, (Shrimati Indumati Mitra)

Very glad to receive your letter and that of dear Haripada. Please do
not be sorry that I could not write to you very often. I am always
praying to the Lord for your welfare. I cannot go to Belgaum now as
arrangements are all ready for my starting for America on the 31st next.
The Lord willing, I shall see you on returning from my travels in
America and Europe. Always resign yourselves to the Lord Shri Krishna.
Always remember that we are but puppets in the Lord's hands. Remain pure
always. Please be careful not to become impure even in thought, as also
in speech and action; always try to do good to others as far as in you
lies. And remember that the paramount duty of a woman is to serve her
husband by thought, word, and deed. Please read the Gita every day to
the best of your opportunity. Why have you signed yourself as. . . Dâsi
(maidservant)? The Vaishya and the Shudra should sign as Dâsa and Dâsi,
but the Brahmin and Kshatriya should write Deva and Devi (goddess).
Moreover, these distinctions of caste and the like have been the
invention of our modern sapient Brahmins. Who is a servant, and to whom?
Everyone is a servant of the Lord Hari. Hence a woman should use her
patronymic, that is, the surname of her husband. This is the ancient
Vedic custom, as for example, such and such Mitra, or the like. It is
needless to write much, dear mother; always know that I am constantly
praying for your well-being. From America I shall now and then write you
letters with descriptions of the wonderful things there. I am now at
Bombay, and shall stay here up to the 31st. The private Secretary to the
Maharaja of Khetri has come here to see me off.

With blessings,

Yours sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
