---
title: XL

---
<div>

[←](039_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](041_shashi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/018_sister_mary.htm)
Chronology [»](041_shashi.htm)  
[«](../../unpublished/ii_your_highness.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_4/writings_prose/reply_to_the_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

## XL

(*From a letter written to H. H. the Maharaja of Khetri*)

AMERICA,  
*1894*.

. . . "It is not the building that makes the home, but it is the wife
that makes it," ("न गृहं गृहमित्याहुर्गृहिणी गृहमुच्यते ।") says a
Sanskrit poet, and how true it is! The roof that affords you shelter
from heat and cold and rain is not to be judged by the pillars that
support it — the finest Corinthian columns though they be — but by the
real spirit-pillar who is the centre, the real support of the home — the
woman. Judged by that standard, the American home will not suffer in
comparison with any home in the world.

I have heard many stories about the American home: of liberty running
into licence, of unwomanly women smashing under their feet all the peace
and happiness of home-life in their mad liberty-dance, and much nonsense
of that type. And now after a year's experience of American homes, of
American women, how utterly false and erroneous that sort of judgment
appears! American women! A hundred lives would not be sufficient to pay
my deep debt of gratitude to you! I have not words enough to express my
gratitude to you. "The Oriental hyperbole" alone expresses the depth of
Oriental gratitude — "If the Indian Ocean were an inkstand, the highest
mountain of the Himalaya the pen, the earth the scroll and time itself
the writer" (Adapted from the *Shiva-Mahimnah-Stotram.*) still it will
not express my gratitude to you!

Last year I came to this country in summer, a wandering preacher of a
far distant country, without name, fame, wealth, or learning to
recommend me — friendless, helpless, almost in a state of destitution
and American women befriended me, gave me shelter and food, took me to
their homes and treated me as their own son, their own brother. They
stood my friends even when their own priests were trying to persuade
them to give up the "dangerous heathen" — even when day after day their
best friends had told them not to stand by this "unknown foreigner, may
be, of dangerous character". But they are better judges of character and
soul — for it is the pure mirror that catches the reflection.

And how many beautiful homes I have seen, how many mothers whose purity
of character, whose unselfish love for their children are beyond
expression, how many daughters and pure maidens, "pure as the icicle on
Diana's temple", and withal with much culture, education, and
spirituality in the highest sense! Is America then full of only wingless
angels in the shape of women? There is good and bad everywhere, true —
but a nation is not to be judged by its weaklings called the wicked, as
they are only the weeds which lag behind, but by the good, the noble,
and the pure who indicate the national life-current to be flowing clear
and vigorous.

Do you judge of an apple tree and the taste of its fruits by the unripe,
undeveloped, worm-eaten ones that strew the ground, large even though
their number be sometimes? If there is one ripe developed fruit, that
one would indicate the powers, the possibility and the purpose of the
apple tree and not hundreds that could not grow.

And then the modern American women — I admire their broad and liberal
minds. I have seen many liberal and broad-minded men too in this
country, some even in the narrowest churches, but here is the difference
— there is danger with the men to become broad at the cost of religion,
at the cost of spirituality — women broaden out in sympathy to
everything that is good everywhere, without losing a bit of their own
religion. They intuitively know that it is a question of positivity and
not negativity, a question of addition and not subtraction. They are
every day becoming aware of the fact that it is the affirmative and
positive side of everything that shall be stored up, and that this very
act of accumulating the affirmative and positive, and therefore
soul-building forces of nature, is what destroys the negative and
destructive elements in the world.

What a wonderful achievement was that World's Fair at Chicago! And that
wonderful Parliament of Religions where voices from every corner of the
earth expressed their religious ideas! I was also allowed to present my
own ideas through the kindness of Dr. Barrows and Mr. Bonney. Mr. Bonney
is such a wonderful man! Think of that mind that planned and carried out
with great success that gigantic undertaking, and he, no clergyman, a
lawyer, presiding over the dignitaries of all the churches — the sweet,
learned, patient Mr. Bonney with all his soul speaking through his
bright eyes. ... 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
