---
title: XLIII

---
<div>

[←](042_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](044_sisters.htm)

  

[«](042_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/021_dear.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/017_babies.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/023_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/019_sister.htm) Mary or
Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/023_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/017_babies.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/023_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/019_sister.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/023_sisters.htm)

## XLIII

C/O GEORGE W. HALE, ESQ.,  
541 DEARBORN AVENUE, CHICAGO,  
*26th June, 1894*.

DEAR SISTERS, (Misses Mary and H. Hale.)

The great Hindi poet, Tulasidâsa, in his benediction to his translation
of the Râmâyana, says, "I bow down to both the wicked and holy; but
alas! for me, they are both equally torturers — the wicked begin to
torture me as soon as they come in contact with me — the good, alas!
take my life away when they leave me." I say amen to this. To me, for
whom the only pleasure and love left in the world is to love the holy
ones of God, it is a mortal torture to separate myself from them.

But these things must come. Thou Music of my Beloved's flute, lead on, I
am following. It is impossible to express my pain, my anguish at being
separated from you, noble and sweet and generous and holy ones. Oh! how
I wish I had succeeded in becoming a Stoic! Hope you are enjoying the
beautiful village scenery. "Where the world is awake, there the man of
self-control is sleeping. Where the world sleeps, there he is waking."
May even the dust of the world never touch you, for, after all the poets
may say, it is only a piece of carrion covered over with garlands. Touch
it not — if you can. Come up, young ones of the bird[1](#fn1) of
Paradise, before your feet touch the cesspool of corruption, this world,
and fly upwards.

"O those that are awake do not go to sleep again."

"Let the world love its many, we have but one Beloved — the Lord. We
care not what they say; we are only afraid when they want to paint our
Beloved and give Him all sorts of monstrous qualities. Let them do
whatever they please — for us He is only the beloved — my love, my love,
my love, and nothing more."

"Who cares to know how much power, how much quality He has — even that
of doing good! We will say once for all: We love not for the long purse,
we never sell our love, we want not, we give."

"You, philosopher, come to tell us of His essences His powers, His
attributes — fool! We are here dying for a kiss of His lips."

"Take your nonsense back to your own home and send me a kiss of my Love
— can you?"

"Fool! whom art thou bending thy tottering knees before, in awe and
fear? I took my necklace and put it round His neck; and, tying a string
to it as a collar, I am dragging Him along with me, for fear He may fly
away even for a moment that necklace was the collar of love; that string
the ecstasy of love. Fool! you know not the secret — the Infinite One
comes within my fist under the bondage of love." "Knowest thou not that
the Lord of the Universe is the bond slave of love?" "Knowest thou not
that the Mover of the Universe used to dance to the music of the ringing
bracelets of the shepherdesses of Vrindaban?"

Excuse my mad scribbling, excuse my foolery in trying to express the
inexpressible. It is to be felt only. 

Ever with blessings, your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)A bird of Bengali folklore which is fabled to live
    exclusively in the atmosphere and whose eggs, laid high up in the
    air, are hatched during the steep fall towards the ground, and the
    young ones fly upwards before they touch the earth. Shri Ramakrishna
    used to compare the eternally liberated souls to these young birds.

</div>
