---
title: 'LVI

  1'

---
<div>

[←](055_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](057_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](055_akhandananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/25_brother_shivananda.htm)  
[«](045_brothers.htm) Addressee [»](073_brother_disciples.htm)

## LVI [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6102e6056.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

(Summer?) *1894*.

DEAR AND BELOVED, (The brother-disciples at Alambazar monastery.)

Your letter gives me all the news over there. I am grieved to hear of
the bereavement Balaram Babu's wife has sustained. Such is the Lord's
will. This is a place for action, not enjoyment, and everyone will go
home when his task is done — some earlier, and some later, that is all.
Fakir has gone — well, such is the will of the Lord!

It is a welcome news that Shri Ramakrishna's festival has come off with
great éclat; the more his name is spread, the better it is. But there is
one thing to know: Great sages come with special messages for the world,
and not for name; but their followers throw their teachings overboard
and fight over their names — this is verily the history of the world. I
do not take into any consideration whether people accept his name or
not, but I am ready to lay down my life to help his teachings, his life,
and his message spread all over the world. What I am most afraid of is
the worship-room. It is not bad in itself, but there is a tendency in
some to make this all in all and set up that old-fashioned nonsense over
again — this is what makes me nervous. I know why they busy themselves
with those old, effete ceremonials. Their spirit craves for work, but
having no outlet they waste their energy in ringing bells and all that.

I am giving you a new idea. If you can work it out, then I shall know
you are men and will be of service. . . . Make an organised plan. A few
cameras, some maps, globes, and some chemicals, etc., are needed. The
next thing you want is a big hut. Then you must get together a number of
poor, indigent folk. Having done all this, show them pictures to teach
them astronomy, geography, etc., and preach Shri Ramakrishna to them.
Try to have their eyes opened as to what has taken place or is taking
place in different countries, what this world is like and, so forth. You
have got lots of poor and ignorant folk there. Go to their cottages,
from door to door, in the evening, at noon, any time and open their
eyes. Books etc., won't do — give them oral teaching. Then slowly extend
your centres. Can you do all this? Or only bell-ringing?

I have heard everything about Brother Tarak from Madras. They are highly
pleased with him. Dear Brother Tarak, if you go to Madras and live there
for some time, a lot of work will be done. But before you go, start this
work there first. Can't the lady devotees convert some widows; into
disciples? And can't you put a bit of learning into their heads? And
can't you then send them out to preach Sri Ramakrishna from door to
door, and impart education along with it? . . .

Come! Apply yourselves heart and soul to it. The day of gossip and
ceremonials is gone, my boy, *you must work now*. Now, let me see how
far a Bengali's religion will go. Niranjan writes that Latu
(Adbhutananda) wants some warm clothing. The people here import winter
clothing from Europe and India. You will get a woollen wrap in Calcutta
at one-fourth of the price at which I might buy it here. . . . I don't
know when I shall go to Europe, everything is uncertain with me — I am
getting on somehow in this country, that is all.

This is a very funny country. It is now summer; this morning it was as
hot as April in Bengal, but now it is as cold as February at Allahabad!
So much fluctuation within four hours! The hotels of this country beggar
description. For instance there is a hotel in New York where a room can
be hired for up to Rs. 5,000 a day, excluding boarding charges. Not even
in Europe is there a country like this in point of luxury. It is indeed
the richest country in the world, where money is drained off like water.
I seldom live in hotels, but am mostly the guest of big people here. To
them I am a widely known man. The whole country knows me now; so
wherever I go they receive me with open arms into their homes. Mr.
Hale's home is my centre in Chicago. I call his wife mother, and his
daughters call me brother. I scarcely find a family so highly pure and
kind. Or why should God shower His blessings on them in such abundance,
my brother? Oh, how wonderfully kind they are! If they chance to learn
that a poor man is in a strait at such and such a place, there they will
go ladies and gentlemen, to give him food and clothing and find him some
job! And what do we do!

In summer they leave their homes to go to foreign lands, or to the
seaside. I, too, shall go somewhere, but have not yet fixed a place. In
other points, they are just as you see Englishmen. They have got books
and things of that sort, but very dear. You can have five times those
things In Calcutta for the same price. In other words, these people will
not let foreign goods be imported into the country. They set a heavy tax
on them, and as a result, the market goes up enormously. Besides, they
are not much in the way of manufacturing clothing etc. They construct
tools and machinery, and grow wheat, rice, cotton, etc., which are
fairly cheap.

By the bye, nowadays we have plenty of Hilsâ fish here. Eat your fill,
but everything digests. There are many kinds of fruits; plantain, lemon,
guava, apple, almond, raisin, and grape are in abundance; besides many
other fruits come from California. There are plenty of pineapples but
there are no mangoes or lichis, or things of that sort.

There is a kind of spinach, which, when cooked, tastes just like our
Noté of Bengal, and another class, which they call asparagus, tastes
exactly like the tender Dengo herb, but you can't have our Charchari
made of it here. There is no Kalâi or any other pulse; they do not even
know of them. There is rice, and bread, and numerous varieties of fish
and meat, of all descriptions. Their menu is like that of the French.
There is your milk, rarely curd, but plenty of whey. Cream is an article
of everyday use. In tea and coffee and everything there is that cream —
not the hardened crust of boiled milk, mind you — and there is your
butter, too, and ice-water — no matter whether it is summer or winter,
day or night, whether you have got a bad cold or fever — you have
ice-water in abundance. These are scientific people and laugh when they
are told that ice-water aggravates cold. The more you take, the better.
And there is plenty of ice-cream, of all sorts of shapes. I have seen
the Niagara Falls seven or eight times, the Lord be praised! Very grand
no doubt, but not quite as you have heard them spoken of. One day, in
winter, we had the aurora borealis.

. . . Only childish prattle! I have not much time to listen to that sort
of thing in this life; it will be time enough to see if I can do that in
the next. Yogen has completely rallied by this time, I hope? The
vagabond spirit of Sarada (Trigunâtita) is not yet at an end, I see.
What is wanted is a power of organisation — do you understand me? Have
any of you got that much brain in your head? If you do, let your mind
work. Brother Tarak, Sharat, and Hari will be able to do it.  — has got
very little originality, but is a very good workman and persevering —
which is an essential necessity, and Shashi (Ramakrishnananda) is
executive to a degree. ... We want some disciples — fiery young men — do
you see? — intelligent and brave, who dare to go to the jaws of Death,
and are ready to swim the ocean across. Do you follow me? We want
hundreds like that, both men and women. Try your utmost for that end
alone. Make converts right and left, and put them into our
purity-drilling machine.

. . . What made you communicate to the *Indian Mirror* that Paramahamsa
Deva used to call Narendra such and such, and all sorts of nonsense? —
As if he had nothing else to do but that! Only thought-reading and
nonsensical mystery-mongering! . . . It is excellent that Sanyal is
visiting you often. Do you write letters to Gupta? Convey to him my
love, and take kind care of him. Everything will come right by degrees.
I don't find much time to write heaps of letters. As for lectures and so
forth, I don't prepare them beforehand. Only one I wrote out, which you
have printed. The rest I deliver off-hand, whatever comes to my lips —
Gurudeva backs me up. I have nothing to do with pen and paper. Once at
Detroit I held forth for three hours at a stretch. Sometimes I myself
wonder at my own achievement — to think that there was such stuff in
this pate! They ask me here to write a book. Well, I think I must do
something that way, this time. But that's the botheration; who will take
the trouble of putting things in black and white and all that! . . . We
must electrify society, electrify the world. Idle gossip and barren
ceremonials won't do. Ceremonials are meant for householders, your work
is the distribution and propagation of thought-currents. If you can do
that, then it is all right. . . .

Let character be formed and then I shall be in your midst. Do you see?
We want two thousand Sannyasins, nay ten, or even twenty thousand — men
and women, both. What are our matrons doing? We want converts at any
risk. Go and tell them, and try yourselves, heart and soul. Not
householder disciples, mind you, we want Sannyasins. Let each one of you
have a hundred heads tonsured — young educated men, not fools. Then you
are heroes. We must make a sensation. Give up your passive attitude,
gird your loins and stand up. Let me see you make some electric circuits
between Calcutta and Madras. Start centres at places, go on always
making converts. Convert everyone into the monastic order whoever seeks
for it, irrespective of sex, and then I shall be in your midst. A huge
spiritual tidal wave is coming — he who is low shall become noble, and
he who is ignorant shall become the teacher of great scholars — through
HIS grace. "उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत प्राप्य वरान्निबोधत — Arise! Awake! and
stop not till the goal is reached." Life is ever expanding, contraction
is death. The self-seeking man who is looking after his personal
comforts and leading a lazy life — there is no room for him even in
hell. He alone is a child of Shri Ramakrishna who is moved to pity for
all creatures and exerts himself for them even at the risk of incurring
personal damnation, इतरे कृपणा — others are vulgar people. Whoever, at
this great spiritual juncture, will stand up with a courageous heart and
go on spreading from door to door, from village to village, his message,
is alone my brother, and a son of his. This is the test, he who is
Ramakrishna's child does not seek his personal good. "प्राणात्येऽपि
परकल्याणचिकीर्षव: — They wish to do good to others even when at the
point of death." Those that care for their personal comforts and seek a
lazy life, who are ready to sacrifice all before their personal whims,
are none of us; let them pack off, while yet there is time. Propagate
his character, his teaching, his religion. This is the only spiritual
practice, the only worship, this verily is the means, and this the goal.
Arise! Arise! A tidal wave is coming! Onward! Men and women, down to the
Chandâla (Pariah) — all are pure in his eyes. Onward! Onward! There is
no time to care for name, or fame, or Mukti, or Bhakti! We shall look to
these some other time. Now in this life let us infinitely spread his
lofty character, his sublime life, his infinite soul. This is the only
work — there is nothing else to do. Wherever his name will reach, the
veriest worm will attain divinity, nay, is actually attaining it; you
have got eyes, and don't you see it? Is it a child's play? Is it silly
prattle? Is it foolery? "उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत — Arise! Awake!" Great Lord!
He is at our back. I cannot write any more. — Onward! I only tell you
this, that whoever reads this letter will imbibe my spirit! Have faith!
Onward! Great Lord! . . . I feel as if somebody is moving my hand to
write in this way. Onward! Great Lord! Everyone will be swept away! Take
care, he is coming! Whoever will be ready to serve him — no, not him but
his children — the poor and the downtrodden, the sinful and the
afflicted, down to the very worm — who will be ready to serve these, in
them he will manifest himself. Through their tongue the Goddess of
Learning Herself will speak, and the Divine Mother — the Embodiment of
all Power — will enthrone Herself in their hearts. Those that are
atheists, unbelievers, worthless, and foppish, why do they call
themselves as belonging to his fold. . . . 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. . . . The term organisation means division of labour. Each does his
own part, and all the parts taken together express an ideal of harmony.
. . .

1.  [^](#txt1)From internal evidence it seems that letter No. LIV vas
    written in the beginning of 1894, for it refers to "Mazoomdar's
    doings", and cold "making itself scarce by degrees".  
      
    The next letter must have been written in March or April 1894, as we
    infer from the Bengali biography of Swami Akhandananda.  
      
    Letter number LVI belongs to the summer of 1894, for it was written
    after Shri Ramakrishna's festival.  
      
    Letter number LXXV belongs most probably to the beginning of 1895,
    for it gives directions about Shri Ramakrishna's birthday
    celebration that year; it also speaks of the retreat of winter and
    refers to certain books to be sent by Sanyal (See letters LIX and
    LXXIII).  
      
    The order of these letters, however, is not altered in the absence
    of more cogent proof.  
      
    August, 1963  
    Editor  
    Volume 6 Page 200

</div>
