---
title: LXI

---
<div>

[←](060_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](062_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/051_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/036_sister.htm)  
[«](060_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee [»](062_mrs_bull.htm)

## LXI

54 W. 33rd ST., NEW YORK,  
*21st March, 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I am astonished to hear the scandals the Ramabai circles are indulging
in about me. Don't you see, Mrs. Bull, that however a man may conduct
himself, there will always be persons who invent the blackest lies about
him? At Chicago I had such things every day against me. And these women
are invariably the very Christian of Christians! . . . I am going to
have a series of paid lectures in my rooms (downstairs), which will seat
about a hundred persons, and that will cover the expenses. I am in no
great hurry about the money to be sent to India. I will wait. Is Miss
Farmer with you? Is Mrs. Peake at Chicago? Have you seen Josephine
Locke? Miss Hamlin has been very kind to me and does all she can to help
me.

My master used to say that these names, as Hindu, Christian, etc., stand
as great bars to all brotherly feelings between man and man. We must try
to break them down first. They have lost all their good powers and now
only stand as baneful influences under whose black magic even the best
of us behave like demons. Well, we will have to work hard and must
succeed.

That is why I desire so much to have a centre. Organisation has its
faults, no doubt, but without that nothing can be done. And here, I am
afraid, I will have to differ from you — that no one ever succeeded in
keeping society in good humour and at the same time did great works. One
must work as the dictate comes from within, and then if it is light and
good, society is bound to veer round, perhaps centuries after one is
dead and gone. We must plunge heart and soul and body into the work. And
until we be ready to sacrifice everything else to one *Idea* and to one
alone, we *never*, *never* will see the light.

Those that want to help mankind must take their own pleasure and pain,
name and fame, and all sorts of interests, and make a bundle of them and
throw them into the sea, and then come to the Lord. This is what all the
Masters *said* and *did*.

I went to Miss Corbin's last Saturday and told her that I should not be
able to come to hold classes any more. Was it ever in the history of the
world that any great work was done by the rich? It is the heart and the
brain that do it ever and ever and not the purse.

My idea and all my life with it — and to *God* for help; to none else!
This is the only secret of success. I am sure you are one with me here.
My love to Mrs. Thursby and Mrs. Adams. 

Ever yours in grateful affection,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
