---
title: LXII

---
<div>

[←](061_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](063_shashi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/039_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](063_shashi.htm)  
[«](061_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee [»](064_mrs_bull.htm)

## LXII

54 W. 33rd ST., NEW YORK,  
*11th April, 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

. . . I am going away to the country tomorrow to see Mr. Leggett for a
few days. A little fresh air will do me good, I hope.

I have given up the project of removing from this house just now, as it
will be too expensive, and moreover it is not advisable to change just
now. I am working it up slowly.

. . . I send you herewith the letter from H. H. the Maharaja of Khetri;
also enclose the slip on Gurjan oil for leprosy. Miss Hamlin has been
helping me a good deal. I am very grateful to her. She is very kind and,
I hope, sincere. She wants me to be introduced to the "right kind of
people". This is the second edition of the "Hold yourself steady"
business, I am afraid. The only "right sort of people" are those whom
the Lord sends — that is what I understand in my life's experience. They
alone can and will help me. As for the rest, Lord help them in a mass
and save me from them.

Every one of my friends thought it would end in nothing, this my getting
up quarters all by myself, and that no *ladies would ever come here*.
Miss Hamlin especially thought that "she" or "her right sort of people"
were way up from such things as to go and listen to a man who lives by
himself in a poor lodging. But the "right kind" came for all that, day
and night, and she too. Lord! how hard it is for man to believe in Thee
and Thy mercies! Shiva! Shiva! Where is the right kind and where is the
bad, mother? It is all *He*! In the tiger and in the lamb, in the saint
and sinner all *He*! In Him I have taken my refuge, body, soul, and
Atman. Will He leave me now after carrying me in His arms all my life?
Not a drop will be in the ocean, not a twig in the deepest forest, not a
crumb in the house of the god of wealth, if the Lord is not merciful.
Streams will be in the desert and the beggar will have plenty, if He
wills it. He seeth the sparrow's fall. Are these but words, mother, or
literal, actual life?

Truce to this "right sort of presentation". Thou art my right, Thou my
wrong, my Shiva. Lord, since a child I have taken refuge in Thee. Thou
wilt be with me in the tropics or at the poles, on the tops of mountains
or in the depth of oceans. My stay — my guide in life — my refuge — my
friend — my teacher — my God — my real Self, Thou wilt never leave me,
*never*. I know it for sure. Sometimes I become weak, being alone and
struggling against odds, my God; and I think of human help. Save Thou me
for ever from these weaknesses, and may I never, never seek for help
from any being but Thee. If a man puts his trust in another good man, he
is never betrayed, never forsaken. Wilt Thou forsake me, Father of all
good, Thou who knowest that *all* my life I am Thy servant and Thine
alone? Wilt Thou give me over to be played upon by others, or dragged
down by evil? He will never leave me, I am sure, mother. 

Your ever obedient son,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
