---
title: LXXIII

---
<div>

[←](072_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](074_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](072_akhandananda072_akhandananda.htm) Chronology
[»](074_rakhal.htm)  
[«](056_dear_and_beloved.htm) Addressee

## LXXIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7247e6073.pdf)* )

U.S.A.,  
(Summer of?) *1895*.

MY DEAR—, (Brother-disciples at the Math.)

The books that Sanyal sent have arrived. I forgot to mention this.
Please inform him about it.

Let me write down something for you all:

1\. Know partiality to be the chief cause of all evil. That is to say,
if you show towards any one more love than towards somebody else, rest
assured, you will be sowing the seeds of future troubles.

2\. If anybody comes to you to speak ill of any of his brothers, refuse
to listen to him *in toto*. It is a great sin to listen even. In that
lies the germ of future troubles.

3\. Moreover, bear with everyone's shortcomings. Forgive offences by the
million. And if you love all unselfishly, all will by degrees come to
love one another. As soon as they fully understand that the interests of
one depend upon those of others, everyone of them will give up jealousy.
To do something conjointly is not in our very national character.
Therefore you must try to inaugurate that spirit with the utmost care,
and wait patiently. To tell you the truth, I do not find among you any
distinction of great or small: everyone has the capacity to manifest, in
times of need, the highest energy. I see it. Look for instance how
Shashi will remain always constant to his spot; his steadfastness is a
great foundation-rock. How successfully Kali and Jogen brought about the
Town Hall meeting; it was indeed a momentous task! Niranjan has done
much work in Ceylon and elsewhere. How extensively has Sarada travelled
and sown seeds of gigantic future works! Whenever I think of the
wonderful renunciation of Hari, about his steadiness of intellect and
forbearance, I get a new access of strength! In Tulasi, Gupta, Baburam,
Sharat, to mention a few, in every one of you there is tremendous
energy. If you still entertain any doubt as to Shri Ramakrishna's being
a jewel-expert, what then is the difference between you and a madman!
Behold, hundreds of men and women of this country are beginning to
worship our Lord as the greatest of all Avataras! Steady! Every great
work is done slowly. ...

He is at the helm, what fear! You are all of infinite strength — how
long does it take you to keep off petty jealousy or egoistic ideas! The
moment such propensity comes, resign yourselves to the Lord! Just make
over your body and mind to His work, and all troubles will be at an end
for ever.

There will not be room enough, I see, in the house where you are at
present living. A commodious building is needed. That is to say, you
need not huddle together in one room. If possible, not more than two
should live in the same room. There should be a big hall, where the
books may be kept.

Every morning there should be a little reading from the scriptures,
which Kali and others may superintend by turns. In the evening there
should be another class, with a little practice in meditation and
Sankirtanas etc. You may divide the work, and set apart one day for
Yoga, a day for Bhakti, another for Jnâna, and so forth: It will be
excellent if you fix a routine like this, so that outside people also
may join in the evening classes. And every Sunday, from ten in the
morning up till night, there should be a continuous succession of
classes and Sankirtanas etc. That is for the public. If you take the
trouble to continue this kind of routine work for some time, it will
gradually make itself easy and smooth. There should be no smoking in
that hall, for which another place must be set apart. If you can take
trouble to bring about this state of things by degrees, I shall think a
great advance is made.

What about a certain magazine that Haramohan was trying to publish? If
you can manage to start one, it will indeed be nice.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
