---
title: LXXIV

---
<div>

[←](073_brother_disciples.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](075_shashi.htm)

  

[«](073_brother_disciples.htm) Chronology [»](075_shashi.htm)  
[«](071_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](076_rakhal.htm)

## LXXIV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7248e6074.pdf)* )

U.S.A.  
(End of?) *1895*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Just now I got your letter and was glad to go through it. No matter
whether there is any work done in India or not, the real work lies here.
I do not want anybody to come over now. On my return to India I shall
train a few men, and after that there will be no danger for them in the
West. Yes, it was of Gunanidhi that I wrote. Give my special love and
blessings to Hari Singh and others. Never take part in quarrels and
disputes. Who on earth possesses the power to put the Raja of Khetri
down? — The Divine Mother is at his elbow! I have received Kali's letter
too. It will be very good indeed if you can start a centre in Kashmir.
Wherever you can, open a centre.... Now I have laid the foundations firm
here and in England, and nobody has the power to shake them. New York is
in a commotion this year. Next year will come the turn of London. Even
big giants will give way, who counts your pigmies! Gird up your loins
and set yourselves to work! We must throw the world into convulsions
with our triumphal shouts. This is but the beginning, my boy. Do you
think there are *men* in our country, it is a *Golgotha*! There is some
chance if you can impart education to the masses. Is there a greater
strength than that of Knowledge? Can you give them education? Name me
the country where rich men ever helped anybody! In all countries it is
the middle classes that do all great works. How long will it take to
raise the money? Where are the *men*? Are there any in our country? Our
countrymen are boys, and even must treat them as such.... There are some
few religious and philosophical books left — the remnants of the mansion
that has been burnt down; take them with you, quick and come over to
this country. ...

Never fear! The Divine Mother is helping me! This year such work is
going to be turned out that you will be struck dumb to hear of it!

What fear! Whom to fear! Steel your hearts and set yourselves to work! 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Sarada is talking of bringing out a Bengali magazine. Help it with
all your might. It is not a bad idea. You must not throw cold water on
anybody's project. Give up criticism altogether. Help all as long as you
find they are doing all right, and in cases where they seem to be going
wrong, show them their mistakes gently. It is criticising each other
that is at the root of all mischief. That is the chief factor in
breaking down organizations. ...

</div>
