---
title: LXXVI

---
<div>

[←](075_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](077_shashi.htm)

  

[«](075_shashi.htm) Chronology [»](077_shashi.htm)  
[«](074_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](078_rakhal.htm)

## LXXVI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7229e6076.pdf)* )

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
READING, CAVERSHAM, ENGLAND,  
*1895*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

Glad to receive your letters. There are two defects in the letters which
you all write, specially in yours. The first is that very few of the
important points I ask are answered. Secondly, there is unusual delay in
replying. . . . I have to work day and night, and am always whirling
from place to place besides.... These are countries where the people are
most luxurious, fashionable folk, and nobody would touch a man who has
but a speck of dirt on his body. ... I hoped that somebody would come
while I was still here, but as yet nothing has been settled I see. ...
Business is business, that is, you must do everything promptly; delay
and shuffling won't do. By the end of next week I shall go to America,
so there is no chance of my meeting him who is coming. . . . These are
countries of gigantic scholars. Is it a joke to make disciples of such
people? You are but children and talk like children. Only this much is
needed that there should be someone to teach a little Sanskrit, or
translate a bit in my absence, that's all. Why not let Girish Babu visit
these lands? It is a good idea. It will cost him but 3000 rupees to
visit England and America, and go back. The more people come to these
countries, the better. But then it sets my nerves on edge to look at
those who don hats and pose as *Sahibs*!

Black as chimney sweeps, and calling themselves Europeans! Why not wear
one's country-dress, as befits gentlemen? — Instead of that, to add to
that frightfulness of appearance! Good heavens! . . . Here, as in our
country one has to spend from one's own pocket to give lectures, but one
can make good the expenses if one lives long enough and makes a
reputation. Another thing, my incessant lecturing tours are making my
constitution very nervous, causing insomnia and other troubles. Over and
above that, I have to work single-handed. It is no use depending on my
countrymen. No one (in Bengal) has hitherto helped me with a penny, nor
has a single soul stepped forward to my assistance. Everybody in this
world seeks help, and the more you help him, the more he wants. And if
you can do no further, he will call you a cheat.... I love — and trust
him.... He will be free from disease through the Lord's grace. I take
all his responsibility. . . . 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
