---
title: LXXXIII

---
<div>

[←](082_dear.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](084_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](082_dear.htm) Chronology [»](084_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](078_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/087_rakhal.htm)

## LXXXIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7220e6083.pdf)* )

C/O E. T. STURDY,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM, READING,  
*4th October, 1895*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

You know that I am now in England. I shall stay here for about a month
and go back to America. Next summer I shall again come to England. At
present there is not much prospect in England, but the Lord is
omnipotent. Let us wait and see. . . .

It is impossible for — to come now. The thing is, the money belongs to
Mr. Sturdy, and we must have the kind of man he likes. Mr. Sturdy has
taken initiation from me, and is a very enterprising and good man.

In the first place we want a man who has a thorough mastery of English
and Sanskrit. It is true that will be able to pick up English soon
should he come here but I am as yet unable to bring men here to learn.
We want them, first, who will be able to teach. In the second place, I
trust those that will not desert me in prosperity and adversity alike. .
. . The most trustworthy men are needed. Then, after the foundation is
laid, let him who will, come and make a noise, there is no fear. — gave
no proof of wisdom in being carried away by a hubbub and joining the
party of those charlatans. Sir, granted that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was
a sham, granted that it has been a very serious mistake, indeed, to take
refuge in him, but what is the way out now? What if one life is spent in
vain, but shall a *man* eat his own words? Can there be such a thing as
having a dozen husbands? Any of you may join any party you like, I have
no objection, no, not in the least, but travelling this world over I
find that save and except his circle alone, everywhere else thought and
act are at variance. For those that belong to him, I have the utmost
love, the utmost confidence. I have no alternative in the matter. Call
me one-sided if you will, but there you have my *bona fide* avowal. If
but a thorn pricks the foot of one who has surrendered himself to Shri
Ramakrishna, it makes my bones ache. All others I love; you will find
very few men so unsectarian as I am; but you must excuse me, I have that
bit of bigotry. If I do not appeal to his name, whose else shall I? It
will be time enough to seek for a big Guru in our next birth; but in
this, it is that unlearned Brahmin who has bought this body of mine for
ever.

I give you a bit of my mind; don't be angry, pray. I am your slave so
long as you are his — step a hair's breadth outside that, and you and I
are on a par. All the sects and societies that you see, the whole host
of them, inside the country or out, he has already swallowed them all,
my brother. "मयैवैते निहताः पूर्वमेव निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन् — These
have verily been killed by Myself long ago, be only the instrument, O
Arjuna." Today or tomorrow they will be merged in your own body. O man
of little faith! Through his grace, "ब्रह्माण्डं गोष्पदायते — The whole
universe becomes a hoof-mark of the cow." Be not traitors, that is a sin
past atonement. Name, fame, good deeds, "यज्जुहोषि यत्तपस्यसि यदश्नासि
etc. — Whatever sacrifices you perform, whatever penances you undergo,
whatever you eat" — surrender everything to his feet. What on earth do
we want? He has given us refuge, what more do we want? Bhakti is verily
its own reward — what else is needed? My brother, he who made men of us
by feeding and clothing and imparting wisdom and knowledge, who opened
the eyes of our self, whom day and night we found the living God — must
we be traitors to him!!! And you forget the mercy of such a Lord! The
lives of Buddha and Krishna and Jesus are matters of ancient history,
and doubts are entertained about their historicity, and you in spite of
seeing the greatness of Shri Ramakrishna's life in flesh and blood
sometimes lose your head! Fie upon you! I have nothing to say. His
likeness is being worshipped in and out of your country, by godless and
heartless men, and you are stranded at times on disbelief!! In a breath
he will create for himself hundreds of thousands of such as you are.
Blessed is your birth, blessed your lineage, and blessed your country
that you were allowed to take the dust of his feet. Well I can't help.
He is protecting us, forsooth — I see it before my eyes. Insane that you
are, is it through my own strength that beauty like that of fairies, and
hundreds of thousands of rupees, lose their attraction and appear as
nothing to me? Or is it he who is protecting me? He who has no faith in
him and no reverence for the Holy Mother will be a downright loser, I
tell you plainly.

. . . Haramohan has written about his troubled circumstances, and says
he will be dislodged from his home soon. He has asked for some lectures;
but I have none at present, but have still some money left in my purse,
which I shall send him. So he need not be afraid. I could send him at
once, but I suspect that the money I last sent was miscarried, therefore
I postpone sending it. Secondly, I know, besides, of no address to send
it to. I see the Madras people have failed to start the paper. Practical
wisdom is altogether wanting in the Hindu race, I see. Whenever you
promise to do any work, you must do it exactly at the appointed time, or
people lose their faith in you. Money matters require a speedy reply. .
. . If Master Mahashaya be willing, tell him to be my Calcutta agent,
for I have an implicit faith in him, and he understands a good deal of
these things; it is not for a childish and noisy rabble to do it. Tell
him to fix upon a centre, an address that will not change every hour,
and to which I shall direct all my Calcutta correspondence. . . .
Business is business. . . . 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
