---
title: LXXXVII

---
<div>

[←](086_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](088_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](086_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology [»](088_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](070_alberta.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/33_sister.htm)

## LXXXVII

R.M.S. "Britannic",  
*Thursday morning, Dec. 5, 1895.*

DEAR ALBERTA,

Received your nice letter last evening. Very kind of you to remember me.
I am going soon to see the "Heavenly Pair". Mr. Leggett is a saint as I
have told you already, and your mother is a born empress, every inch of
her, with a saint's heart inside.

I am so glad you are enjoying the Alps so much They must be wonderful.
It is always in such places that the human soul aspires for freedom.
Even if the nation is spiritually poor, it aspires for physical freedom.
I met a young Swiss in London. He used to come to my classes. I was very
successful in London, and though I did not care for the noisy city, I
was very much pleased with the people. In your country, Alberta, the
Vedantic thought was introduced in the beginning by ignorant "cranks",
and one has to work his way through the difficulties created by such
introductions. You may have noticed that only a few men or women of the
upper classes ever joined my classes in America. Again in America the
upper classes being the rich, their whole time is spent in enjoying
their wealth and imitating (aping?) the Europeans. On the other hand in
England the Vedantic ideas have been introduced by the most learned men
in the country, and there are a large number among the upper classes in
England who are very thoughtful. So you will be astonished to hear that
I found my grounds all prepared, and I am convinced that my work will
have more hold on England than America. Add to this the tremendous
tenacity of the English character, and judge for yourself. By this you
will find that I have changed a good deal of my opinion about England,
and I am glad to confess it. I am perfectly sure that we will do still
better in Germany. I am coming back to England next summer. In the
meanwhile my work is in very able hands. Joe Joe has been the same kind
good pure friend to me here as in America, and my debt to your family is
simply immense. My love and blessings to Hollister and you. The steamer
is standing at anchor on account of fog. The purser has very kindly
given me a whole cabin by myself. Every Hindu is a Raja, they think, and
are very polite — and the charm will break, of course, when they find
that the Raja is penniless!!

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
