---
title: XC

---
<div>

[←](089_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](091_sarada.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/079_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/066_friend.htm)

## XC

NEW YORK,  
*29th Dec., 1895.*

DEAR SISTER, (Miss S. Farmer)

In this universe where nothing is lost, where we live in the midst of
death *in life*, every thought that is thought, in public or in private,
in crowded thoroughfares or in the deep recesses of primeval forests,
lives. They are continuously trying to become self-embodied, and until
they have embodied themselves, they will struggle for expression, and
any amount of repression cannot kill them. Nothing can be destroyed —
those thoughts that caused evil in the past are also seeking embodiment,
to be filtered through repeated expression and, at last, transfigured
into perfect good.

As such, there is a mass of thought which is at the present time
struggling to get expression. This new thought is telling us to give up
our dreams of dualism, of good and evil in essence, and the still wilder
dream of suppression. It teaches us that higher direction and not
destruction is the law. It teaches us that it is not a world of bad and
good, but good and better — and still better. It stops short of nothing
but acceptance. It teaches that no situation is hopeless, and as such
accepts every form of mental, moral, or spiritual thought where it
already stands, and without a word of condemnation tells it that so far
it has done good, now is the time to do better. What in old times was
thought of as the elimination of bad, it teaches as the transfiguration
of evil and the doing of better. It, above all, teaches that the kingdom
of heaven is already in existence if we will have it, that perfection is
already in man if he will see it.

The Greenacre meetings last summer were so wonderful, simply because you
opened yourself fully to that thought which has found in you so
competent a medium of expression, and because you took your stand on the
highest teaching of this thought that the kingdom of heaven already
exists.

You have been consecrated and chosen by the Lord as a channel for
converting this thought into life, and every one that helps you in this
wonderful work is serving the Lord.

Our scripture teaches that he who serves the servants of the Lord is His
highest worshipper. You are a servant of the Lord, and as a disciple of
Krishna I will always consider it a privilege and worship to render you
any service in the carrying out of your inspired mission wherever I be. 

Ever your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
