---
title: XCIII

---
<div>

[←](092_yogen.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](094_sarada.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/084_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/085_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/083_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/085_mrs_bull.htm)

## XCIII

NEW YORK,  
*25th Jan., 1896.*

DEAR MRS. BULL,

Your letter to Sturdy has been sent over to me. It was very kind of you
to write that note. This year, I am afraid, I am getting overworked, as
I feel the strain. I want a rest badly. So it is very good, as you say,
that the Boston work be taken up in the end of March. By the end of
April I will start for England.

Land can be had in large plots in the Catskills for very little money.
There is a plot of 101 acres for $200. The money I have ready, only I
cannot buy the land in my name. You are the only friend in this country
in whom I have perfect trust. If you consent, I will buy the land in
your name. The students will go there in summer and build cottages or
camps as they like and practice meditation. Later on, if they can
collect funds, they may build something up. I am sorry, you cannot come
just now. Tomorrow will be the last Sunday lecture of this month. The
first Sunday of next month there will be a lecture in Brooklyn; the
rest, three in New York, with which I will close this year's New York
lectures.

I have worked my best. If there is any seed of truth in it, it will come
to life. So I have no anxiety about anything. I am also getting tired of
lecturing and having classes. After a few months' work in England I will
go to India and hide myself absolutely for some years or for ever. I am
satisfied in my conscience that I did not remain an idle Swami. I have a
note-book which has travelled with me all over the world. I find these
words written seven years ago — "Now to seek a corner and lay myself
there to die!" Yet all this Karma remained. I hope I have worked it out.
I hope the Lord will give me freedom from this preaching and adding good
bondages.

"If you have known the Âtman as the one existence and that nothing else
exists, for whom, for what desire, do you trouble yourself?" Through
Maya all this doing good etc. came into my brain — now they are leaving
me. I get more and more convinced that there is no other object in work
except the purification of the soul — to make it fit for knowledge. This
world with its good and evil will go on in various forms. Only the evil
and good will take new names and new seats. My soul is hankering after
peace and rest eternal undisturbed.

"Live alone, live alone. He who is alone never comes into conflict with
others — never disturbs others, is never disturbed by others." I long,
oh! I long for my rags, my shaven head, my sleep under the trees, and my
food from begging! India is the only place where, with all its faults,
the soul finds its freedom, its God. All this Western pomp is only
vanity, only bondage of the soul. Never more in my life I realised more
forcibly the vanity of the world. May the Lord break the bondage of all
— may all come out of Maya — is the constant prayer of 

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
