---
title: XCVII

---
<div>

[←](096_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](098_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](096_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/073_sisters.htm)  
[«](094_sarada.htm) Addressee [»](135_sarada.htm)

## XCVII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7271e6097.pdf)* )

NEW YORK,  
*14th April, 1896*.

DEAR SARADA,

Glad to hear everything in your letter. I have got news that Sharat
arrived safe. I am in receipt of your letter and the copy of the *Indian
Mirror*. Your contribution is good, go on writing regularly. ... It is
very easy to search for faults, but the characteristic of a saint lies
in looking for merits — never forget this. ... You need a little
business faculty. ... Now what you want is organisation — that requires
strict obedience and division of labour. I shall write out everything in
every particular from England, for which I start tomorrow. I am
determined to make you decent workers thoroughly organised. ...

The term "Friend" can be used with all. In the English language you have
not that sort of cringing politeness common in Bengali, and such Bengali
terms translated into English become ridiculous. That Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa was God — and all that sort of thing — has no go in
countries like this. M— has a tendency to put that stuff down
everybody's throat, but that will make our movement a little sect. You
keep aloof from such attempts; at the same time, if people worship him
as God, no harm. Neither encourage nor discourage. The masses will
always have the *person*, the higher ones the *principle*; we want both.
But principles are universal, *not* persons. Therefore stick to the
principles he taught, let people think whatever they like of his person.
... Truce to all quarrels and jealousies and bigotry! These will spoil
everything. "But many *that are* first shall be last; and the last
first." "मद्भक्तानाञ्च ये भक्तास्ते मे भक्ततमा मताः — Those who are the
devotees of My devotees are My best devotees." 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
