---
title: CVII

---
<div>

[←](106_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](108_sister.htm)

  

[«](106_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/066_nanjunda_rao.htm)  
[«](104_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee [»](111_mrs_bull.htm)

## CVII

LUCERNE, SWITZERLAND,  
*23rd August, 1896*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I received your last today. By this time you must have received my
receipt for £5 you sent. I do not know what membership you mean. I have
no objection to have my name to be put on the list of membership of any
society. As for Sturdy, I do not know what his opinions are. I am now
travelling in Switzerland; from hence I go to Germany, then to England,
and next winter to India. I am very glad to hear that Saradananda and
Goodwin are doing good work in the U.S. As for me, I do not lay any
claim to that £500 for any work. I think I have worked enough. I am now
going to retire. I have sent for another man from India who will join me
next month. I have begun the work, let others work it out. So you see,
to set the work going I had to touch money and property, for a time. Now
I am sure my part of the work is done, and I have no more interest in
Vedanta or any philosophy in the world or the work itself. I am getting
ready to depart to return no more to this hell, this world. Even its
religious utility is beginning to pall me. May Mother gather me soon to
Herself never to come back any more! These works, and doing good, etc.,
are just a little exercise to cleanse the mind. I had enough of it. This
world will be world ever and always. What we are, so we see it. Who
works? Whose work? There is no world. It is God Himself. In delusion we
call it world. Neither I nor thou nor you — it is all He the Lord, all
One. So I do not want anything to do about money matters from this time.
It is your money. You spend what comes to you just as you like, and
blessings follow you. 

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I have entire sympathy with the work of Dr. Janes and have written
him so. If Goodwin and Saradananda can speed the work in U.S., Godspeed
to them. They are in no way bound to me or to Sturdy or to anybody else.
It was an awful mistake in the Greenacre programme that it was printed
that Saradananda was there by the kind permission (leave of absence from
England) of Sturdy. Who is Sturdy or anybody else to *permit* a
Sannyasin? Sturdy himself laughed at it and was sorry too. It was a
piece of folly. Nothing short of that. It was an insult to Sturdy and
would have proved serious for my work if it had reached India.
Fortunately I tore all those notices to pieces and threw them into the
gutter, and wondered whether it was the celebrated "Yankee" manners the
English people delight in talking about. Even so, I am no master to any
Sannyasin in this world. They do whatever it suits them, and if I can
help them — that is all my connection with them. I have given up the
bondage of iron, the family tie — I am not to take up the golden chain
of religious brotherhood. I am free, must always be free. I wish
everyone to be free — free as the air. If New York needs Vedanta, or
Boston, or any other place in the U.S., it must receive them and keep
them and provide for them. As for me, I am as good as retired. I have
played my part in the world.

</div>
