---
title: CIX

---
<div>

[←](108_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](110_miss_s_e_waldo.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/099_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](110_miss_s_e_waldo.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/062_joe_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/086_joe.htm)

## CIX

C/O MISS MULLER,  
AIRLIE LODGE, RIDGEWAY GARDENS,  
WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND,  
*7th October, 1896*.

Once more in London, dear Joe Joe, and the classes have begun already.
Instinctively I looked about for one familiar face which never had a
line of discouragement, never changed, but was always helpful, cheerful,
and strengthening — and my mind conjured up that face before me, in
spite of a few thousand miles of space. For what is space in the realm
of spirit? Well, you are gone to your home of rest and peace. For me,
ever-increasing mad work; yet I have your blessings with me always, have
I not? My natural tendency is to go into a cave and be quiet, but a fate
behind pushes me forward and I go. Whoever could resist fate?

Why did not Christ say in the Sermon on the Mount, "Blessed are they
that are always cheerful and always hopeful for they have already the
kingdom of heaven"? I am sure, He must have said it, He with the sorrows
of a whole world in His heart, He who likened the saintly soul with the
child — but it was not noted down; of a thousand things they noted down
only one, I mean, remembered.

Most of our friends came — one of the Galsworthys too — i.e. the married
daughter. Mrs. Galsworthy could not come today; it was very short
notice. We have a hall now, a pretty big one holding about 200 or more.
There is a big corner which will be fitted up as the Library. I have
another man from India now to help me.

I enjoyed Switzerland immensely, also Germany. Prof. Deussen was very
kind — we came together to London and had great *fun* here. Prof. Max
Müller is very, very friendly too. In all, the English work is becoming
solid — and respectable too, seeing that great scholars are
sympathising. Probably I go to India this winter with some English
friends. So far about my own sweet self.

Now what about the holy family? Everything is going on first-rate, I am
sure. You must have heard of Fox by this time. I am afraid I rather made
him dejected the day before he sailed by telling him that he could not
marry Mabel, until he began to earn a good deal of money! Is Mabel with
you now? Give her my love. Also give me your present address.

How is Mother? Frankincense, same solid sterling gold as ever, I am
sure. Alberta, working at her music and languages, laughing a good deal
and eating a good many apples as usual? By the by, I now live mostly on
fruits and nuts. They seem to agree with me well. If ever the old
doctor, with "land" up somewhere, comes to see you, you may confide to
him this secret. I have lost a good deal of my fat. But on days I
lecture, I have to go on solid food. How is Hollis? I never saw a
sweeter boy — may all blessings ever attend him through life.

I hear your friend Cola is lecturing on Zoroastrian philosophy — surely
the stars are not smiling on him. What about your Miss Andreas and our
Yogananda? What news about the brotherhood of the ZZZ's and our Mrs.
(forgotten!)? I hear that half a shipload of Hindus and Buddhists and
Mohammedans and Brotherhoods and what not have entered the U.S., and
another cargo of Mahatma-seekers, evangelists etc. have entered India!
Good. India and the U.S. seem to be two countries for religious
enterprise. Have a care, Joe; the heathen corruption is dreadful. I met
Madam Sterling in the street today. She does not come any more for my
lectures, good for her. Too much of philosophy is not good. Do you
remember that lady who used to come to every meeting too late to hear a
word but button-holed me immediately after and kept me talking, till a
battle of Waterloo would be raging in my internal economy through
hunger? She came. They are all coming and more. That is cheering.

It is getting late in the night. So goodnight, Joe. (Is strict etiquette
to be followed in New York too?) And Lord bless you ever and ever.

"Man's all-wise maker, wishing to create a faultless form whose
matchless symmetry should far transcend creation's choicest works, did
call together by his mighty will, and garner up in his eternal mind, a
bright assemblage of all lovely things, and then, as in a picture,
fashioned them into one perfect and ideal form. Such the divine, the
wondrous prototype whence her fair shape was moulded into being."
(*Shakuntalam* by Kalidasa, translated by Monier Williams).

That is you, Joe Joe; only I would add, the same the creator did with
all purity and nobility and other qualities and then Joe was made.

Ever yours, with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Mrs. & Mr. Sevier in whose house (flat) I am writing now, send their
kindest regards.

</div>
