---
title: CX

---
<div>

[←](109_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](111_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](109_joe_joe.htm) Chronology [»](111_mrs_bull.htm)

## CX

AIRLIE LODGE, RIDGEWAY GARDENS,  
WIMBLEDON,  
*8th October, 1896*.

DEAR (MISS S. E. WALDO),

. . . I had a fine rest in Switzerland and made a great friend of Prof.
Paul Deussen. My European work in fact is becoming more satisfactory to
me than any other work, and it tells immensely on India. The London
classes were resumed, and today is the opening lecture. I now have a
hall to myself holding two hundred or more. ...

You know of course the steadiness of the English; they are the least
jealous of each other of all nations, and that is why they dominate the
world. They have solved the secret of obedience without slavish cringing
— great freedom with great law-abidingness.

I know very little of the young man R—. He is a Bengali and can teach a
little Sanskrit. You know my settled doctrine. I do not trust any one
who has not conquered "lust and gold". You may try him in theoretical
subjects, but keep him off from teaching Raja-Yoga — that is a dangerous
game except for the regularly trained to play at. Of Saradananda, the
blessing of the greatest Yogi of modern India is on him — and there is
no danger. Why do you not begin to teach? . . . You have a thousand
times more philosophy than this boy R—. Send notices to the class and
hold regular talks and lectures.

*I will be thousand times more pleased* to see one of you start than any
number of Hindus securing success in America — even one of my brethren.
"Man wants Victory from everywhere, but defeat from his own children". .
. . Make a blaze! Make a blaze! 

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
