---
title: CXVI

---
<div>

[←](115_dear.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](117_alberta.htm)

  

[«](115_dear.htm) Chronology [»](117_alberta.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/077_babies.htm) Both Sisters  
[«](112_mary.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale  
[«](108_sister.htm) Harriet Hale  
[«](112_mary.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/088_mary.htm)

## CXVI

39 VICTORIA ST., LONDON S.W.,  
*28th Nov., 1896.*

DEAR SISTERS, (Misses Mary and Harriet Hale.)

. . . I feel impelled to write a few lines to you before my departure
for India. The work in London has been a roaring success. The English
are not so bright as the Americans, but once you touch their heart, it
is yours for ever. Slowly have I gained, and it is strange that in six
months' work altogether I would have a steady class of 120 persons apart
from public lectures. Here every one means work — the practical
Englishman. Capt. and Mrs. Sevier and Mr. Goodwin are going to India
with me to work and spend their own money on it! There are scores here
ready to do the same: men and women of position, ready to give up
everything for the idea, once they feel convinced! And last though not
the least, the help in the shape of money to start my "work" in India
has come and more will follow. My ideas about the English have been
revolutionized. I now understand why the Lord has blessed them above all
other races. They are steady, sincere to the backbone, with great depths
of feeling — only with a crust of stoicism on the surface; if that is
broken, you have your man.

Now I am going to start a centre in Calcutta and another in the
Himalayas. The Himalayan one will be an entire hill about 7,000 ft. high
— cool in summer, cold in winter. Capt. and Mrs. Sevier will live there,
and it will be the centre for European workers, as I do not want to kill
them by forcing on them the Indian mode of living and the fiery plains.
My plan is to send out numbers of Hindu boys to every civilised country
to preach — get men and women from foreign countries to work in India.
This would be a good exchange. After having established the centres, I
go about up and down like the gentleman in the book of Job.

Here I must end to catch the mail. Things are opening for me. I am glad,
and I know so you are. Now all blessings be yours and all happiness.

With eternal love,  
VIVEKANANDA,

  
PS. What about Dharmapala? What is he doing? Give him my love if you
meet him.

</div>
