---
title: CXXI

---
<div>

[←](120_alberta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](122_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/103_madras_committee.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/089_rakhal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/088_mary.htm) Addressee
[»](123_mary.htm)

## CXXI

RAMNAD,  
*30th Jan., 1897.*

MY DEAR MARY,

Things are turning out most curiously for me. From Colombo in Ceylon,
where I landed, to Ramnad, the nearly southernmost point of the Indian
continent where I am just now as the guest of the Raja of Ramnad, my
journey has been a huge procession — crowds of people, illuminations,
addresses, etc., etc. A monument forty feet high is being built on the
spot where I landed. The Raja of Ramnad has presented his address to
"His most Holiness" in a huge casket of solid gold beautifully worked.
Madras and Calcutta are on the tiptoe of expectation as if the whole
nation is rising to honour me. So you see, Mary, I am on the very height
of my destiny, yet the mind turns to quietness and peace, to the days we
had in Chicago, of rest, of peace, and love; and that is why I write
just now, and may this find you all in health and peace! I wrote a
letter to my people from London to receive Dr. Barrows kindly. They
accorded him a big reception, but it was not my fault that he could not
make any impression there. The Calcutta people are a hard-headed lot!
Now Barrows thinks a world of me, I hear! Such is the world.

With all love to mother, father, and you all, 

I remain, yours affly.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
