---
title: CXXIII

---
<div>

[←](122_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](124_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_4/translation_prose/the_education_that_india_needs.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/39_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](121_mary.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/078_sister.htm)

## CXXIII

DARJEELING,  
*April 28, 1897*.

DEAR MARY,

A few days ago I received your beautiful letter. Yesterday came the card
announcing Harriet's marriage. Lord bless the happy pair!

The whole country here rose like one man to receive me. Hundreds of
thousands of persons, shouting and cheering at every place, Rajas
drawing my carriage, arches all over the streets of the capitals with
blazing mottoes etc.,!!! The whole thing will soon come out in the form
of a book, and you will have a copy soon. But unfortunately I was
already exhausted by hard work in England; and this tremendous exertion
in the heat of Southern India prostrated me completely. I had of course
to give up the idea of visiting other parts of India and fly up to the
nearest hill station, Darjeeling. Now I feel much better, and a month
more in Almora would complete the cure. By the bye, I have just lost a
chance of coming over to Europe. Raja Ajit Singh and several other Rajas
start next Saturday for England. Of course, they wanted hard to get me
to go over with them. But unfortunately the doctors would not hear of my
undertaking any physical or mental labour just now. So with the greatest
chagrin I had to give it up, reserving it for a near future.

Dr. Barrows has reached America by this time, I hope. Poor man! He came
here to preach the most bigoted Christianity, with the usual result that
nobody listened to him. Of course they received him very kindly; but it
was my letter that did it. I could not put brains into him! Moreover, he
seems to be a queer sort of man. I hear that he was mad at the national
rejoicings over my coming home. You ought to have sent a brainier man
anyway, for the Parliament of Religions has been made a farce of in the
Hindu mind by Dr. Barrows. On metaphysical lines no nation on earth can
hold a candle to the Hindus; and curiously all the fellows that come
over here from Christian land have that one antiquated foolishness of an
argument that because the Christians are powerful and rich and the
Hindus are not, so Christianity must be better than Hinduism. To which
the Hindus very aptly retort that, that is the very reason why Hinduism
is a religion and Christianity is not; because, in this beastly world it
is blackguardism and that alone which *prospers*, virtue always suffers.
It seems, however advanced the Western nations are in scientific
culture, they are mere babies in metaphysical and spiritual education.
Material science can only give worldly prosperity, whilst spiritual
science is for eternal life. If there be no eternal life, still the
enjoyment of spiritual thoughts as ideals is keener and makes a man
happier, whilst the foolery of materialism leads to competition and
undue ambition and ultimate death, individual and national.

This Darjeeling is a beautiful spot with a view of the glorious
Kanchenjanga (28,146 ft.) now and then when the clouds permit it, and
from a near hilltop one can catch a glimpse of Gauri Shankar (29,000
ft?) now and then. Then, the people here too are so picturesque, the
Tibetans and Nepalese and, above all, the beautiful Lepcha women. Do you
know one Colston Turnbull of Chicago? He was here a few weeks before I
reached India. He seems to have had a great liking for me, with the
result that Hindu people all liked him very much. What about Joe, Mrs.
Adams, Sister Josephine, and all the rest of our friends? Where are our
beloved Mills? Grinding slow but sure? I wanted to send some nuptial
presents to Harriet, but with your "terrible" duties I must reserve it
for some near future. Maybe I shall meet them in Europe very soon. I
would have been very glad, of course, if you could announce your
engagement, and I would fulfil my promise by filling up half a dozen
papers in one letter....

My hair is turning grey in bundles, and my face is getting wrinkled up
all over; that losing of flesh has given me twenty years of age more.
And now I am losing flesh rapidly, because I am made to live upon meat
and meat alone — no bread, no rice, no potatoes, not even a lump of
sugar in my coffee!! I am living with a Brahmin family who all dress in
knickerbockers, women excepted of course! I am also in knickers. I would
have given you a surprise if you had seen me bounding from rock to rock
like a chamois, or galloping might and main up and down mountain roads.

I am very well here, for life in the plains has become a torture. I
cannot put the tip of my nose out into the streets, but there is a
curious crowd!! Fame is not all milk and honey!! I am going to train a
big beard; now it is turning grey. It gives a venerable appearance and
saves one from American scandal-mongers! O thou white hair, how much
thou canst conceal, all glory unto thee, Hallelujah!

The mail time is nearly up, so I finish. Good dreams, good health, all
blessings attend you.

With love to father and mother and you all,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
