---
title: CXXIV 1

---
<div>

[←](123_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](125_shuddhananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/075_doctor_shashi.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/076_mr_.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/005_sir.htm) Addressee

## CXXIV [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7339e6124.pdf)* )

ALMORA,  
*30th May, 1897*.

DEAR SIR,[2](#fn2)

I hear some unavoidable domestic grief has come upon you. To you,  a man
of wisdom, what can this misery do? Yet the amenities of friendly
intercourse, incidental to relative existence in this world, require my
making mention of it. Those moments of grief, however, very often bring
out a better spiritual realisation. As if for a while the clouds
withdraw and the sun of truth shines out. In the case of some, half of
the bondage is loosened. Of all bondages the greatest is that of
position — the fear of reputation is stronger than the fear of death;
but even this bondage appears to relax a little. As if the mind sees for
a moment that it is much better to listen to the indwelling Lord than to
the opinions of men. But again the clouds close up, and this indeed is
Mâyâ.

Though for a long time I had no direct correspondence with you, yet I
have often been receiving from others almost all the news about you.
Some time ago you kindly sent me to England a copy of a translation of
the Gita. The cover only bore a line of your handwriting. The few words
in acknowledgment of this gift, I am told, raised doubts in your mind
about my old affection towards you.

Please know these doubts to be groundless. The reason of that laconic
acknowledgment is that I was given to see, during four or five years,
only that one line of your handwriting on the cover of an English Gita,
from which fact I thought, if you had no leisure to write more, would
you have leisure enough to read much? Secondly, I learnt, you were
particularly the friend of white-skinned missionaries of the Hindu
religion and the roguish black natives were repelling! There was
apprehension on this score. Thirdly, I am a Mlechchha, Shudra, and so
forth; I eat anything and everything, and with anybody and everybody —
and that in public both abroad and here. In my views, besides, much
perversion has supervened — one attributeless absolute Brahman, I see, I
fairly understand, and I see in some particular individuals the special
manifestations of that Brahman; if those individuals are called by the
name of God, I can well follow — otherwise the mind does not feel
inclined towards intellectual theorisings such as the postulated Creator
and the like.

Such a God I have seen in my life, and his commands I live to follow.
The Smritis and the Puranas are produc tions of men of limited
intelligence and are full of fallacies, errors, the feelings of class
and malice. Only parts of them breathing broadness of spirit and love
are acceptable, the rest are to be rejected. The Upanishads and the Gita
are the true scriptures; Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Chaitanya, Nanak, Kabir,
and so on are the true Avatâras, for they had their hearts broad as the
sky — and above all, Ramakrishna. Ramanuja, Shankara etc., seem to have
been mere Pundits with much narrowness of heart. Where is that love,
that weeping heart at the sorrow of others? — Dry pedantry of the Pundit
— and the feeling of only oneself getting to salvation hurry-scurry! But
is that going to be possible, sir? Was it ever likely or will it ever be
so? Can anything be attained with any shred of "I" left anyhow?

Another great discrepancy: the conviction is daily gaining on my mind
that the idea of caste is the greatest dividing factor and the root of
Maya; all caste either on the principle of birth or of merit is bondage:
Some friends advise, "True, lay all that at heart, but outside, in the
world of relative experience, distinctions like caste must needs be
maintained." ... The idea of oneness at heart (with a craven impotence
of effort, that is to say), and outside, the hell-dance of demons —
oppression and persecution — ay, the dealer of death to the poor, but if
the Pariah be wealthy enough, "Oh, he is the protector of religion!"

Over and above, I come to see from my studies that the disciplines of
religion are not for the Shudra; if he exercises any discrimination
about food or about going out to foreign lands, it is all useless in his
case, only so much labour lost. I am a Shudra, a Mlechchha, so I have
nothing to do with all that botheration. To me what would Mlechchha's
food matter or Pariah's? It is in the books written by priests that
madnesses like that of caste are to be found, and not in books revealed
from God. Let the priests enjoy the fruits of their ancestors'
achievement, while I follow the word of God, for my good lies there.

Another truth I have realised is that altruistic service only is
religion, the rest, such as ceremonial observances, are madness — even
it is wrong to hanker after one's own salvation. Liberation is only for
him who gives up everything for others, whereas others who tax their
brains day and night harping on "my salvation", "my salvation", wander
about with their true well-being ruined, both present and prospective;
and this I have seen many a time with my own eyes. Reflecting on all
these sundry matters, I had no heart for writing a letter to you. If
notwithstanding all these discrepancies, you find your attachment for me
intact, I shall feel it to be a very happy issue indeed.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.
2.  [^](#txt2)This is the last letter written to Pramada Das Mitra. It
    is a bold challenge to the old love and spiritual fellowship of the
    two representative minds of that age, and as such, Swamiji states
    his own case in it in all its extreme trend and tendency so as to
    demand of his correspondent a sincere depth of love and of the power
    to harmonise.

</div>
