---
title: CXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](127_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](129_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](127_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](129_rakhal.htm)  
[«](085_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](131_akhandananda.htm)

## CXXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7346e6128.pdf)* )

ALMORA,  
*15th June, 1897*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am getting detailed reports of you and getting more and more
delighted. It is that sort of work which can conquer the world. What do
differences of sect and opinion matter? Bravo! Accept a hundred thousand
embraces and blessings from me. Work, work, work — I care for nothing
else. Work, work, work, even unto death! Those that are weak must make
themselves great workers, great heroes — never mind money, it will drop
from the heavens. Let them whose gifts you will accept, give in their
own name if they like, no harm. Whose name, and what is it worth? Who
cares for name? Off with it! If in the attempt to carry morsels of food
to starving mouths, name and possession and all be doomed even — अहो
भाग्यमहो भाग्यम् — thrice blessed art thou! It is the heart, the heart
that conquers, not the brain. Books and learning, Yoga and meditation
and illumination — all are but dust compared with love. It is love that
gives you the supernatural powers, love that gives you Bhakti, love that
gives illumination, and love, again, that reads to emancipation. This
indeed is worship, worship of the Lord in the human tabernacle, "नेदं
यदिदमुपासते — not this that people worship". (That is things other than
God.) This is but the beginning, and unless we spread over the whole of
India, nay, the whole earth, in that way, where lies the greatness of
our Lord!

Let people see whether or not the touch of our Lord's feet confers
divinity on man! It is this that is called liberation-in-life — when the
last trace of egoism and selfishness is gone. Well done! Glory to the
Lord! Gradually try to spread. If you can, go to Calcutta, and raise a
fund with the help of another band of boys; set one or two of them to
work at some place, and begin somewhere else. Spread in that way, and go
on inspecting them. You will see that the work will gradually become
permanent, and spread of religion and education will follow as a matter
of course. I have given particular instructions to them in Calcutta. Do
that kind of work, and I shall carry you on my shoulders — bravo! You
will see that by degrees every district will become a centre — and that
a permanent one. I am soon going down to the plains. I am a fighter, and
shall die in the battlefield. Does it behave me to sit up here like a
zenana lady?

Yours with all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
