---
title: CXXXVI

---
<div>

[←](135_sarada.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](137_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](135_sarada.htm) Chronology [»](137_rakhal.htm)  
[«](132_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](154_akhandananda.htm)

## CXXXVI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8378e6136.pdf)* )

MURREE,  
*10th October, 1897*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am very glad to receive your letter. You need not make a big plan for
the present, but do only what is possible under existing circumstances.
Gradually the way will open to you. We must certainly have the
orphanage, no hesitating in that. We must not leave the girls in the
lurch either. But then we must have a lady superintendent for an
orphanage of girls. I believe Mother will be a very good hand for that.
Or engage for this task some aged widow of the village who has no issue.
And there must be separate places for the boys and girls. Captain Sevier
is ready to send you money to help in this. Nedou's Hotel, Lahore — that
is his address. If you write to him, write the words, "To wait arrival",
on the letter. I am soon going to Rawalpindi, tomorrow or the day after;
then I visit Lahore and other places via Jammu, and return to Rajputana
via Karachi etc.

I am doing well.

Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. You must admit Mohammedan boys, too, but never tamper with their
religion. The only thing you will have to do is to make separate
arrangements for their food etc., and teach them so that they may be
moral, manly, and devoted to doing good to others. This indeed is
religion.

Shelve your intricate philosophical speculations for the present. In our
country we at present need manhood and kindness. "स ईशः
अनिर्वचनीयप्रेमस्वरूपः — The Lord is the Essence of unutterable love."
But instead of saying "प्रकाश्यते क्वापि पात्रे — He is manifest in
special objects", we should say, "स प्रत्यक्ष एव सर्वेषां प्रेमस्वरूपः —
He is ever manifest as Love in all beings." What other God — the
creation of your mind — are you then going to worship! Let the Vedas,
the Koran, the Puranas, and all scriptural lumber rest now for some time
— let there be worship of the visible God of Love and Compassion in the
country. All idea of separation is bondage, that of non-differentiation
is Mukti. Let not the words of people dead-drunk with worldliness
terrify you. "अभीरभीः — Be fearless" "Ignore the ordinary critics as
worms!" Admit boys of all religions — Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, or
anything; but begin rather gently — I mean, see that they get their food
and drink a little separately, and teach them only the universal side of
religion.

Be mad over this, and strike others with this madness! This life has no
other end. Preach His name, let His teachings penetrate the world to the
very bone. Never forget. Repeat this Mantra in your heart of hearts
unceasingly, as you go the round of your daily duties.

Yours,  
V.

</div>
