---
title: CXXXVII

---
<div>

[←](136_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](138_m.htm)

  

[«](136_akhandananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/081_jagmohanlal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/109_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/111_rakhal.htm)

## CXXXVII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8376e6137.pdf)* )

MURREE,  
*10th October, 1897*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

Reached Murree from Kashmir in the evening of the day before yesterday.
Everybody had an enjoyable time of it, only Krishnalal (Dhirananda) and
Gupta (Sadananda) suffered now and then from fever, which, however, was
but slight. This Address is to be sent to the Raja of Khetri. Have it
printed in gilt etc. The Raja is expected at Bombay about the 21st or
22nd of October. None of us is staying at Bombay at present — if there
be any, send him a copy so that he may present the same to the Raja even
on Board the ship, or somewhere in the city of Bombay. Send the superior
copy to Khetri. Have this passed in a meeting and if any change is
needed, no harm. Then sign it, all of you, only leaving a blank for my
name, and I shall sign it on going to Khetri. Let no pains be spared in
this.

. . . Captain Sevier says he is very anxious for a site. He wishes to
have a spot near Mussoorie or in some other central place, as soon as
possible. ... The thing is that we do not want a place which is too
cold, at the same time it must not be too hot. Dehra Dun is unbearable
in summer, but pleasant in winter; Mussoorie itself is, I dare say, not
the right place for many in winter. Above or below it, that is, in
British or Garhwal territory, some land is sure to be found. At the same
time there must be a supply of water at the place throughout the year,
for drinking purposes and for everyday use. My plan is this: With only
Achyutananda and Gupta I go from Murree to Rawalpindi, thence to Jammu,
thence to Lahore, and from Lahore straight to Karachi. ... Give my
hearty love and blessings to Shashi Babu. I see that Master Mahashaya
has buckled to work after such a long time. Give him my special love and
greetings. To see him, with his feminine retiringness, stirred to work,
my courage has gone up by leaps and bounds. I am writing to him tomorrow
even. Victory to the Lord! — To work! To work! 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
