---
title: CLIV

---
<div>

[←](153_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](155_nivedita.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/156_mary.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/157_mary.htm)  
[«](136_akhandananda.htm) Addressee

## CLIV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8459e6154.pdf)* )

CALIFORNIA,  
*21st February, 1900*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am very glad to receive your letter and go through the details of
news. Learning and wisdom are superfluities, the surface glitter merely,
but it is the heart that is the seat of all power. It is not in the
brain but in the heart that the Atman, possessed of knowledge, power,
and activity, has Its seat. "शतं चैका च हृदयस्य नाड्यः — The nerves of
the heart are a hundred and one" etc. The chief nerve-centre near the
heart, called the sympathetic ganglia, is where the Atman has Its
citadel. The more heart you will be able to manifest, the greater will
be the victory you achieve. It is only a few that understand the
language of the brain, but everyone from the Creator down to a clump of
grass, understands the language that comes from the heart. But then, in
our country, it is a case of rousing men that are, as it were, dead. It
will take time, but if you have infinite patience and perseverance,
success is bound to come. No mistake in that.

How are the English officials to blame? Is the family, of whose
unnatural cruelty you have written, an isolated one in India? Or, are
there plenty of such? It is the same story all over the country. But
then, it is not as a result of pure wickedness that the selfishness
commonly met with in our country has come. This bestial selfishness is
the outcome of centuries of failure and repression. It is not real
selfishness, but deep-rooted despair. It will be cored at the first
inkling of success. It is only this that the English officials are
noticing all round, so how can they have faith at the very outset? But
tell me, do they not sympathise with any real work that they meet with?
. . .

In these days of dire famine, flood, disease, and pestilence, tell me
where your Congressmen are. Will it do merely to say, "Hand the
government of the country over to us"? And who is there to listen to
them? If a man does work, has he to open his mouth to ask for anything?
If there be two thousand people like you working in several districts,
won't it be the turn of the English themselves to consult you in matters
of political moment? "स्वकार्यमुद्धरेत्प्राज्ञः The wise man should
achieve his object." . . . A— was not allowed to open a centre, but what
of that! Has not Kishengarh allowed it? — Let him work on without ever
opening his lips; there is no use of either telling anything to anybody,
or quarrelling with any. Whoever will assist in this work of the Divine
Mother of the universe, will have Her grace, and whoever will oppose it
will not only be "अकारणाविष्कृतवैरदारुणः — raising a deadly enemy for
nothing", but also laying the axe to his own prospects. शनैः पन्थाः —
all in good time. Many a little makes a mickle. When a great work is
being done, when the foundations are laid or a road constructed, when
superhuman energy is needed — it is one or two extraordinary men who
silently and noiselessly work through a world of obstacles and
difficulties. When thousands of people are benefited, there is a great
tomtoming, and the whole country is loud in notes of praise. But then
the machine has already been set agoing, and even a boy can work it, or
a fool add to it some impetus. Grasp this that, that benefit done to a
village or two, that orphanage with its twenty orphans, those ten or
twenty workers — all these are enough; they form the nucleus, never to
be destroyed. From these, hundreds of thousands of people will be
benefited in time. Now we want half a dozen lions, then excellent work
will be turned out by even hundreds of jackals. . .

If orphan girls happen to come to your hands for shelter, you must take
them in above all else. Otherwise, Christian missionaries will take
them, poor things, away! What matters it that you have no particular
arrangements for them? Through the Divine Mother's will, they will be
provided for. When you get a horse, never you worry about the whip. ...
Get together whomsoever you can lay your hands on, no picking and
choosing now — everything will be set right in course of time. In every
attempt there are many obstacles to cope with, but gradually the path
becomes smooth.

Convey to the European officer many thanks from me. Work on fearlessly —
there is a hero! Bravo! Thrice well done! The starting of a centre at
Bhagalpur that you have written about is no doubt a good idea —
enlightening the schoolboys and things of that sort. But our mission is
for the destitute, the poor, and the illiterate peasantry and labouring
classes, and if, after everything has been done for them first, there is
spare time, then only for the gentry. Those peasants and labouring
people will be won over by love. Afterwards it will be they who will
collect small sums and start missions at their own villages, and
gradually, from among those very men, teachers will spring.

Teach some boys and girls of the peasant classes the rudiments of
learning and infuse a number of ideas into their brains. Afterwards the
peasants of each village will collect funds and have one of these in
their village. "उद्धरेदात्मनात्मानम् — One must raise oneself by one's
own exertions" — this holds good in all spheres. We help them to help
themselves. That they are supplying you with your daily bread is a real
bit of work done. The moment they will come to understand their own
condition and feel the necessity of help and improvement, know that your
work is taking effect and is in the right direction, while the little
good that the moneyed classes, out of pity, do to the poor, does not
last, and ultimately it does nothing but harm to both parties. The
peasants and labouring classes are in a moribund condition, so what is
needed is that the moneyed people will only help them to regain their
vitality, and nothing more. Then leave the peasants and labourers to
look to their own problem, to grapple with and solve it. But then you
must rake care not to set up class-strife between the poor peasants, the
labouring people, and wealthy classes. Make it a point not to abuse the
moneyed classes. "स्वकार्यमुद्धरेत्प्राज्ञः — The wise man should
achieve his own object."

Victory to the Guru! Victory to the Mother of the Universe! What fear!
Opportunity, remedy, and its application will present themselves. I do
not care about the result, well or ill. I shall be happy if only you do
this much of work. Wordy warfares, texts and scriptures, doctrines and
dogmas — all these I am coming to loathe as poison in this my advanced
age. Know this for certain that he who will work will be the crown on my
head. Useless bandying of words and making noise is taking away our
time, is consuming our life-energy, without pushing the cause of
humanitarianism a step further. माभैः — Away with fear! Bravo! There is
a hero indeed! May the blessed Guru be enthroned in your heart, and the
Divine Mother guide your hands.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
