---
title: CLVIII

---
<div>

[←](157_margot.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](159_nivedita.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/51_mr_leggett.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/176_joe.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/174_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/176_joe.htm)

## CLVIII

ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA,  
*18th April, 1900*.

MY DEAR JOE,

Just now I received yours and Mrs. Bull's welcome letter. I direct this
to London. I am so glad Mrs. Leggett is on the sure way to recovery.

I am so sorry Mr. Leggett resigned the presidentship.

Well, I keep quiet for fear of making further trouble.

You know my methods are extremely harsh and once roused I may rattle A—
too much for his peace of mind.

I wrote to him only to tell him that his notions about Mrs. Bull are
entirely wrong.

Work is always difficult; pray for me Joe that my works stop for ever,
and my whole soul be absorbed in Mother. Her works, She knows.

You must be glad to be in London once more — the old friends, give them
all my love and gratitude.

I am well, very well mentally. I feel the rest of the soul more shall
that of the body. The battles are lost and won, I have bundled my things
and am waiting for the great deliverer.

"Shiva, O Shiva, carry my boat to the other shore."

After all, Joe, I am only the boy who used to listen with rapt
wonderment to the wonderful words of Ramakrishna under the Banyan at
Dakshineswar. That is my true nature; works and activities, doing good
and so forth are all superimpositions. Now I again hear his voice; the
same old voice thrilling my soul. Bonds are breaking — love dying, work
becoming tasteless — the glamour is off life. Only the voice of the
Master calling. — "I come Lord, I come." "Let the dead bury the dead,
follow thou Me." — "I come, my beloved Lord, I come."

Yes, I come. Nirvana is before me. I feel it at times — the same
infinite ocean of peace, without a ripple, a breath.

I am glad I was born, glad I suffered so, glad I did make big blunders,
glad to enter peace. I leave none bound, I take no bonds. Whether this
body will fall and release me or I enter into freedom in the body, the
old man is gone, gone for ever, never to come back again! The guide, the
Guru, the leader, the teacher has passed away; the boy, the student, the
servant is left behind.

You understand why I do not want to meddle with A—. Who am I to meddle
with anyone, Joe? I have long given up my place as a leader — I have no
right to raise my voice. Since the beginning of this year I have not
dictated anything in India. You know that. Many thanks for what you and
Mrs. Bull have been to me in the past. All blessings follow you ever!
The sweetest moments of my life have been when I was drifting: I am
drifting again — with the bright warm sun ahead and masses of vegetation
around — and in the heat everything is so still, so calm — and I am
drifting languidly — in the warm heart of the river! I dare not make a
splash with my hands or feet — for fear of breaking the marvellous
stillness, stillness that makes you feel sure it is an illusion!

Behind my work was ambition, behind my love was personality, behind my
purity was fear, behind my guidance the thirst of power! Now they are
vanishing, and I drift. I come! Mother, I come! In Thy warm bosom,
floating wheresoever Thou takest me, in the voiceless, in the strange,
in the wonderland, I come — a spectator, no more an actor.

Oh, it is so calm! My thoughts seem to come from a great, great distance
in the interior of my own heart. They seem like faint, distant whispers,
and peace is upon every thing, sweet, sweet peace — like that one feels
for a few moments just before falling into sleep, when things are seen
and felt like shadows — without fear, without love, without emotion.
Peace that one feels alone, surrounded with statues and pictures — I
come! Lord, I come!

The world *is*, but not beautiful nor ugly, but as sensations without
exciting any emotion. Oh, Joe, the blessedness of it! Everything is good
and beautiful; for things are all losing their relative proportions to
me — my body among the first. Om That Existence!

I hope great things to come to you all in London and Paris. Fresh joy —
fresh benefits to mind and body.

With love as ever to you and Mrs. Bull,

Yours faithfully,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
