---
title: CLXIII

---
<div>

[←](162_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](164_alberta.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/193_turiyananda.htm)
Chronology [»](164_alberta.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/180_mrs_leggett.htm) Addressee

## CLXIII

6 PLACE DES ETATS UNIS, PARIS,  
*3rd Sept., 1900.*

DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. Francis Leggett.)

We had a congress of cranks here in this house.

The representatives came from various countries, from India in the
south, to Scotland in the north, with England and America buttressing
the sides.

We were having great difficulty in electing the president, for though
Dr. James (Professor William James) was there, he was more mindful of
the blisters raised on him by Mrs. Melton (probably a magnetic healer)
than solution of world problems.

I proposed Joe (Josephine MacLeod), but she refused on the ground of
non-arrival of her new gown — and went to a corner to watch the scene,
from a coign of vantage.

Mrs. (Ole) Bull was ready, but Margot (Sister Nivedita) objected to this
meeting being reduced to a comparative philosophy class.

When we were thus in a fix — up sprung a short, square, almost round
figure from the corner, and without any ceremony declared that all
difficulties will be solved, not only of electing a president but of
life itself, if we all took to worshipping the Sun God and Moon God. He
delivered his speech in five minutes; but it took his disciple, who was
present, fully three quarters of an hour to translate. In the meanwhile,
the master began to draw the rugs in your parlour up in a heap, with the
intention, as he said, of giving us an ocular demonstration of the power
of "Fire God", then and there.

At this juncture Joe interposed and insisted that she did not want a
fire sacrifice in her parlour; whereupon the Indian saint looked daggers
at Joe, entirely disgusted at the behaviour of one he confidently
believed to be a perfect convert to fire worship.

Then Dr. James snatched a minute from nursing his blisters and declared
that he would have something very interesting to speak upon Fire God and
his brethren, if he were not entirely occupied with the evolution of
Meltonian blisters. Moreover his great Master, Herbert Spencer, not
having investigated the subject before him, he would stick to golden
silence.

"Chutney is the thing", said a voice near the door. We all looked back
and saw Margot. "It is Chutney," she said, "Chutney and Kali, that will
remove all difficulties of Life, and make it easy for us to swallow all
evils, and relish what is good." But she stopped all of a sudden and
vehemently asserted that she was not going to speak any further, as she
has been obstructed by a certain male animal in the audience in her
speech. She was sure one man in the audience had his head turned towards
the window and was not paying the attention proper to a lady, and though
as to herself she believed in the equality of the sexes, yet she wanted
to know the reason of that disgusting man's want of due respect for
women. Then one and all declared that they had been giving her the most
undivided attention, and all above the equal right, her due, but to no
purpose. Margot would have nothing to do with that horrible crowd and
sat down.

Then Mrs. Bull of Boston took the floor and began to explain how all the
difficulties of the world were from not understanding the true relation
between the sexes. She said, "The only panacea was a right understanding
of the proper persons, and then to find liberty in love and freedom in
liberty and motherhood, brotherhood, fatherhood, Godhood, love in
freedom and freedom in love, in the right holding up of the true ideal
in sex."

To this the Scotch delegate vehemently objected and said that as the
hunter chased the goatherd, the goatherd the shepherd, the shepherd the
peasant, and the peasant drove the fisher into the sea, now we wanted to
fish out of the deep the fisher and let him fall upon the peasant, the
peasant upon the shepherd, and so on; and the web of life will be
completed and we will be all happy. He was not allowed to continue his
driving business long. In a second everyone was on his feet, and we
could only hear a confusion of voices — "Sun God and Moon God", "Chutney
and Kali," "Freedom holdings up right understanding, sex, motherhood",
"Never, the fisherman must go back to the shore", etc. Whereupon Joe
declared that she was yearning to be the hunter for the time and chase
them all out of the house if they did not stop their nonsense.

Then was peace and calm restored, and I hasten to write you about it.

Yours affly.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
