+++
title = "indra stuti"

+++
The indra stuti is another hymn in the pauShya section of the adiparavan
of the mahAbhArata (1.3.150-1.3.153 in the critical Poona edition of the
mahAbhArata) which appears to be a composition of the “intermediate
period”. However it bears certain distinctive features that
differentiate if from the ashvina stuti and suggest that it is even
closer to the transitional period than the former. It appears in the
same frame story as the ashvina stuti of upamanyu: veda of the bhArgava
clan was a student of Ayodo dhaumya. After he had gone through his own
trial he was granted mastery over the veda and the dharmasutras by Ayodo
dhaumya. He then founded his own school and had his own student also of
the bhArgava clan, utta\~Nka. Once the kShatriyas pauShya and janamejaya
invited veda to serve as the brahmA priest in their sacrifice. veda
left, instructing utta\~Nka to take full care of his household. When he
was away veda’s wife moved by amorous arousal asked utta\~Nka to have
sex with her, but he firmly refused. veda on his return was pleased with
the conduct of utta\~Nka and graduated him, and asked to proceed on his
own. He insisted that he would need to pay veda his parting fee though
veda asked him to take it easy. Pressed thus veda asked utta\~Nka to ask
his wife for whatever she wanted and provide that as the fee. She
demanded the earrings of the queen of pauShya. So utta\~Nka went on his
quest. On the way he saw a gigantic bull and mighty man tending it. The
man ordered utta\~Nka to eat the dung of the bull and drink its urine.
utta\~Nka refused but the mighty man commanded utta\~Nka to do stating
that his own teacher had done the same (1). After partaking of the
unclean material, utta\~Nka washed his mouth, purified himself and went
to pauShya and asked him for his queen’s earrings. The kShatriya asked
utta\~Nka to go and ask her directly in her apartment. He went there but
the queen was not in sight. He came back and asked pauShya why that was
so. The king told him that he was impure due to improper purification
after his meal and the queen did not give audience to unclean souls. So
utta\~Nka again rigorously purified himself and went to the queen and
made the request for her earrings that were desired by veda’s wife. She
gladly gave that to him but stated that he would have to safe guard them
from takShaka the nAga who also desired them. The king then asked him to
have shrAddha lunch before he left as he was a learned brahmin. It
turned out that the lunch was cold and defiled by the hair of a woman.
Getting furious utta\~Nka cursed the king with blindness. The pauShya
was taken aback by the curse and in retaliated by cursing the brahmin
with sterility. utta\~Nka objected by stating that it was king who had
offended him first and showed him the hair and cold food. The king
accepted that there had been a problem with the food, so the brahmin
stated that pauShya’s blindness would eventually be cured. The king was
unable to withdraw his curse but utta\~Nka stated that he would
eventually smother the curse with his own brahman power as he was not on
the wrong.

utta\~Nka then started off with the earrings, on the way while he was
having his bath when a vagabond came and stole the earrings. utta\~Nka
chased him with utmost speed after having worshiped the devas and just
as he caught he changed his form to that of the snake takShaka and
started burrowing through a hole. He began pursuing the snake by digging
into the hole with a hoe, but failed to make much progress. So he
invoked indra for aid, who sent his vajra into utta\~Nka’s hoe and it
started drilling a hole behind the serpent. Finally he reached the sarpa
loka where he saw the wonderful underground world of the sarpas with
enormous palaces and terraces. Here he worshiped dR^itarAShTra airAvata
the lord of all nAgas with the sarpa AnuShTubh invocations and asked for
the earrings but they did not give it to him. Dejected he looked around
and saw a peculiar sight. Two dames were weaving a cloth in fine loom
with black and white threads. It was run by a wheel, with twelve spokes,
turned by six boys. And he also saw a being with a great horse. He
immediately invoked indra with the indra stuti. The being with the horse
then said I am pleased with you praise, ask me what you want. utta\~Nka
sought victory over the serpents. The being asked utta\~Nka to blow into
the horse. On doing so flames issued forth from all the orifices of the
horse and threatened to burn the loka of the sarpas. Fearing destruction
takShaka handed over the earrings to utta\~Nka. Just then utta\~Nka
realized that the auspicious moment for his teacher’s wife to wear the
earrings had come and it would take him a long time to get back to her.
He asked the being how he could return. The being gave him his great
horse and asked him to ride it back. In a moment the horse bore him back
to veda’s abode. veda’s wife was about to lay a spell on him for not
getting the earrings, when he arrived with them just in time and gave
her the gift. Pleased with him she instead gave him a boon of complete
success.

On being asked by veda about the cause for his delay, he narrated the
entire tale. veda explained to him that the mighty man with the enormous
bull was indra. The two dames weaving the cloth were dhAtA and vidhAtA
and the threads were the days and nights. The wheel was the year with
the 12 months and the six boys the seasons. The being was indra who had
also borne veda aid in the past and the horse was agni. The dung and
urine was actually ambrosia which had allowed utta\~Nka to live while in
the loka of the sarpas. veda then bade him to make his own way in the
world.

The indra stuti of utta\~Nka (UIS) has the following interesting
features:

1\) It uses the old vedic style in some respects such as the phrase
“vajrasya bhartA” which is encountered right from the archaic nivids
recited in the shrauta ritual.

2\) In terms of the allegories for the wheel of time the UIS resembles
the (UAS) and the sUktaM RV1.146, suggesting that like the UAS it is
clearly based on an astronomical allegory. The main allegory here is
that of the year and the hymn provides the vedic formulation of how
linear direction time (conceived as a cloth woven with days and nights)
emerges from a harmonic process of the celestial cycles (compared to the
harmonic movement of the loom).

3\) The meter is clearly centered on aNuShtubh and is close the
classical shloka of epic literature. In this sense it is atypical with
respect to a vedic sUktaM.

4\) The invocation in the form of a salutation is seen in the last line
of the hymn. While the salutation formulae are relatively common in the
yajur texts like “namo astu sarpebhyo” or the namaka AnuvAkas of the
shatarudriya chant, the phrases seen in the last line of the UIS is rare
or even absent in the vedic texts. However it is very common in the
itihAsa-purANa where the terms like jagadIshvara or trilokeshvara are
very common in the praise of most deities.

Thus the UIS appears to be a sample of a “transitional” text where the
old vedic metaphors are used in the context of an old narrative similar
to the brAhmaNa narratives, but new elements typical of the Pauranic
corpus are already emerging.

The mythographic frame of the UIS is far more complex than the UAS. At
the face of it, like the latter hymn, the UIS also has a clear
astronomical underpinning as suggested by the year allegory. While the
theft of the earrings and their recovery many be interpreted as a form
of a solar regeneration myth there is hardly any emphasis on it here
unlike the repeated emphasis in the frame myth of the UAS. This, taken
together with the more complex frame, suggests that there is a more
complex astronomical imagery embedded in the language of this myth with
the stolen earrings. A few elements which emerge from this language are
described below. 

Firstly, it is most likely that the earrings, as bright objects, do have
a solar connection to them. Most importantly the name of the king in the
tale is pauShya (vR^iddhi form of puShya) and the thief of the earrings
is the sarpa (takShaka) can be linked to the nakShatras puShya
(associated with the M44 cluster) and sarpa (Aslesha) are next to each
other. The summer solstice, and accordingly the archaic new year full
moon lay between these constellations in the end of the vedic period and
the immediate post-mahAbhArata era (1300-1200 BC). The loss, theft or
disappearance of bright objects, like fire, and gold are typically
associated with myths signifying the [precession of the
axis](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/04/great-circle.html) with the
sun (the bright object emerging often elsewhere) . Thus, it appears like
the earrings of pauShya’s wife appear to be sun slipping to the new
point between the snake’s head (the nakShatra pushya is the head of the
serpentine constellation Hydra) puShya (M44 and surrounding stars in the
constellation of Cancer) during the summer solstice. Here it was
recovered by utta\~Nka with indra and agni’s aid. Further evidence for
this is offered by the lines from the sarpa chant of utta\~Nka as he
entered nAga-loka.

surUpAshcha virUpAshcha tathA kalmASha-kuNDalAH .   
Adityavan-nAka-pR^iShThe rejur-airAvatodbhavAH ..140.. 

Of beautiful form, of various forms with speckled ear-rings are the
serpents.  They shine in the roof of the sky like the sun, snakes born
of airAvata.

bahUni nAga-vartmAni ga\~NgAyAstIra uttare .  
ichChetko.arkAMshu senAyA.n chartumairAvata.n vinA .. 141..\\\\

On the northern banks of the ga\~NgA are many stations of serpents. Who
except airAvata would desire to move in the burning rays of the Sun?

Here the serpents are mentioned as shining with the sun in roof of the
sky and dhR^itarAShTra airAvata, the lord of the serpents is mentioned
as moving in the burning rays of the sun. These clearly indicate that
serpent lord airAvata is celestial and represents the constellation of
Hydra whose head is Aslesha with the summer solstice sun (presided by
the vedic sarpa). This also explains what is meant by the north bank of
the ga\~NgA: the celestial ga\~NgA is the Milky Way, just to the north
of which lies the constellation of Hydra.

Now there are other more obscure motifs in the myth that are also
suggestive of astronomical connections or links to other myths:

At the very beginning of the tale of utta\~Nka is the mention of the
mention of the illicit sexual advance made by veda’s wife to utta\~Nka.
Such illicit or incestuous sexual relationships are mentioned in other
precessional myths of vedic and itihasa-purANa origin. 1) The
precessional myth associated with kR^ittika and the birth of kumAra has
the wives of 6 of the 7 R^iShis engaging in an illicit dalliance with
agni. 2) The myth associated with rohiNi has prajApati making an
incestuous advance on his own daughter. 3) In the classical precessional
myth of the churning of the ocean there is the illicit advance of rudra
towards mohinI. 4) In the vR^iShAkapi hymn, correctly interpreted by
Tilak as a precessional myth, vR^ishAkapi (the virile ape) makes and
illicit advance towards indrANi. For which indrANi punishes him by
making a dog (Canis Major) bite him. These analogies suggest that the
illicit sexual advance is a motif in the precessional which probably
stands as a metaphor for the break in the old order or the longing for a
new relationship, previously forbidden.

Another strange motif occurs in two independent of utta\~Nka tales (1)
is the consumption of filth that normally causes the brahmin to fall to
ritual impurity. In both cases filth happens to be a concealed form of
ambrosia. The exact implications of this concealed truth are not
certain, but it could imply that the truth is always concealed. The
temporary blindness of the king and the sterility of utta\~Nka could be
a metaphor of the solar decline at the winter solstice embedded within
the larger frame. However, it could also signify the mythological
“chaos” often associated with the precessional change of the
coordinates of the year. Finally, there is the motif of the fire of
equine form within
[water](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/04/indo-european-divine-tripartation.html)
briefly alluded to as “garbham-apAM” – the horse of indra, which is
agni. The connection of this equine fire within water to the
astronomical myth of precession needs further exploration.

Another peculiar feature of the UIS is the black garment of indra. Some
commentators have taken this to mean the color of the night sky \[with
the thousand eyes of indra being the stars\] or the thunder clouds. It
is interesting to note the connection with the samavedic udgAtA priest
learning the rahasya gAnaM, the great shakvarI sAman, during which he
wears black clothes. The shakvarI is said to be an embodiment of the
vajra and the udgAtA wearing black clothes comes from the forest to the
sacrificial arena, chanting it. This is the rite of bringing of the
vajra and is supposed to be followed by a thunderstorm.

A translation of the indra stuti is provided below:

1.3  
trINy-arpitAn-yatra shatAni madhye ShaShTishcha nitya.n charati dhruve
.asmin .  
chakre chatur-viMshati parva yoge ShaD yat-kumArAH parivartayanti
..150..

Around the axis set with the 300 and 60 \[spokes\] the \[wheel\]
perpetually turns. The six young boys turn the wheel marked with 24
divisions (2) occurring as pairs.

tantra.n cheda.n vishvarUpaM yuvatyau vayatas-tantUn-satata.n
vartayantyau .  
kR^iShNAnsitAMsh chaiva vivartayantyau bhUtAnyajasraM bhuvanAni chaiva
..151..  

These two dames of universal form are weaving without intermission a
cloth with threads. With black and white \[threads\] they weave ushering
into existence the manifold worlds and the entities within them.

vajrasya bhartA bhuvanasya goptA vR^itrasya hantA namuchernihantA .  
kR^iShNe vasAno vasane mahAtmA satyAnR^ite yo vivinakti loke ..152..  

Oh bearer of the vajra, the protector of the universe, you are the
slayer of vR^itra and the slayer Namuchi. Oh illustrious one, who wears
the black cloth and displays inviolable and violable laws of the
universe.

yo vAjina.n garbham-apAM purANaM vaishvAnara.n vAhanam-abhyupetaH .  
namaH sadAsmai jagadIshvarAya lokatrayeshAya purandarAya ..153..

That horse which was born from the depths of water in the ancient past,
\[which is\] the fiery vaishvAnara, is furnished as your horse. I salute
you, the supreme lord of the universe, the lord of the three worlds, and
the destroyer of forts.  

…………………..  
Notes  
(1) In another tale utta\~Nka is offered ambrosia by indra in the form
of the urine of a niShAda in a desert.

(2) The 24 divisions on the wheel of time are the 24 fortnights that
occur as pairs corresponding to each month.
