+++
title = "The Hindu struggle in the mountains and a discursion on philological encounters with the turuShka-s"

+++
Sometime after Bhairappa, a noted writer among the karNATa-s, published
a novel that was supposed to concern the turuShka-bhArata saMgrAma, we
happened to be journeying deep in the karNATa country. As the events
would conspire, we found ourselves in the company of an old
acquaintance, a relative of the eminent historian Irfan Habib, and his
secular wife, formerly a Hindu. While we tried to veer away from any
communal discussion, it was not to be so. We eventually came to hear
that Sanskritic learning was saved from oblivion by none other than the
Islamic Sultans. The Mohammedan gentleman chimed in that Tipu Sultan
generously endowed the premier advaita maTha at shR^i\~Ngagiri. His wife
then regaled us to a quaint tale of how the Islamic slave-marauder Maliq
Kaffur stopped from destroying the temple of Madhurai because he was
shown the true sign of “God” in the temple by a Hindu godman. Hence, she
felt it was illiberal of Hindus to post a sign that no one except Hindus
were allowed beyond a certain point in the Madhurai temple. She said
because of this, they were unable to take some mlechCha visitors to see
the splendors of India architecture. I mentioned that I would be very
interested of learning of any notable example of the suratrANa-s
salvaging Sanskritic literature. He said that he had been consulting the
works of the eminent historians and was preparing an article to submit
to some Marxian publication, for which he had gathered “bombshell”
evidence that would dismiss the claims of the Hindutva types. We said
that before he presented his evidence, we would disqualify Akbar and
Dara Shikoh. Our Sheikhzade said that was fine, and that he could
furnish evidence from the Arabic, pre-Mogol Dilli-sultanate and Bahmanid
periods, though he added that the Mogols were the greatest exponents of
the “composite Sufi culture”. As he was reeling out his evidence he
arrived at the reign Firuz Shah Tughlaq, there were few more pious
marUnmatta-s than him. The Mohammedan gentleman declared that during
Firuz’s invasion of the Hindu kingdom of Nagarkot (susharma-rAjya or
modern Kangra) he “salvaged” a large library of Sanskrit books from some
old temple in the region and brought it to Delhi to be studied and
translated into Arabic and Persian by the eminent Islamic intellectuals
of his age. This act he said also gave employment to the paNDita-s to
help the Mohammedan intellectuals with their translations. We queried
him that did Mohammedan raconteurs not state that the Tughlaq
slaughtered Hindus and demolish the “old temple” during the invasion of
Kangra? His secular wife countered that it was fantasy of the Bhairappa
types, and that both Sultans Mohammed ibn Tughlaq and Firuz Shah Tughlaq
had themselves held the golden Chatra for jvAlAmukhI at the famous
shakti-pITha. Rather than correct her, the Shaikhzade merely nodded his
head and rolled on with Zain-al-abidin. Not wanting to interrupt his
flow, we remained silent. We were told that the said suratrANa had
introduced Kashmiriyat in which Hindus and Moslems have a joint
ownership of the land and culture. He also added that the concept of
Kashmiriyat could be extended to the whole of India as implemented by
several other suratrANa-s whom he named. He then cited shrIvara’s
translation of the story of Yusuf and Zulaikha in the form of a
saMskR^ita kAvya, and called it a masterpiece that deserved to be on the
same pedestal as the rAmAyaNa. Why do we not have any TV serial on Yusuf
and Zulaikha he asked? His wife chimed in that it pointed to the high
status of women in Islamic society. We were left wondering as to how a
Judaistic reformulation of an ancient pagan Egyptian tale could reflect
on women in Islam.

In any case we did not interrupt his flourishes because it is sometimes
useful to hear things straight from the horse’s mouth, and after all he
was regurgitating material from “the People’s history of India and
Pakistan” which was a historical vision close to the current incarnation
of the Kangress party and its “progressive” advisers. Hence, it was a
view that certainly had a resonance with the vision which the Kangress
and its backers intended for bhArata. We were also amused by the
convergence in vision between the eminent historians and white
indologists of the like of Witzel’s patra-bandhu-s, including Minkowski
and Pollock. Finally, it touched a topic that we had some interest in –
a more accurate picture of the philological impact of the Mohammedan
irruptions. So we thought of revisiting this issue especially in the
context of a much neglected aspect of Hindu history, namely the struggle
in mountains of the Eastern pa\~nchanada and uttarAkhaNDa. We have
already touched upon some issues in this regard before on these pages
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/02/12/on-a-paramara-warrior-queen-and-some-saracenic-structures-in-lata/)
and
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/10/05/takaraja-s/).

So what was the story of Firuz Tughlaq’s invasion of Kangra? The
mountains tracts of pa\~nchanada and uttarAkhaNDa offered terrain that
allowed Hindus to resist the Islamic onslaught right from the times of
the first Turkic invasions. The strategic value of this terrain came to
fore during the [Jihads of Shihabuddin, the Sultankalka of
Ghur](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/07/19/the-jihads-of-shihabuddin-the-sultankalka-of-ghur/),
who was killed by the Hindu Khokar chiefs after facing stiff resistance
from the susharma-rAjya, which was related to the clan of pR^ithivirAja
and jayachandra. Down the line, with the turuShka-s established in
dillika, Mohd. b. Tughlaq invaded Kangra, which the Islamic chronicle,
the Badr-i-Chach described as being unconquered by Darius the Achaemenid
and Alexander of Macedon. Its Hindu women were described as beautiful as
the sun, and its defenders were described as being like buffaloes with
necks like that of rhinos. They were led by pR^ithivichandra who massed
ballistas on the walls of the Kangra fort against the attacking Ghazis.
While the Badr-i-Chach claims that Mohd. b. Tughlaq, with the intention
of sending the Hindus to hell, conquered the fort, it is interesting to
note that none of the other Islamic chronicles, like Tarikh-i-Firoz
Shahi or Ferishta mention it, while waxing eloquent on the Tughlaq’s
Jihads across bhArata. Further, the numismatic evidence indicates that
pR^ithivichandra’s coins continue to be issued throughout the period
when Tughlaq is supposed to have conquered his kingdom. This suggests
that this Tughlaq’s invasion of Kangra was a failure with nothing much
to show. Indeed, the events that followed support this. The grandson of
pR^ithivichandra, rUpachandra, took the opportunity of Mohd. b.
Tughlaq’s death to launch a retaliatory strike against the
Mohammedans. Gathering a strong cavalry force, he charged down from
Kangra to attack Ghazi strongholds all the way to the gates of dillika.
The new suratrANa, Firuz Tughlaq who was caught up in other Jihads was
unable to relive his Muqaddams, whose treasure hoards were captured by
rUpachandra and several of them were killed and others fled. Even as he
came withing striking range of dillika, he got the news that he was
facing a massive attack on rear from the Sultan of Kashmir. He hurried
back to relieve his kingdom and in the process suffered some losses
against the Sultan of Kashmir. Nevertheless, he managed to take back the
Kangra territory from that invader. Thereafter, rupachandra faced a
massive attack from Firuz Tughlaq. In describing this invasion
Shams-i-siraj ‘Afif in his Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi mentions that some
Hindus have claimed that the Sultan and the earlier Tughlaq had held
Chatra-s over the jvAlAmukhI idol or fire. But he clarifies: “Good
Mohammedans should pay no heed to such lies. These two Sultans were
specially chosen by Allah among the Mohammedans and in the whole course
of their reigns, whenever they conquered a Hindu temple, they broke and
destroyed it.” We have to admit that when the Mohammedan so clearly
explains the matter, indeed it is only the deluded Hindus who repeatedly
make up such stories to assuage themselves. Ferishta further clarifies
what happened in the Kangra: “The name by which it was known was
jvAlAmukhI. In this temple was a great library of 1300 Hindu books.
Firuz ordered one of those books, which treated philosophy, astronomy
and prognosis translated into Persian by Eizuddin Khalid Khani and had
it named after himself as Dalayil-i-Firoz Shahi (The demonstrations of
Firoz Shah). He broke the idols in the temple, mixed the pieces with cow
flesh in bags tied around the neck of brAhmaNa-s and he paraded them
around the camp. He sent the main idol of jvAlAmukhI to Mecca to be
trampled under the foot of the Hajis.”

This clarifies what really seems to have happened – after all we hear a
clear opinion from the Moslem chroniclers, who in those days had no need
to pay any lip service to secularism. Rather, they were recording with
pride the exploits of the army of Islam. First, we may conclude that the
Sultans did not hold Chatra-s over the image at the shaktI pITha.
Instead, the Firuz appears to have desecrated the temple keeping with
his temple-busting record elsewhere in India. For example, before the
Kangra campaign, he led a large army to Jagannath in Orissa, where it is
recorded that “he created a lake of the blood of Hindus” in a great
massacre. This is also in line with the records of his killing of
brAhmaNa-s in dillika. Second, he did not salvage any library from the
jvAlAmukhI pITha – he merely acquired it in course of sacking the
shrine. From the record of Ferishta, he appears to have merely had
translated one of the 1300 books in the library and plagiarized it as
his own work. What happened to the rest of the 1299 books? We hear of
these books much later from Abdul Qadir al-Badaoni. Pressurized by the
Padishaw Akbar to acquire old Hindu and Hermetic material, he managed to
lay his hands on what remained of them in Lahore. He describes the text
that was plagiarized as the Dalayil-i-Firoz Shahi as a “moderately good
work containing various philosophical facts both of science and
practice, neither free from beauties nor defects.” He then sternly
declares that a few more of these books were translated in Firuz’s
court, which were all on “useless topics like theatrics and sexuality”.
Third, we must note that though the translated material survived in
Lahore during Akbar’s days none of these texts, including the one
plagiarized by Firuz under his name, have survived to date. Thus, one
can confidently state that the Islamic actions did not result in
salvaging of the original Sanskrit texts but their complete destruction.
Hence, there is nothing to show that Firuz in any way patronized
Sanskritic learning. What we may infer is that after the sack of the
Hindu library, unlike some other Ghazis who destroyed the contents
outright, he was interested in getting what might be useful for him.
This resulted in a few books being plagiarized as Persian translations,
in no way implying that the Sanskrit originals were saved or that Hindus
who held such knowledge were encouraged. Rather, what it suggests is
that, other than a few books, the rest of the 1300-book collection
sacked by them was simply destroyed. This is in line with what we know
of other Ghazi attacks in India and elsewhere, where libraries of the
Hindus and Greeks were scattered or destroyed contributing to the loss
of their knowledge. As an example, one might cite the case of loss of
the critical tantra-s and vaidika texts from Kashmir due to Sikandar
but-shikan – shrIvara describes him as burning all Hindu libraries he
could lay hands on (sakala pustakAn niShUdita) – so much for the great
Kashmiriyat.

Comparing the situation between Kashmir and Himachal-uttarAkhaNDa with
respect to Sanskritic texts and knowledge is a useful exercise because
it helps comprehend the effects of the Ghazis’ actions. An analysis of
the Kashmirian literary and mantra traditions provide strong evidence
supporting to the near total loss of Kashmirian traditions due to the
establishment of turuShka rule in Kashmir. The Kashmirian poet ma\~Nkha
mentions the great luminaries of his age (around the 1150s of the CE) in
his shaiva mahAkAvya, the shrIkaNTha-charita. These include who include:
1) ruyyaka who wrote the last great piece of sUtra-literature in Kashmir
the alaMkAra-sarvasva; 2) ma\~Nkha himself who wrote a commentary on it;
3) alaMkAra, the brother of ma\~Nkha who was reputed to be a novelist of
bANa’s stature; 4) kalhaNa the historian; 5) trailokya who was
considered to be a reincarnation of kumArila bhaTTa of yore, who was
simultaneously well-versed in the intricacies of vaidika ritual and
literary expression; 6) jinduka, who was similarly a great mImAmsaka
well-versed in both prabhAkara and kumArila’s traditions and also a
poet; 7) jalhaNa a noted poet. This points a vigorous Sanskritic
tradition that encompassed a wide range of expressions. For this the
Kashmirian tradition was well-known and respected throughout the length
and breadth of bhArata: for example, we find a detailed exposition of
ruyyaka’s theoretical analysis of literature presented in his sUtra-s by
samudrabandha, a nambuthiri from the chera country. Of the shaiva
tAntrika works, we see a discussion of the siddhAnta texts of the
Kashmirian bhaTTa rAmakaNTha by the great scholar aghorashiva deshika
\[a brief hagiography can be read
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/09/03/a-brief-hagiography-of-aghorashiva-deshika/)\],
and the Kashmirian kaula traditions studied by the virtuoso tAntrika
mahesvarAnandanAtha, both from the drAviDa country. Similarly, in the
drAviDa country the vaiShNava scholar yAmunAchArya wrote the now lost
kAshmIrAgama prAmANya based on the pA\~ncharAtrika traditions of
Kashmir. Kashmirian authors also wrote works on events in other parts of
India that gained wide popularity, such as the history of pR^ithivirAja
ChAhamAna the last rAjA of dillikA written by bhaTTa jayAnaka (\~1200
CE). But 150 years later, with establishment of the turuShka regime in
Kashmir there is no evidence for production of any Sanskrit text in
Kashmir. Indeed, jonarAja and shrIvara state with the reign of Sikandar,
the malignant Sufi subversionists whom he invited, and his successor Ali
Shah, scholastic activity had become extinct in Kashmir. This is
supported by the fact that in rest of India there is no longer any
commentary on new texts originating in Kashmir and the memory of the
Kashmirian intellectuals is seen to gradually fade out in the surviving
Hindu strongholds. The loss of texts in Kashmir due to the book burning
by Sikandar is supported by the case of the paippalAda shAkhA of the
atharvaveda. A Kashmirian brAhmaNa informed the Mogol Akbar that it was
lost in Kashmir during the reign of Sikandar. Later during the respite
offered to Hindus by Zain-al-abidin, a Kashmirian brAhmaNa known as
yuddhabhaTTa journeyed to the Vijayanagara empire where he sought to
learn the AV from the southern brAhmaNa-s \[Footnote 1\]. The latter
were impressed by yuddhabhaTTa’s recitation of the kaTha yajurveda and
initiated him into the oral tradition of the AV-P. Having acquired it he
returned to Kashmir re-initiated the tradition and wrote down the text
(This is the manuscript on which the AV-P manuscript taken by the
Germans to Tuebingen is based). Now, even the leniency of Zain-al-abidin
did little to resurrect the Sanskritic tradition in Kashmir. The
translation of Yusuf and Zulaikha or Layli and Majnoon, while exciting
to the secularists, really did not amount to undoing the destruction
that had already taken place. In any case, translation of these West
Asian works merely acquainted Hindus with that material (not that there
is anything wrong it that), but in no way did it contribute to setting
up an ecosystem that could sustain the heathen traditions of bhArata. In
conclusion, one might say with some certainty that the establishment of
Islam in Kashmir snuffed out the creativity of the Hindus.

In this regard there is a tragic lesson to be learned from the fate of
Kashmir – to some it might sound like blaming the victims. Some of our
own coethnics, who have faced a milder version of the same at the hands
of dramiDa-s perverted by western ideologies, might find such
suggestions callous. Nevertheless, it is important for Hindus to
squarely face our failures if we do not want to repeat them, especially
since we are almost poised to repeat them: There was an aspect of
leadership failure among the Kashmirian brAhmaNa-s, despite their
extraordinary intellectual accomplishments. As indicated by manu and
chANakya thereafter, in addition to their intellectual activities, it is
incumbent on brAhmaNa-s, as the natural leaders of Hindu society, to
instigate and organize the defense of Arya lands against AtatAyin-s.
Right from the 1000s of the CE, when the kShatriya-s of Kashmir kept out
the turuShka-s in fierce battles, the nature of the marUnmatta-s was
well-known to the brAhmaNa-s. Indeed kShemendra gives a correct
description of the ravaging of the earth in the kali age by the
mlechCha-s and turuShka-s. In the manthAna-bhairava tantra the coming of
the rAvaNa-like Arabs to the western reaches of bhArata was described
and not unknown in scholarly Kashmirian circles. Yet, they failed to
organize an effective defense of the land when the turuShka-s did
finally come upon them. We find that the brAhmaNa-s did react, but it
was via Gandhian tactics of non-violent protests and mass fasts – such
might have worked with the Hindu rAjA-s but had no effect on the beards.
They also failed to take steps to counter the da’i activity of the Sufi
subversionists. Ironically, during the reign of Zain-al-abidin, we see
that the Kashmirian engineers were building “thunder weapons of mass
destruction” for the turuShka-s. In his history shrIvara states that:
“the engineers showed the sultan (Zain-al-abidin) thunder weapons
which make men tremble with the deep sound they make. The sultan had
these to be manufactured with different metals, new and hard…It destroys
forts, pierces the vitals of men, strikes horses with terror, shoots
stone bolides from a distance, hence remains unseen by soldiers from
their defenses; it is well-controlled, make a deep noise and of great
use – such was the weapon made by the engineers.” These were among the
words shrIvara had composed for the inscription on the weapons and
describes the fire-arms as being made of an alloy of different metals
\[Footnote 2\]. If only such weapons had been channelized for the
defense of Hindus. In contrast, around the same time when south India
was overrun by the turuShka-s, the brAhmaNa-s, like vidyAraNya, sAyaNa,
and gopaNArya among others, came to instigate and directly participate
in the national war against the marUnmatta-s. In addition to actively
restoring Sanskritic traditions destroyed by the turuShka-s, they paid
utmost attention to the oversight of the great national war in close
coordination with able kShatriya-s and shUdra-s. This is an important
illustration of how Gandhian tactics are unlikely to lead much success,
contrary to what the West wants Hindus to believe. Indeed, it is very
much in western interests to see that the Hindus become emasculated
museum specimens, which can be taken out of the collection drawers for
sensitive indological studies.

Now returning to the Himachal and uttarAkhaNDa we find that a certain
level of Sanskrit scholarship survived in large part due to the ability
to the rAjA-s to prevent the turuShka-s from establishing marUnmAda in
the land. This is seen in the form of at least some widely distributed
texts even as the Kashmirian traditions disappeared: These include the
medical work the madanapAla nighaNThu, the work of anantadeva on gotra-s
and dharma and the bhAvashataka, a book of saMskR^ita puzzles. A closer
analysis of the encounter between the Tughlaqs and the rAjA-s of
susharmarAjya shows that despite the ravaging of the temple and library
of jvAlAmukhI they were able to survive the onslaught of the turuShka-s
in large part. In his account ‘Afif mentions that rUpachandra used the
Kangra fort for a defensive operation against the large force of the
Tughlaq. He admits that both sides fought with great courage and
endurance and were locked in a siege for six months, during which they
exchanged heavy bombardment of missiles from mangonels and trebuchets.
Then we are told that one day suddenly rUpachandra surrendered to the
sultan and he in return bestowed robes of honor, horses and a Chatra and
having received. Then they exchanged gifts and the sultan is supposed to
have departed as the lord of Kangra. The account of Ferishta is
comparable: he says that the Tughlaq in course of his invasion of Kangra
was overtaken by snow and hail. Then rUpachandra is said to have
surrendered after sustaining some loss but Firuz Tughlaq restored his
kingdom after changing the name of Kangra to Mohammedabad after Mohammed
ibn Tughlaq. Yet another Islamic history the Ma’asir al-Umara describes
the event thus: Having recounted the tale of the invincibility of the
fort, it states that the Army of Islam under Firuz Tughlaq laid siege to
it. However, he was unable to reduce the fort and had to content himself
with an interview with rUpachandra. The rAjA invited the Tughlaq to the
fort, who then made an attempt on the rAjA and tried to seize the fort.
However, the rAjA deployed “crowd after crowd” of armed men to the
sultan’s consternation. The rAjA declared that he, however, had no
design on the sultan and was merely being prudent to head off any
attempt on the sultan’s part. The sultan gave up his project and
returned. The account concludes by stating that on all subsequent
occasions whenever sultans sent invasionary forces to Kangra nothing of
note was ever achieved.In conclusion, despite the attempts by ‘Afif and
Ferishta to cover up the Islamic failure at Kangra it is clear that this
is the most likely outcome, because they all agree that the Firuz could
not occupy Kangra. We may infer that Firoz attacked the jvAlAmukhI pITha
and ravaged the land around it but was unsuccessful in conquering the
fort after a six month siege due the resolute defense by the rAjA
rUpachandra, which is admitted by the Mohammedan chroniclers themselves.

Subsequently, during the reign of rAjA meghachandra, the descendent of
rUpachandra, Timur-i-lang invaded India (1399 CE). After the sack of
dillikA, he turned his attention on Kangra. He states in his narrative:
“*As soon as I learned these facts about Kangra and the country around
it, my whole heart was intent upon carrying out Jihad against the kaffr
Hindus of that place. Hence, to conquer that land I spurred my horses
and went in that direction.*” We are informed of several brutal
massacres of Hindus and that he fought twenty stiff battles against the
Hindus in 32 days and conquered seven of their forts which formed a
chain of defense in the mountains. However, he fails to mention the
conquest of the Kangra fort which was his primary objective. This
suggests, that meghachandra indeed again staved of the conquest of his
citadel by Timur. Thereafter, yet another jihad was launched on Kangra
by the Pathan, Sher Shah Suri indicating that the Hindus were still
firmly in possession of the territory after the Timur whirlwind. He sent
the Ghazi Khawas Khan to take the territory. The Ghazi first targeted
and destroyed the ancient devIshaMkara temple in Kangra. He uprooted the
li\~Nga and had weights made from it in Delhi, which were then
distributed to the Moslem butchers to weigh beef. The large bronze
parasol of the temple, with a Sanskrit inscription on it, was also sent
to Delhi, where it was melted down and pots were made out of it for
Mohammedans to wash themselves before the Namaz. However, despite his
brutal raids in the region the impregnable fort of Kangra allowed the
Hindus to regain their territory and drive out the ghazis. To emulate
his ancestor Timur, the Mogol tyrant Akbar launched a bloody Jihad on
Kangra next. For this purpose he sent Hussain Quli Khan from the lower
Panjab to wage holy war on the Hindus. The chronicles of Akbar mention
the fierce defense of the region by the Hindus led by rAjA jayachandra
against the Army of Islam. They are said to have hurled a hail of
bullets from muskets, and bolides from trebuchets from the various
fortifications around Kangra and inflicted heavy losses on the Mogols.
But HQ Khan pressed on, and managed to break many of the fortifications
with the huge cannons which Akbar had obtained from the Osman Turks.
Having breached the first line of forts of the Hindus HQ Khan launched a
huge attack on the ancient Hindu temple of mahAmAyA, one of the key
kAlI-kula holy kShetra-s, which was inside the fort of Bhavan near the
Kangra fort. The Mogol chronicles admit that the Hindu defended the fort
with utmost ferocity. They state that the not one of the rAjpUt-s or
brAhmaNa-s fled despite being outnumbered (10:1) and not one of them was
taken alive. After their ammunition was exhausted and the Mogols closed
in but were attacked by the rAjpUt-s and brAhmaNa-s all of whom were
killed in sword-fights which followed. Even as the conflict was raging
with a shower of arrows and bullets, 200 black cows of the Hindus
crowded into the main temple for shelter. The Mohammedans are described
as killing the cows one by one by slitting their throats, taking off
their shoes and filling them with the blood of cows and splattering it
all over the temple. Finally, HQ Khan launched an incendiary missile on
the Kangra fort, which killed 80 people including some of the royalty.
Shaken by this and the prolonged siege, jayachandra finally surrendered
to the Mogols. Akbar had the rAjA-s palace demolished and replaced by a
Masjid and sent a Mullah to occupy it. Akbar further appropriated an
ancient Hindu knowledge system from Kangra. He learned that in the
mAhAmAyA temple was a traditional Hindu hospital which had physicians
famed for their restorative plastic surgeries and treatment of
blindness, who were visited by Hindus all over the subcontinent
\[Footnote 3\]. The temple and hospital were destroyed by HQ Khan, most
physicians killed and Akbar had the rest attached to him. Some of these
physicians were probably part of the team that performed a restorative
surgery when his balls were pierced by a black buck. Despite Akbar’s
subjugation of the region the rAjA still had nominal control over the
Kangra fort itself, and he and his descendents kept fight the Mogols
throughout Akbar reign. Upon his death they rescinded the Mogol currency
and started minting their own coins again setting the stage for the
final show down. After Akbar’s death, his son Jahangir launched several
jihads on Kangra. In course of one of them, the rAjA trilokachandra who
had launched a retaliatory strike on a Mogol outpost at Kiratpur, a town
at lower elevation, was killed. But one his generals, saMgrAm, took over
the struggle and continued engaging the Mogols by drawing them into the
hilly terrain. There the Mogols suffered heavy losses from rAjpUt
snipers posted on the hills and were driven out in disarray leaving
their equipment behind. Finally, in 1621 CE the fort was ironically
taken for Jahangir by vikramjit, a rAjput general in his service, after
a sanguinary encounter and harishchandra the young son of trilokachandra
was driven out. Jahangir then visited the fort and had a cow’s throat
slit to the accompaniment of Quranic readings and had its blood
sprinkled all over the place. He then built a Jahangiri darwaza and
inscribed his name on it. However, harishchandra on coming of age
conducted a prolonged struggle against the Mogols which was continued by
his descendents for 160 years until finally in 1786 CE saMsArachandra
recaptured the fort and gouged out the inscription of Jahangir.

This less known struggle along with other such in the mountainous zone
by the “pahADI rAjpUt-s” was of significance in preserving the Hindu
identity of these regions and preventing the marUnmAda from washing out
the dharma. Even though the struggle was imbalanced and the major
temples were repeatedly targeted, their successful use of the terrain
kept the Hindu identity intact, which could repeatedly revive the
damaged shrines and uphold Sanskritic traditions. Nevertheless, the
damage done by the Jihads cannot be understated. Contrary to
Islamo-Marxian narratives, the Mohammedan attacks destroyed libraries
and a rich medical tradition of the hospital linked to the mahAmAyA
temple. On the other hand, the appropriation of some of this material by
the Tughlaq or Akbar did little to preserve them – unlike what is
claimed by the eminent historians.

::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: There are several markers for Kashmir-South India contacts
playing and important role in the survival of certain vaidika
traditions. The transfer of the AV-P from the karNATa-Andhra-draMiDa
saMrAjya or the Vijayanagaran empire to Kashmir played an important role
in the survival of the AV-P manuscripts because they were subsequently
largely lost in South India (barring certain traditions like those of my
clan). On the other side the transfer of sections of the kaTha yajurveda
from Kashmir and the neighboring regions to the taittirIyaka-s of South
India helped preserve certain key some key sections relating to the
performance of certain yAga-s such as nAchiketAgni as well as the
“metal” ritual. The Kashmirians probably accessed an ancient AV-P
school, which is attested in Karnataka at least since the days of the
kadaMba ruler harivarman.

Footnote 2: Many centuries later rAjpUt engineers were also responsible
for the making of the rockets used by the Ghazi Tipu Sultan against the
English.

Footnote 3: It is quite possible that the Hindu physician vAchaspati was
associated with this temple or at least hailed from its vicinity. A
vigorous tradition of the Hindu sciences is attested in the medical and
astronomical texts sponsored by the TAkarAja-s from the region.
