---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](../from_the_diary_of_a_disciple/scc_xxix.htm)
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [Shri Priya
Nath Sinha](priya_nath_sinha_contents.htm) / [→](pns_xxxi.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

XXX  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_265_e7_30.pdf)* )

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

We evince a sad lack of restraint in conversation or any conjoint action
such as music and so on. Everyone tries to put himself foremost. The
jostling at railway or steamer station is another illustration of this.
A friend of Swamiji had a talk with him one day at the Math on this
subject. Swamiji remarked, "You see, we have an old adage: 'If your son
is not inclined to study, put him in the Durbars (Sâbha).' The word
Sabha here does not mean social meetings, such as take place
occasionally at people's houses — it means royal Durbars. In the days of
the independent kings of Bengal, they used to hold their courts mornings
and evenings. There all the affairs of the State were discussed in the
morning — and as there were no newspapers at that time, the king used to
converse with the leading gentry of the capital and gather from them all
information regarding the people and the State. These gentlemen had to
attend these meetings, for if they did not do so, the king would inquire
into the reason of their non-attendance. Such Durbars were the centres
of culture in every country and not merely in ours. In the present day,
the western parts of India, especially Rajputana, are much better off in
this respect than Bengal, as something similar to these old Durbars
still obtains there."

Q. — Then, Maharaj, have our people lost their own good manners because
we have no kings of our own?

Swamiji: It is all a degeneration which has its root in selfishness.
That in boarding a steamer one follows the vulgar maxim, "Uncle, save
thy own precious skin", and in music and moments of recreation everyone
tries to make a display of himself, is a typical picture of our mental
state. Only a little training in self-sacrifice would take it away. It
is the fault of the parents who do not teach their children good
manners. Self-sacrifice, indeed, is the basis of all civilisation.

On the other hand, owing to the undue domination exercised by the
parents, our boys do not get free scope for growth. The parents consider
singing as improper. But the son, when he hears a fine piece of music,
at once sets his whole mind on how to learn it, and naturally he must
look out for an Âddâ. (Something like a club. The word has got a bad
odour about it in Bengali.) Then again, "It is a sin to smoke!" So what
else can the young man do than mix with the servants of the house, to
indulge in this habit in secret? In everyone there are infinite
tendencies, which require proper scope for satisfaction. But in our
country that is not allowed; and to bring about a different order of
things would require a fresh training of the parents. Such is the
condition! What a pity! We have not yet developed a high grade of
civilisation; and in spite of this, our educated Babus want the British
to hand over the government to them to manage! It makes me laugh and cry
as well. Well, where is that martial spirit which, at the very outset,
requires one to know how to serve and obey and to practise
self-restraint! The martial spirit is not self-assertion but
self-sacrifice. One must be ready to advance and lay down one's life at
the word of command, before he can command the hearts and lives of
others. One must sacrifice himself first.

A devotee of Shri Ramakrishna once passed some severe remarks, in a book
written by him, against those who did not believe in Shri Ramakrishna as
an Incarnation of God. Swamiji summoned the writer to his presence and
addressed him thus in a spirited manner:

What right had you to write like that, abusing others? What matters it
if they do not believe in your Lord? Have we created a sect? Are we
Ramakrishnites, that we should look upon anyone who will not worship
him, as our enemy? By your bigotry you have only lowered him, and made
him small. If your Lord is God Himself, then you ought to know that in
whatsoever name one is calling upon him, it is *his* worship only — and
who are you to abuse others? Do you think they will hear you if you
inveigh against them? How foolish! You can only win others' hearts when
you have sacrificed yourself to them, otherwise why should they hear
you?

Regaining his natural composure after a short while, Swamiji spoke in a
sorrowful tone:

Can anyone, my dear friend, have faith or resignation in the Lord,
unless he himself is a hero? Never can hatred and malice vanish from
one's heart unless one becomes a hero, and unless one is free from
these, how can one become truly civilised? Where in this country is that
sturdy manliness, that spirit of heroism? Alas, nowhere. Often have I
looked for that, and I found only one instance of it, and only one.

Q. — In whom have you found it, Swamiji?

Swamiji: In G. C. (Babu Girish Chandra Ghosh.) alone I have seen that
true resignation — that true spirit of a servant of the Lord. And was it
not because he was ever ready to sacrifice himself that Shri Ramakrishna
took upon himself all his responsibility? What a unique spirit of
resignation to the Lord! I have not met his parallel. From him have I
learnt the lesson of self-surrender.

So saying, Swamiji raised his folded hands to his head out of respect to
him.

</div>
