+++
title = "The sculptor of Ma Bhavatarini of Dakshineshwar : Nabinxa0Bhaskar"
date = "2020-04-13"

+++
Translating [Ranadeb Mukherjee’s
post](https://www.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=1704395026261614&id=100000733981836&ref=m_notif&notif_t=feedback_reaction_generic)

The one whom Thakur Sri Ramakrishna called ‘Ma’,the one for whom without
giving water,he would not take anything in his mouth:That same image of
Ma Bhavatarini was made by the sculptor Nabin Bhaskar of Dainhat at
Katwa . At the wish of Rani Rashmoni in 1855 he made the image of
Bhavatarini Kali. For the time of a month he went to Kolkata,subsisted
on haviShyAnna,followed AchAra and when he finished the work(of
sculpting),then the image was not proportionate to the garbhagriha. She
then ordered him to make another mUrti of Ma Bhavatarini again and told
him to make that mUrti larger than the previous one.

Nabin Bhaskar made two images of Bhavatarini Kali. One is in
Dakshineshwar and another in some house in Goa Bagan at Kolkata. His
family claims that Rani Rashmoni donated an image to someone she knew.
Nabin Bhaskar’s fame was such that the Rajas in Bengal presidency came
to to Dainhat. Nabin Bhaskar got his raw material from Bihar. For
procuring ‘kosthi pathor'(black stone) he purchased a hill in Jamalpur.
At Nabin’s good fame,apart from the Burdwan Royal family,he was also
commisioned by the royal families of
Cossimbazar,Natore,Puntia,Rangpur,Dinajpur,Jemo,Muktagacha,Mymensingh,Manipur,Lalgarh
to sculpt their grihadevatas. It is said that the Maharani of Dinajpur
was so spellbound at Nabin Bhaskar’s skill that she gifted him a golden
chisel.

Bhaskar took his craft to new heights on his sculpting the image of
Dakshineshwar. His best creation is the creation of the murti of Yogadya
at Kshirgram. Even today in his house broken images can be found that
are in a state of neglect. Still,a very beautiful 10 inch idol of Kali
has been closely kept in his successor Nimai Bhaskar’s possession. Along
with this Kali Murti he keeps a dazzling statue of ‘shwet pathor’. This
is the last creation of Nabin. Today his workshop is broken and filled
with weeds,and the naach-mahal is also dilapidated .His ancestral
dwelling has but one room, even it is mired in household disputes. This
generation has but forgetten such a fabulous sculptor.

Nabin Bhaskar’s house is now in a state of decay,swallowed up by time.
His descendants no longer carry the illustrious legacy of his sculpting.
His left over creations are also slowly going to ruin, due to lack of
care. Due to the lack of anyone to look after that place,that family
house at Dainhat is now like a dump. Some valuable works of that
sculptor are still in that house.

> [View post on imgur.com](https://imgur.com/a/NTabA7z)

