+++
title = "Piety – A Relationship With Thexa0Gods"
date = "March 20, 2019"

+++
![54256668_10161543708205574_5503959577181290496_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/54256668_10161543708205574_5503959577181290496_n.jpg?w=676)

There are many approaches to piety, and perspectives upon the proper
‘relationship’ with God or Gods. It has been said that the ‘Abrahamic’
faiths tend more towards the notion of ‘submission’ and wonderment
towards an ultimately unknowable transcendental … indeed, outright
“ineffable” supreme.

And, to be sure, you do also get not entirely dissimilar perspectives
within Hinduism. Although theyare, of course, not the only ones – and
in any case, there’s rather more going on within them to render their
theology and often metaphysics much more ‘personal’ in practice.

But this post is not about all of that. Rather, it seeks to suggest, in
an image, another, far older \[at least in terms of our belief and
practice of same\] Indo-European perspective upon, and relationship with
Divinity.

Some of us view our path – our Pati \[this is me making a bilingual
pun/theological insight\] – as being much more like this image.

Whether it is to render homage to the Gods as something approaching a
feudal lord, a primarch-primogenitor; or whether, for a rare and select
few, it is to “Walk With The Gods Themselves” ;

Some might say that this is a more “human” approach to and understanding
of Divinity. And therefore, that it “loses” some of the ‘impressiveness’
of a more ‘purely’ transcendental approach.

They would be wrong. Not least due to the strong view that in an array
of Hindu positions – particularly of Shakta theology – that it is a
\*both\* rather than \*either\* approach.

Or because of the sensation entailed in Darshana – that is to say, the
realization that Who you witness before you is, in point of fact … a
God, with all that that entails.

In some ways, the visage being more ‘familiar’ yet the ‘essence’
transcending the familiarity of the human (or other) representation,
renders it even further awe-inspiring.

And then, to be related, even in some small way to such!

In any case – people who insist upon this perspective being somehow
‘tawdry’ or ‘unimpressive’ … I can only surmise that they lack
imagination.

And ‘imagination’, in a certain sense, is most definitely correlate with
‘vision’, with ‘perception’, indeed.
