+++
title = "Godhūmo vijayate"

+++
As we have noted several times before, the Ṛgveda represents a very
early stage of the evolution of Indo-Aryan. Its agricultural terms
relate to a major puzzle in Indo-European history. There is an
unmistakable agricultural vocabulary including words such as kṛṣṭi =
cultivation, deriving from the root kṛṣ to plow. The furrow sītā and
also the eponymous goddess represent agricultural practice in a field
often termed kṣetra. The primary grain cultivated in these fields was
yava = barley, one of the oldest crops cultivated by man. Another word
generally taken to mean a generic grain is dhāna. All these words have a
clear Indo-European origin and are part of a small but consistent
vocabulary of agricultural terms that can be traced back to a very early
stage of IE if not PIE itself. Yet, the archaeological evidence for
agriculture among the early Indo-Europeans is murky. This issue has been
raised before by Mallory as a key problem in our understanding of early
Indo-European archaeology. There is no mention of wheat, and at best 3
uncertain mentions of rice – i.e. the word odana, which could have
simply meant a boiled grain.

The Yajurveda and later layers of the Atharvaveda, in contrast, present
a different picture. Rice and wheat are both present and the former is
already on its way to overtaking barley as the principle grain. The
words for rice include vrīhi (regular rice) and nīvāra (a wild rice).
The first word is found in Iranian as birinci and has cognates across
the Iranian languages. The first word was also either transferred to
Dravidian as arici or acquired by it parallely to Indo-Iranian. It is
also found in Greek as oruza, Mongolian ür-e, Japanese uruchi. The same
applies for wheat, which in Yajurveda is already seen as godhūma. It is
also found in the later Avestan layers as gantuma. Dravidian shows a
form similar to the Indo-Aryan word. It also occurs in Hittite as gant
and in the Egyptian branch of Afro-Asiatic, and Semitic as well, it has
cognates with similar sounds. Thus, these two crops most likely spread
rapidly and laterally from a focus and were taken up by related and
unrelated language families as they spread. This suggests that, while
rice is not found in RV, the Iranians and Indo-Aryans acquired at least
some knowledge of this crop even as they neared their current homelands.
However, we cannot entirely rule out knowledge going back to an earlier
period. The Altaic and Japanese cognates for rice suggest an eastern
focus while the western cognates for wheat likewise suggest a western
focus. Both of these are consistent with the ecology and genetics of the
domestication of these crops.

If we look at rice and wheat production today the stamp of these foci
and distinct ecology are clearly visible. In figure 1 we plot the mean
annual density (tons/hectare of national land; log-log scale) over 17
years of wheat versus rice production for the 72 countries that
cultivate both these crops. We find that they are entirely uncorrelated
(![r^2=0.034](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.034&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.034")). This is notable given that wheat and rice are among the
most cultivated crops in the world (wheat most, then corn, then rice).

[![Rice\_Wheat\_density](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/rice_wheat_density.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/rice_wheat_density.png)Figure
1

Now if we divide the plot into 4 quadrants based on the median values
for rice and wheat cultivation we find that there is a relatively small
group of 12 countries (1/6th of total set) that show a high density for
both wheat and rice cultivation (Table 1)

Table 1: High density rice and wheat cultivation; Land is national area
in hectares.

    Country                           Land         Rice        Wheat
    --------------------------  ----------  -----------  -----------
    Bangladesh                    13017.00   1162382.50     58596.88
    China                        932748.77   6876275.00   4541253.88
    Egypt                         99545.00     76581.38    201579.00
    India                        297319.00   3244250.00   2661475.00
    Iran, Islamic Republic of    162855.00     85245.50    713768.25
    Iraq                          43737.00     12825.00    385919.62
    Italy                         29413.14     42250.00    589500.00
    Nepal                         14335.00     80625.00     66600.00
    Pakistan                      77088.00    239241.38   1121625.00
    Portugal                       9150.00      3750.00     28000.00
    Spain                         49900.00     17144.00    471508.38
    Uzbekistan                    42540.00     12625.00    196625.00

It is notable that 4 of these make up bulk of the Indian subcontinent
while 3 others are part of the old greater Iranian zone. These lie
precisely at the junction of the eastern rice focus and the western
wheat focus. Indeed, we find low wheat-high rice density zones like
Bhutan, Myanmar, Japan, Korea, and Thailand around the eastern periphery
of this zone and reverse on the western periphery. This also raises that
possibility that combined cultivation of the two, in addition to
ecology, is in part the echo of the entry of the Indo-Iranians into this
zone who then stabilized both the eastern and western acquisitions
across their core domains.

In figure 2 we plot the wheat versus barley production (in tons; log-log
scale). A similar picture is obtained if we plot densities as above. The
two, in distinct contrast to rice, show a good correlation
(![r^2=0.644](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.644&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.644")). Further, while just 72 countries grow both rice and
wheat, 96 grow both wheat and barley. This suggests that barley, which
was the old IE crop, was to a degree ecologically and operationally
equivalent to wheat, with steppe-land as opposed wetland preference
(rice). Thus, unlike rice, barley has taken little root in
non-Mediterranean Africa. Hence, it appears that as wheat was acquired,
it ate into the share of barley across the steppe-land but barley still
holds on as the fourth most produced crop. Its role in domesticated
animal feed and probably its special role in alcoholic beverage
production (already described in the Yajurveda) play an important role
in its tenacity and even expansion.

[![Barley\_Wheat](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/barley_wheat.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/barley_wheat.png)Figure
2.
