+++
title = "On bats"

+++
Our residence in childhood was graced by a lamppost and a large
audumbara tree, which at night gave us the chance to study both
fast-flying insect-eating microbats and slower flying large-eyed
megabats. The deliberate climbing movements of the large megabats and
their glowing large eyes struck us as being sharply contrasting to the
microbats with the high-pitched shrieks and little eyes. Like others, in
my studies on chiropteran anatomy I thought they were related to
primates. However, molecular phylogenies were to show that this was
entirely erroneous. The bats were not a part of euarchontoglires, but a
clade within the diverse laurasiatheres (pegasoferae; uniting
carnivorans, perissodactyls and bats). Anatomy suggested that the
microbats and megabats formed two distinct monophyletic clades. But the
molecules showed that this idea too was wrong\! The megabats are nested
within microbats; in fact they were a sister group to the clade
containing Craseonycteris, the smallest extant mammal\! Since the
beginning of the Mesozoic, when mammals got relegated to the nooks and
corners of the world, most of mammal diversity was in the small-bodies
forms. Thus, bats, like rodents, are among the most speciose clades of
mammals – there are over 1100 different species according to current
biodiversity studies. Due to the dinosaurian priority in the conquest of
the air, bats were relegated to the nights, when most dinosaurs sleep in
their roosts.

Microbats mainly live on insects, though some lineages have spawned a
range of aerial predators: Myotis and Noctilio catch fishes,
Chrotopterus and Megaderma hunts rodents and other small animals
(including other small bats in the case of Megaderma), others like
Trachops specialize in hunting frogs and yet others like the famous
vampires suck blood. Molecular phylogenies have shown that such
predatory behaviors have evolved independently on many occasions – like
the fishers – Myotis belongs to the vespertilionid clade and Noctilio to
the highly diverse Noctilionoid clade. Likewise Chrotopterus has emerged
amongst the leaf-nosed bats, while Megaderma among the rhinolophoid
microbats. Vampires which belong to the Noctilionoid clade are closely
related to the insect eating leaf-nosed bats. While bats more or less
lost their ability to move on the ground, the vampires re-invented a
novel mode of running in a relative period. Many of the microbats also
specialize in licking nectar from night-blooming flowers as means to
supplement their insectivorous lifestyle. The megabats are mainly fruit-
and flower- eaters. Thus, despite only having the nights for themselves,
bats have evolved an interesting diversity that we generally tend to
miss due to the difficulty in observing them.

However, the most dramatic feature of the bats is their ability to
navigate their flight entirely through echo-location. This feature is
seen in all microbats and a few megabats like Rousettus. These bats emit
sounds or clicks with their tongue and with their sensitive ears and
other acoustic surfaces on their faces receive echoes of these sounds.
Speakman’s work had shown that echolocation is a very energy-draining
process because of the high-pitched vocalizations involved. Bats are
able to effectively use it only because vocalization is coupled with
flight related lung-compression, so they in a sense pay the same price
for flying and echo-location.

Molecular phylogenies have established that the bats come in two great
clades: 1) The Yangochiroptera including three major clades of
microbats: the vespertilionoids, the noctilionoids and the
emballonuroids. 2) The Yinpterochiropterans including the megabats and
the rhinolophoid microchiropterans. Thus echo-location was an ancestral
trait for all extant bats and the microchiropteran condition was the
primitive morphotype for all extant bats. The megabats, which do not
need to hunt insects in the dark, have mostly lost this ability both to
make ultra-sounds and receive them instead reverting to depending on
large eyes. It is probably the high cost of echo-location that resulted
in its loss when maneuverability became less important in the megabats.

It is light of these molecular results that we can now interpret better
the early fossil record of bats including the dramatic recent report of
an exquisitely preserved bat Onychonycteris from the end of the early
Eocene (\~52.5 Myr ago) by Simmons et al. A phylogeny, using the
molecular results as a framework, suggests that Onychonycteris,
Icaronycteris, Archaeonycteris, Hassianycteris, Palaeochiropteryx, and
(Tanzanycteris) form successive ourgroups to the extant bats.
Previously, at least six other bats from the Eocene have been studied in
some details and found to be most probably echolocators: Icaronycteris,
Archaeonycteris, Palaeochiropteryx, Hassianycteris, Tachypteron and
Tanzanycteris. Thus, even in the early Eocene echolocation had fully
evolved, and, indeed, the common ancestor of all modern bats appears to
have emerged within an early radiation of Eocene microbats. However,
Onychonycteris is different – it has a small cochlea and a stylohyal
bone without the paddle-like expansion for supporting the sensitive ear.
Thus it does not have the auditory apparatus requisite for echolocation.
But in other respects it resembles the most primitive echolocating
microbat Icaronycteris and other primitive Eocene forms. This makes it
the most primitive bat found to date, before the origin of echolocation.
Nevertheless, it had a calcar that supports the uropatagium. We know
little of its eyes to determine whether like megabats it depended on
vision to navigate. But it is clear that echolocation emerged rather
rapidly in bats in short time interval. It also supports the argument
that bats emerged in the North American continent and rapidly spread
from there.

In contradiction to molecular estimates the current fossil record
suggests that the bats arose in the Cenozoic after the K/T event. The
molecular studies place their origins in the Cretaceous. One possibility
is that flight arose only in the Cenozoic and there was a long cryptic
history prior to that of arboreal insectivorous forms. Would we ever
find any pre- Onychonycteris fossils?
