+++
title = "Cooper’s book on Marathas"

+++
Randolf Cooper is one of the few white historians to reconsider the
great struggle between the Maharatta-s and the Britons and investigate
it more neutrally. A chance to glance at his work: “The Anglo-Maratha
Campaigns and the Contest for India…” raised a few points in our mind.
History’s narrative is obviously colored by the writers. After their
victory over the Hindus and Moslems in the sub-continent the Britons
wrote their own histories of these groups, which became the truth for
the English speaking secularized Hindu elite. Historian Jadunath
Sarkar’s work on Indian military history represents the putrid extreme
of this acceptance of this British constructs. A few major points in
their narrative were: 1) The trivialization of Hindu India. They sought
to show that the concept of India was non-existent in the Hindu mind and
that the idolatrous Hindus were already on the decline due to the
failings of their institutions. They were already a conquered nation,
being completely subjugated by the Moslem rulers culminating in the
Mogols. 2) The legitimacy of British conquests. The British narrative
presented a sense of direction in history — India was a land to be
conquered. It was first conquered by Alexander and his Greeks (wrongly
painted as role models for the Europeans), the Moslems with the Mogols
being the last amongst them and the Britons finally took over India from
them. The Hindu struggles against Islam were simply washed aside. Even
more dramatically the recent Hindu struggle against the Britons was
completely ignored or misrepresented. 3) The legitimization of Islamic
historians. Despite the many battles between the Jihadists and the
Britons in the sub-continent, the British and their allies saw the
Moslems as long standing collaborators in their wars against many
nations (from Suleyman-i-Kaanooni, to the Crimean War, to the Sikh wars,
to the Cold war, to Kosovo). Not surprisingly, the British, in addition
to translating Islamic histories, legitimized them as true historians of
India, in contrast to the ahistorical Hindus.  
Cooper notices some of these issues and points to how narratives of
world history present the falsehood of a seamless transition between the
Silsila-i-Timuria and the Briton as though it was a fact. However,
Cooper’s work also shows some of the typical paradoxes that are rife in
the products of the secular academic mindset in the gaseous new-fangled
such areas as “Post-colonial”, subaltern, “post-modern” studies. At the
trivial end of things this is represented by his enormous fascination
for the Pakistani-sponsored term “South Asian” in place of the
legitimate terms like bhArata, jambudvIpa or India. At a more subtle
level, he in many places fails to grasp the distinctive socio-cultural
component of the Hindu dharma that made history unfold the way it did in
the sub-continent. This is because his western conditioning makes him
contrast secular with Hindu, a contrast which is entirely alien to Hindu
thought.  
Thus we have Cooper stating: “One should not become attached to the
notion of that the Maratha military forces of 1803 were ‘Hindu’ armies.
A proto-national model would be more appropriate. A model based on the
realization that collectively the Maratha armies of 1803 were quite
secular and not dissimilar to the armed forces of modern India in being
composed of military professionals from across the subcontinent. The
Maratha powerbrokers of the era were interested in victory and their
military effort drew men from the broadest military spectrum — one that
included Hindus from every caste, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians. In that
respect the Maratha armies of 1803 competed directly with the British
for the loyalty of soldiers needed for the projection of power within
the contest for India.”  
But ultimately he is unable to extricate himself from the reality that
Hindu scaffold was defined the nationalist essence (what he calls
“proto-national”) element of India. He says: “The Marathas were the
last indigenous South Asian power that was militarily capable of not
only halting but also rolling back the consolidation process that
ultimately produced the British Raj. The Anglo-Sikh Wars (1846-46,
1848-9) and the Anglo-Afghan Wars (1839-42, 1878-80, 1919) occurred
after the British had achieved a military perimeter around the majority
of Hindus in India. In subcontinental terms, these later wars were
comparatively localized conflicts, which would have had limited
interethnic political appeal for Hindus beyond the regional strongholds
of the Sikhs and Afghans.”  
Thus he is forced to concede that it was this Hindu mass which was the
primary rival of the Britons and that they aimed at achieving a military
envelop around the Hindu core.  
Nevertheless, he does confront the main problematic issue with the
Western historical narrative:  
“Oddly enough, when foreign military cultures seemed technologically
similar to our own (i.e. Western), we had a tendency to derogatorily
dismiss them as if they were shabby imitations of our cherished ‘Western
way of war’.” – Parenthesis mine.  
He correctly notices (albeit briefly) that: 1) That the well-developed
Hindu sense of war-making had vedic origins. To elaborate on this point:
Any proper student of the veda know that in these texts military power
is seen as primary aspect of human existence, and it was a major concern
of brahma-kShatra elite of Aryan society. While modern Hindus might miss
the point it is not out of character to state that the majority of vedic
composers whether brAhmaNa or kShatriya were quite intimately associated
with military concerns. The vedic evidence suggests that the
vishvAmitra-s, bharadvAjas, vasiShThas, and bhArgava-s, in addition to
various kShatriya R^iShi-s, actually participated in battle as
combatants. Given the importance of combat even in the foundational
texts of the dharma it would be surprising to see Hindus as non-warlike
nation. This was a false image that the Britons and the Hindu-s
subverted by them came to emphasize.  
2\) The second point Cooper which brings out it is that the called drill
and discipline in warfare was well-established amongst Hindus, and owed
no western influence for its origins. The English in their narratives
attributed to this to Europeans – even claiming to have inherited it
from Greeks, Romans and Mesopotamians (very ironic given that the pagan
Roman armies fought the barbarian German and Gaul tribes which today
have spawned the nations of UK, USA, Netherlands, Germany and France).
In course of making his point he describes a vIra-kal from Akluj that
eloquently portrays the military order and discipline of the Hindu
armies engaged in traditional war with deployments of cavalry, elephant
and different kinds of infantry units (lancers, sword and shieldsmen,
and archers). He also builds the case that the Hindu armies were
professional systems that employed a wide range of individual across
different varNa-s and in some cases even foreigners and mixed people. A
point to note here is that this was also a pre-European Hindu system. A
careful study of the military establishments in South India illustrates
this point forcefully. The (semi-)professional soldiers in the drAviDa,
karnATa and Andhra countries came from many jAtis, sometime specializing
other time diversifying in the military market. In Andhra, as we have
seen before, even after the kShatriya-s fell against the Islamic
assault, the professional shUdra military based on the Kohlis, Reddis,
Kammas and Kapus could continue the struggle and showed remarkable
organizational and administrative capability.
