+++
title = "A lost kaumAra mahAsthala"

+++
In the late 1800s our predecessor was returning to his home base after
attending to secular business in the town of Guntur in the Andhra
country on his horse. It was late evening and he had reached the eastern
fringe of the village of Chebrolu. He decided to visit the temple of
rudra known as bhImeshvara, which lay right on his path. Having paid his
respects to the deva he wondered whether he should visit a smArta whom
he knew in vicinity or simply spend the night in the open as the weather
was excellent. As it was late and it felt it might not be appropriate to
disturb the Brahmin he decided to sleep in the open on an elevation to
the north east of the temple just at the boundary to the expanses of
rice fields. It was here that in his dream he witnessed the kaumAra
vidyA of 14 syllables with the intertwining of the square, the hexagon,
the triangle and the bindu. He felt he was inside a kumAra gR^iha and
the maNDala lay upon him. He saw an enormous shrine of kumAra with its
spire pointing to the skies with a cock-banner fluttering atop it. The
next day he went to visit the smArta who lived in the hamlet and asked
him if there was once a kumara kShetra in the village. The brAhmaNa said
that there were some tales of kumAra being worshiped there in the past,
but he was not sure. Then obtaining some essentials from the brAhmaNa he
returned to the mound and performed a subrahmaNya yAga as ordained in
the guha-paddhati. The brAhmaNa from the village accompanied him and
asked him after performance of the yAga to initiate him into a mantra.
Our predecessor after some thought agreed and initiated him into the
vidyA of the queen of the kula path with which one enchants all. He
asked the brAhmaNa to keep worshiping the queen of the 3 kUTa-s and said
that after 4 generations one in his line will attain eko-mAnuSha AnandaH
and will automatically have a one-time siddhi of the kaulavidyA.

\~\*\~\*\~

Armed with the records of Epigraphica Indica and MR Raoâ€™s collection of
inscriptions we note:  
\-In 1006 CE Bayalanambi the commander of the army of Western chAlukya
king satyAshraya invaded the Vengi to conquer the choDa-Eastern chAlukyA
combine. He destroyed the forts of Dannada and Enumandala and on his way
he stopped at Chebrolu and made gifts to kumAra whose was the patron
deity of the village.  
\-In 1076 goNkaya, the commander of the velanATi choDas, conferred
ornaments to the image of kumAra and also that of rudra housed in the
mUlasthAna-mahAdeva temple.  
\-In 1115 CE gaNDamAMbA the wife of the velanATi choDa ruler made gift
to kumAra.  
\-In 1118 a certain sUrana from a family of temple artisans became a
general in the army of the koNDapaDamaTi war-lord manda and conquered
Vijayawada. He made several gifts to the temple of kumAra at Chebrolu.  
\-In 1145 CE a lamp tower was gifted by the koNDapaDamaTi war-lord
bhImarAja to the kumAra temple, which had 300 staff involved in its
upkeep and 300 for performance of dance dramas.  
\-In 1213 CE, gaNapati-deva who was return from the conquest of the
south gifted the village to the commander of his army, jayasenApati, the
author of a famous treatise on Hindu dance. jayasenApati repaired and
whitewashed all the temples in the village. He erected a gold kalasha
atop the kumAra shrine. He also covered the whole central image of
kumAra with gold and made utsava-mUrti-s of kumAra and his wives senA
and gajAyI. He built an enclosure around the temple, a maNDapa in front
of it and gopura 3 stories high. He also built another maNDapa where the
utsava-mUrti of kumAra and his wives would rest after the
makara-shankarAnti festival and the hunting festival. He commissioned
paintings in this maNDapa which depicted the heroic deeds of kumAra in
the battles of devas and dAnavas. He also restored the li\~Nga-s at
mUlasthAna-mahAdeva and a forest shrine of rudra, repaired bhImeshvara
and fortified the town. The inscription mentions that an astronomer and
a physician were attached to the staff of the kumAra temple.  
The rampage of the army of Islam under the Bahmanid sultan Muhammad
ravaged the temples of this region and appears to have desecrated the
kumAra temple.  
\-In 1553 CE the vijayanagaran governor devabhaktuni kondana reinstalled
the temple of kumAra.

The great kumAra shrine of Chebrolu appears to have been built by the
chAlukya king yuddhamalla. It no longer exists today. It appears to have
been completely destroyed during the invasion of the Adilshahi army.
