+++
title = "On mammaTa, nyAya and related matters"

+++
The Kashmirian efflorescence was a remarkable, even if a brief phase, in
the intellectual development of Hindus. Almost simultaneously we witness
the emergence of several great savants, even as Kashmir defied the
Islamic onslaught of the accursed Mahmud of Ghazna and his successors.
It was one of the last blazes of Hindu productivity before it was seized
and dented by the savagery of the barbaric Mohammedans. We see many
great figures like abhinavagupta, somadeva, kShemendra and mammaTa. The
last of these has possibly been more influential in erudite Sanskrit
circles than few others. rAjAnanka mammaTa the author of the
kAvya-prakAsha (KP) belonged to an scholarly clan: His father jayyaTa
was a co-author along with vAmana bhaTTa of the famous grammatical work
kAshikA. His first brother kayyaTa wrote a once well-known commentary on
the mahAbhAShya of pata\~njali. His second brother was the famous
uvvaTa, a protégé of rAjA bhojadeva paramAra, who is renowned for his
commentary on the shukla yajurveda and its shrauta deployment.

The learned scholar Ganganath Jha brings attention to a statement that
used to be prevalent in among brAhmaNa-s whose traditional education
required the study of mammaTa’s work:  
kAvyaprakAshasya kR^itA gR^ihe gR^ihe TIkA tathApyeSha tathaiva durgamaH
|  
TIka-s on the kAvyaprakAsha have been composed in every house yet it
remains difficult to understand as ever\!

Consonant with this statement apparently 49 commentaries are known to
exist in different states of survival for the KP. The difficulties
aside, mammaTa’s work presents something interesting for every Hindu –
after all it was consider an integral part of traditional education. A
few points that struck me run closely in parallel with the other great
kavi from those regions, kShemendra (we had earlier described his words
from the kavikaNThAbharaNa on these pages), especially in terms of the
description of the attainment of kavitvam. Another point of note that
roused my interest early one while reading Ganganath Jha’s commentary on
the work was the respect the KP had among the later nyAyAyika-s like
gadAdhara and jagadIsha. This is particularly interesting in light of
the fact that jayanta bhaTTa, an earlier Kashmirian vedicist, had
expressed the view that the AstIka thought should primarily be modeled
after nyAya thought rather than advaita vedAnta. This implied that among
the Kashmirian vedicists there was a strand that was primarily
affiliated with nyAya, as against vedAnta, which was quite popular among
the vedicists of the drAviDa regions. Via the KP we obtain evidence that
mammaTa was very much a nyAyAyika in thought.  
In the prose expansion on the first kArika in the first chapter (ullAsa)
in comparing the real world to the imaginations of the poets mammaTa
states:  
“niyati-shaktyA niyata-rUpA sukha-duHkha-moha-svabhAvA
paramANv-AdyupAdAna-karmAdi-sahakAri-kAraNa-paratantrA ShaDrasA na cha
hR^idyaiva taiH tAdR^ishI brahmaNo nirmitir-nirmANam”  
The construction constructed by brahman (the world) is controlled by the
natural laws, form governed by laws, has the subjective experiential
nature of pleasure, pain and illusion, and its existence is the
consequence of matter and its interactions, respectively the atomic
particles and forces; it has only 6 tastes (rasas) and these too not
always of a pleasant nature.  
We find mammaTa expressing a rather deep stream of thought here:  
\-He is firstly contrasting the unconstrained nature of poetic
expression to the real world, which he described as being governed by
natural laws. The word he uses is niyati, i.e. niyati shaktyA
niyata-rupA, to express the natural laws and the form of the universe
developing by natural laws. This word niyati from the brAhmaNa period
has been used to describe the natural laws (e.g. in the
kauShitaki/shAkhAyana brAhmaNa and the shvetAshvatara upaniShat e.g.
“kAlaH svabhAvo niyatir yadR^icchA bhUtAni yoniH puruSheti cintyam |”
SU 1.2).  
\-Then mammaTa goes on to describe the basis for the real world: 1) The
substantial cause or matter (upAdAna) is comprised of the evolutes of
the fundamental particles i.e. paramANvadi. 2) The causes governing
cooperation or interactions (sahakAri-kAraNa) which are the forces i.e.
karmAdi.  
\-Finally he uses a pun to mention that in our sensory sphere we
distinguish 6 tastes, in contrast to the 9 rasa-s typical of poetic
imagination.  
Thus, we see that the naturalistic theory for the basis of the universe
governed by natural laws in the form of fundamental particles and their
interactions, so succinctly presented by mammaTa, is clearly that of
nyAya-vaisheShika thought.

Then mammaTa goes on to describe the essentials for being a kavi:  
shaktir-nipuNatA loka-shAstra-kAvyAdyavekShaNAt |  
kAvyaj\~na-shikShayAbhyAsa iti hetus-tadudbhave || 3

shaktiH kavitvabIjarUpaH saMskAra-visheShaH yAM vinA kAvyaM na prasaret
prasR^itaM vA upahasanIyaM syAt | lokasya
sthAvara-ja\~NgamAtmaka-loka-vR^ittasya | shAstrANAM
Chando-vyAkaraNa-abhidhAna-kosha-kalA-chaturvarga-gaja-turaga-khaDgAdi-lakShaNa-granthAnAm
| kAvyAnAM cha mahAkavi-saMbandhinAm | AdigrahaNAd-itihAsAnAM cha
vimarshanAdvy-utpattiH |  
kAvyaM kartuM vichArayituM cha ye jAnanti tad-upadeshena karaNe yojane
cha paunaH-punyena pravR^ittir-iti | trayaH samuditAH na chu
vyastAs-tasya kAvyasyodbhave nirmANe samullAse cha hetur-na tu hetavaH
||

The kArika first summarizes the essentials:  
“Poetic genius, knowledge gained from study of the world, of scholarly
works, of poetry, study and practice of the teachings of those
well-versed in kAvya; these together compose the basis of poetry.”  
Then he goes one to elaborate in prose: “Poetic genius (kavitvaM) is the
seed of poetry. This is a peculiar ability, without which there would
either be no poetry or, if there were, it would be laughable.”  
Like kShemendra, mammaTa describes kavitvaM to be a pre-requisite for
kAvya. But apparently unlike the kShemendra he sees this as an innate
natural ability that has to be there in the first place – he does not
describe any means of mantra-prayoga here to acquire it (unlike the
sarasvatI and bAlA mantras recommended by kShemendra). Apparently unlike
kShemendra he also does not see kavitvaM as coming from human effort.
mammaTa describes that as a distinct pre-requisite.  
Then he goes on to elaborate on the study of the world and scholarly
works:  
“Poetic ability is developed by a study of the world, the organisms and
inorganic objects, and the ways of the universe; \[also through the
study of\] shAstra-s, prosody, grammar, thesauri and lexicons, the
kalA-s, the matters of the 4 puruShArtha-s, texts dealing with study of
animals (e.g. horses, elephants etc.) and weapons (swords etc.); \[also
by\] studying kAvya-s and keeping company of great poets. The word Adi
(i.e. its use in the above series) implies the itihAsas and also the
\[knowledge\] emerging from critical examination/discussion of these
topics; \[also by\] frequently practicing writing poetry under the
guidance of those capable of writing and discussing it. The above three
(i.e. innate genius, study of the world through observation and
scholastic endeavor and practice of writing with guidance) conjointly,
not singly, comprise the origin, the formation and brilliance of poetry;
they are the source, not sources \[of poetry\].

Agreeing with kShemendra, mammaTa sees the kavi as being a naturalist
and scholar who acquires knowledge both through new observation of the
world as well as by scholastic study. He stresses that genius,
study/observation and practice should combine into a single entity for
kAvya to shine. Here, it appears that he envisions these abstract
entities as almost combining into a single entity – kAvya, like the
atoms of nyAya combining into a single molecule of a substance. Thus,
again as in the case of kShemendra we observe that the medieval Hindu
kavi maintained continuity in spirit with the kavi-s of the veda, even
though the veda was no longer counted along with classical kAvya – they
were not mere versifiers but holders of knowledge.
