+++
title = "graha pratigaraM"

+++
We invoked the terrifying son of pinAkin, the seizer, the awful vinAyaka
with a gleaming tusk dripping with the blood of devadviT-s gored in
hand-to-hand combat. He held a frightful axe still unwashed with the
blood of his foes slain in the battlefields of heaven and earth. He
embraced the lovely madadravA with her eyelids gently shaded and with
eyes of the form of long lotus petals casting stupefying side-glances.
Seated on his lap, she grasped a wondrous lotus and tightly embraced the
fiery ulka. Around them stood all manner of hideous goblins holding
tridents, gadA-s, bhindipAla-s and axes.

Next we called upon the one of large goblin-like form, the ugra-bhUta,
who held a heavy crooked staff and a sharp straight sword. He rode a
white swift horse and was embraced by his wives pUrNA and puShkalA of
pretty smiles. He was accompanied by 8 horse borne gaNa-s with deadly
bows.

Then we humbly called upon the lord of the graha-s to bear us aid
against the AtatAyin-s. The noise was terrifying – there were all manner
of hideous roars and shrieks and cries and clangs. There was loud music
filled with vIra-bhAva. There we saw a multitude of awful graha-s – some
had the heads of tigers, others of elephants, others of rams and ibexes,
yet others of birds and still others with bovid, rhinocerotid and
reptilian heads. There were extreme fear-inspiring skandApasmara-s and
vIrabAhu-dala-s. There were male and female twins mUjika and mi\~njikA
with maces and lances. There was bewitching mukhamaNDikA of pretty hips
roving around with bands of kumAra-mAtR^i-s. In their midst was
chatuShpatha-niketA, jAtahAriNI, shakunIdevI, saramAdevI and lohitAyanI
of great violence, decorated with bones and venomous snakes as
ornaments. There was the frightful shishu holding a trident and shAkha
and vishAkha with spears. In their midst sat the illustrious dhUrta
ensnared by the fair arms of the all-fascinating ShaShThI of firm
breasts. We showed the trishUla mudra and the shakti mudra. We sought
sAyujya with him so that we may become ghora to our bhrAtR^ivya-s.
