+++
title = "Procul Este Profani – An Aeneid Reference From The US Air Force 416th Flight Test Squadron Unitxa0Blazon"
date = "May 5, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/181694544_856664514945874_3881217458256282813_n.png?w=500)

Not quite Techno-Heraldry , but a pretty cool unit-patch all the same.
Not just for the rather cool iconography, but also due to the
significance of the Latin maxim.

US Air Force 416th Flight Test Squadron, Edwards Air Force Base,
‘Special Projects’ flight. Now, the squadron in question was basically
brought back into being in 1989 for the specific purpose of testing
ongoing F-16 upgrades and modernizations designed to keep the by then
decade and a half old airframe in active duty for the US and its NATO
allies; as well as more specialized packages for same.

In addition to that, the squadron has also found a role running F-16s as
part of testing and refinement for other, subsequent-generation American
combat jets.

All of this helps to explain what’s going on with the patch. Dragons, in
addition to being pretty formidable flying fighters in and of
themselves, are also guardians of treasure – and often depicted as
seriously knowledgeable and cunning, as well. The rearing down out of a
cloud-bank conveys quite handily a “DO NOT APPROACH” sort of vibe, while
the grey also recalls the usual colour of their aircraft. And all of
this is, obviously, taking place in the sky.

Yet it’s the maxim that stood out for me – Procul Este Profani.

It’s a quote from Book VI of the Aeneid, wherein Aeneas is about to
descend to the Underworld to be shown the vision of his people’s future.
Having made his sacrificial offering, the presiding seer then shouts the
phrase as the journey of revelation is about to begin. I’ll quote from
the Fairclough \[1916\] translation, for context:

“Then for the Stygian king he inaugurates an altar by night, and lays
upon the flames whole carcasses of bulls, pouring fat oil over the
blazing entrails. But just before the rays and dawning of the early sun
the ground rumbled underfoot, the wooded ridges began to quiver, and
through the gloom dogs seemed to howl as the goddess \[Hecate\] drew
nigh. “Away! away! you that are uninitiated!” shrieks the seer,
“withdraw from all the grove! And you, rush on the road and unsheathe
your sword! Now, Aeneas, is the hour for courage, now for a dauntless
heart!” So much she said, and plunged madly into the opened cave; he,
with fearless steps, keeps pace with his advancing guide.”

The relevant line is the “Away! You that are Uninitiated!”

Pro-Fani, in Latin, means pretty much that – those who are ‘outside’ the
Temple and its belonging; those who should not be in or around a sacred
space when it is in operation. Not party to its knowledge and the
revelatory impartment that is to follow. \[Procul, meanwhile, is
effectively “go far away/go away really quickly”\]

So you can see how it’s a pretty apt maxim for a ‘special projects’
high-tech military hardware testing unit.

All up, I rather like it not just because that is a pretty cool looking
dragon – but also because I tend to be pretty keen on (well-chosen)
ancient mythological references turning up perhaps unexpectedly in
modern spheres. And it’s a pleasant surprise to be reminded that the
American military *does* have some pretty literate sorts with a respect
for culture and heritage in such a manner. Rather than, say, just going
for the Hollywood approach in referential touchstones.
