+++
title = "NRO L-34 ‘Odin’ Satellite Launch Mission Patch – An Indo-European Iconographicxa0Analysis"
date = "May 5, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/95286993_10163478728915574_3282167785165160448_n.jpg?w=600)

Appropriate for a Wednesday – another not-quite Techno-Heraldry US
military patch. This time, for the NRO (National Reconnaissance Office)
L-34 “Odin” satellite launch.

Now, there’s a few (space) oddities to the patch that may seem a bit
peculiar upon first inspection – yet which have perhaps surprising
resonances with the underlying characteristics of the project and/or the
Indo-European deific complex it’s referencing.

The first of these being the otherwise odd choice of armament – Odin, as
we all know, customarily wields a spear after all. Except in Hindu
understanding, where a battle-axe is *also* eminently appropriate, and
is one of the prime weapons of Rudra.

The second is the fact that there is but a single Raven perched on
Odin’s shoulder. Although this has … additional peculiarity, as the
NOSS-3 satellite is always launched as a pair. So in terms of “Odin’s
Ravens” acting as spies – there *should* be two Ravens, two Satellites.
And there *were* … except something apparently happened to one of these
post-deployment, leading to its official designation as “debris”. So –
one Raven, one officially operational Satellite. The resonancy of the
iconography post-facto asserts itself? Who can say. Well .. the NRO,
probably, but they ain’t telling.

The third point to be made is that there is a lesser-known (these days,
at any rate) typology for the Indo-European Sky Father Deific being
hailed as having one All-Seeing Eye, located in the Sky. I’ll be writing
more about this in reference to another rather cool unit patch later,
but suffice to say that it is my belief that Odin is also the bearer of
this iconographic and conceptual element – in much the same manner,
indeed *exactly* the same manner as we find RigVedic attestation for
Varuna.

And speaking of this … it is interesting to note that the “Odin” \[as
in, the satellite\] is a Naval Ocean Surveillance System project – which
is used to track and monitor ships upon the sea.

Or, to phrase it in RigVedic terms … RV 1 25 7 :

” He knows the path of birds that fly through heaven, and, Sovran of the
sea,  
He knows the ships that are thereon.”

For more detail upon how the Sky Father deific is *also* the Sovereign
of the Sea – for the Sky is, after all, also another kind of Sea
(particularly up there, out there, in Space), please consult my earlier
work: “Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On The
Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune Ouranos” .

All things considered, a perhaps surprising incase of a US military
blazon referencing some archaic and oft-obscured Indo-European
mythology.
