+++
title = "Khan’s Maryannu Invocation"
date = "May 22, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/190236105_328032042018193_8790053721090880087_n.jpg?w=531)

For context, this man is a prominent geneticist frequently commenting on
matters pertaining to our field. The ‘Maryannu’ he references here are a
rather intriguing group spoken of in the ancient Near East, that appear
to have constituted chariot-borne warriors. Indo-European chariot-borne
warriors, based around the speculated etymological link of “Maryannu” to
Sanskrit मर्य \[‘Marya’\] – a term which connoted young men, eager for
glory.

The supposition is that, in line with very recent advancements in
archaeology and archaeogenetics, the spread of these ‘Maryannu’ and
their revolutionary chariot-borne warfare approach was an expansion of
the Indo-Iranian, and more specifically Indo-Aryan clades coming down
and heading \*west\* through the Near East. If you have read about the
intriguing either Indo-Aryan or Sanskrit superstrate of Mitanni (an
otherwise theoretically non-IE-base population that mysteriously seems
to wind up with a ruling class speaking Indo-Aryan, utilizing Indo-Aryan
deifics in their state religion, and employing horse-trainers that
appear to have been quite directly linked to the Indo-Aryan civilization
found further East … in fact with the entire confederacy built around
such a corps) …

Well, the Maryannu are those guys, we suspect.

Khan is, of course, memeing quite hard about this. Yet all the best
memes – they endure, precisely because they maintain an essence of
truth.
