+++
title = "Goddess Worship At Devi Kothi – An Expansion From William Simpson’s Painting And Journalisticxa0Portrayal"
date = "May 23, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/108062686_158416882589711_6580743109187950462_n.jpg?w=1024)

Something I often find remarkable when looking at images and textual
accounts of religious elements across the Indo-European sphere is just
how … familiar they are when we actually gaze into them closely. This
does not mean that they are all identically the same, of course – far
from it! But it *does* tend to facilitate us seeing the shared heritage,
shared understandings, shared Gods which underpin such things. Even if
they have ‘grown’ and expressed themselves differently following the
millennia and the thousands of kilometers between them.

So it is with this fine depiction: a beautiful painting of the Goddess
worship at Devi Kothi – the same site those amazing frescoes I had
posted earlier are from. This painting, aptly enough entitled “Worship
of the Devi at Kothi, near Chini” done by William Simpson in 1860.

He details his experience observing these rites in an article “Pujahs in
the Sutlej Valley, Himalayas” in in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, vol.XVI, part 1, 1884 … which of course, I went off and tracked
down to attempt to find more about what is depicted here.

It’s not a bad read, and there are some very nice moments in it –
although we are hampered by the state of European knowledge at the time
meaning that various things aren’t quite grasped. Which is unsurprising
– and just makes me marvel all the more at how much we *now* know by
comparison, especially when it comes to situating the rites in question
within their comparative Indo-European context … where things most
definitely become more familiar!

One point I would make is that Simpson seems genuinely intrigued by the
people and the places and the customs he describes in his article. Where
we often have this mental image of some pulp colonial British officer
going around and referring to anybody not sufficiently ‘white’ as being
“Savages!” with barbarous customs – I did not detect that with Simpson
or his perspectives. He makes some comparisons which we would not
indulge today, between what he saw and things he had read in the Old
Testament for instance (which, given the Christianity prevalent in
Europe at the time, we could potentially read almost as an ‘endorsement’
if he could find such faux-familiarity in our rites); but he also was
only able to make the sketches which informed this later artwork
precisely because he took the time to live there with them, and as he
puts it – “as I did my best when any of the people applied with
ailments, they became friendly, and seeing me sketching, and taking an
interest in their doings, they announced their ceremonies, and invited
me to come and see them.”

Now in terms of what is actually being depicted here – what we are
seeing is the embodiment of the Devi having been brought out from the
village’s shrine and carried forth upon the shoulders of several
villagers. This is on the right of the image, and is the impressively
plumed representation carried upon the litter bedecked with the red
cloth.

Moving toward the center of the image, the eye is understandably drawn
to two things – first, the physical structure made of wood, the
Dharmsala; and second, the troupe of musicians, including several rather
sizeable horns.

As applies the Dharmsala, this building serves two fundamentally linked
purposes. First, it is a place where visiting travelers to the village
may find shelter when they come here. And second, it is also where the
Devi is placed in some of those ceremonies where She is brought forth
from Her Home in the Mandir.

This is as we should expect – after all, Sacred Hospitality is a
cornerstone of the Indo-European civilizational complex; and regarding
the God as Guest, is a foundational fundament for how we have long
performed the more involved acts of piety.

As applies the musicians – partially, of course, they are there to
provide music and rhythm to the acts of the villagers (particularly the
drums); as every ritual act is a performance and everything is
interwoven into one glorious, joyous pageant of regularity, structure,
ascendency, and place.

However, they are *also* there because, as Simpson notes, this is
Royalty Who is visiting. And so, it is only appropriate that elements of
the observance are considered, just as they had been congealed, in
exactly that light.

A rhythmic dance is being performed by the majority of the rest of the
village’s population, their arms interlinked, to the left of the image;
in time with the beat of the drums aforementioned. Although ‘dance’ is
perhaps not quite the adequate word to convey the motion in question –
as it would appear that the assemblage of villagers may have been
engaged in something more akin to what we would term ‘Parikrama’ .. the
motion about the perimeter which is, again, important as part of our
worshipful customs.

Simpson goes into some detail about various ritual piety expressions he
witnessed during his time there – including a regular bathing rite for
the representation of Devi performed every morning utilizing minted
water; what he terms “a hawa khana, or a constitutional airing” at
varying other times, accompanied again by an assemblage of sufficient
coterie of the villagers “, in order that  
a proper state of honour should be maintained”; and two more specific
and ornate observances.

The first concerns a Visit of the Devi embodied at Devi Kothi to a
neighbouring village – apparently occurrent at the instruction of the
Devi Herself. As Simpson puts it:

“When the feast was over, the Devi was lighted up, and the march back to
Coati was begun. Here a very remarkable feature connected with these
Devis attracted our notice. The movement towards Coati suddenly stopped,
and a considerable agitation took place; the red Yak-tails that
surmounted the Devi shook and bobbed up and down, while the people
crowded round, and seemed very excited. On asking about the meaning of
this, the answer was, “Khuda bolta hai,” which means the God speaks. By
what means the utterance was accomplished I could not make out, but in
some manner the wishes of the Devi were understood, and its desire was
not to go back to Coati; being out for a holiday, it, or perhaps those
around it, seemed to desire a continuation of the day’s amusement, so
its wish was to go to Chini, and pay the Devi there a visit. When this
became known, the villagers from Chini gave a great shout of joy at the
honour of the visit. The excitement was great, and the Yak-tails shook
very much, the long trumpets sounded, the drums beat, and the dancing
commenced again round the Devi as it moved away to the neighbouring
village, the crowd all following. The dancing was much more lively than
when the Devi was first carried out from Coati.

A number of the Chini Wallahs went off at once to their village, and it
turned out that their object was to bring out the Devi there to receive
the other. When the Coati Devi arrived, the Chini Devi was at the
outskirts of the village with all its attendants, with trumpets and
drums. The reception of the one Devi by the other was like two rajahs
meeting ; there was a great amount of shaking and bobbing, which ended
by the Chini Devi getting behind, and allowing the visitor the honour of
going first at the head of the procession. When the temple was reached,
there was more shaking, and the Coati Devi was carried once or twice
round the dharmsalah, and then into the temple. This was repeated with
the other Devi, and the proceedings of that day, so far as I saw,
terminated. Next morning the visitor returned to Coati, and was
accompanied by the Chini Devi to the outside of the village, where, with
the usual shaking, they parted, and the Chini Devi was carried back to
the  
temple.”

In terms of the “feast” which Simpson mentioned at the outset of this
above quoted excerpt – that would be in the manner of our MahaPrasad.
Although with the addition of cooked goat, the young goats in question
having been beheaded and their blood utilized in an earlier phase of the
Puja.

Effectively, food is offered to the Gods – in this case, the Goddess –
and then after She has consumed essence of it, it is distributed more
widely and the meritorious blessing of its provision is similarly taken
up by those humans who eat of it as part of the communal rite. It may
also be viewed in terms of the Guest conceptry earlier mentioned – it
being just plain good manners to offer an arriving guest sustenance
following Their journey to be with you. Simpson notes with interest that
upon this occasion, amongst the humans, the women of the village were
served before the men.

One further point of interest concerns another phase of the rite between
the offering being made and then its subsequently being partaken of. A
“battle” of sorts, conducted with walnuts and pinecones.

As Simpson puts it:

” This part of the pujah seemed to be completed, and being in the autumn
might have passed as a kind of harvest festival, and that which
followed, as walnuts and pine cones were employed, might also have some
relation to the ripening of the fruits of the earth, only it is
difficult to understand how a fierce battle could be associated with
such a ceremony Unfortunately I was unable to get any explanation, all I
learned being that it was ” dustoor ” or custom. This being the case, I
can only describe what I saw. The temple had a rough balcony, which went
round on the level of an upper story; Dilloo, with his red dress on,
appeared in this balcony with some of the villagers, which became the
signal for action, and a spirited warfare began, the missiles being the
walnuts which gave the pujah its name, but pine cones were also used,
and being larger, they were the more dangerous.  
Dilloo and his party first made the circuit of the balcony, when those
below began throwing the walnuts and cones at them ; the defenders soon
returned the fire, covering them selves as well as they could by means
of the balcony, and some of them using one or two small windows as
embrasures.  
This lasted for about half an hour, when those in the temple returned
and mixed with the others below, seemingly none the worse from the
encounter ; this, I understood, was not always the case, for accidents
had taken place.”

Now, of course, upon reading this my mind instantly connected the
occurrences to the frescoes of the Goddess Temple which is the major
site of discussion. They depict Devi in various forms embroiled in
combat against demonic armies. And yes, it is worth noting that it is
indeed the case that as applies, say, Devi as Shakambhari fighting
against Durgamasur – the ‘life-cycle’ and nourishment of growing things
is most strongly connected to Her involvement and Her martial conquest.
The Divine War Effort in defence of the Cosmic Order, without which
there is only desolation and desiccation in direct diremost consequence.

In Indonesia, amongst the Hindus of Bali, there is a custom called the
Kecak – often referred to as the ‘Monkey Dance’, although this is
something of a misnomer.

What this Kecak ceremony actually entails is an assemblage of a
village’s menfolk re-enacting in symbolic fashion key elements from the
Ramayana – in particular the climactic confrontation of the army of
Rama, Laxman, Hanuman, etc. (including many Vanaras – hence the ‘Monkey’
association for the dance), against the forces of the demon emperor
Ravana.

I have not engaged in any in-depth exploration of either the ceremonial
combat at Kothi, nor of the Ramayana re-enactment just aforementioned.
However, given that we know for a fact that ritual re-enactment –
Eliadian ‘Eternal Return’, in fact – is a cornerstone of Indo-European
religious activity … it would therefore seem plausible that some degree
of resonancy should also be presumed as applies this ritual occasion
occurrent at Kothi.

In any case, there is much more which can and should be said upon all of
the matters (and the Maters) but briefly examined above. But for now,
that should be almost sufficient.

I say ‘almost’ sufficient – because there is one more point to make, and
it is an interesting one. Simpson is not, perhaps, an expert upon Hindu
religious development – however I do think that some of his observations
are quite significant in the manner in which they align with those of us
who *are*.

At various points, he opines that what he is witnessing up here in the
Mountains are customs which are either unknown or have become somewhat
‘diluted’ down upon the Plains. He does not attribute nor ascribe these
differences to specialized (d)evolution occurrent amidst the
mountain-folk – but rather suggests that they are remnants of previously
more dominant modes of custom and mechanisms of worship which have
fallen from favour elsewhere.

In this, I would suggest that he is quite likely correct. Although one
does not have to take my word for it – some months ago we ran an excerpt
from the work of Professor Michael Witzel, perhaps the foremost
(Western) living academic authority upon Hinduism. He had observed just
such a phenomenon of incredibly conservative preservation up in the
Mountain-country of elements from the Vedic past (and, correspondingly,
co-occurrences of elements known elsewhere from the Indo-European
mytho-religious sphere).

Now this should not be misread as suggesting that the Hinduism of the
lowlands be regarded as all just ‘watered down’ and ‘inauthentic’. Often
it is more that particular things have become more emphasized down
there, and other archaic customs have fallen from favour. So while there
are some groups which do less than ideal things here and there (and a
fair swathe of the ‘Hindu Reform’ efforts of the 1800s and subsequent,
were indeed built around actually changing things for a variety of
reasonings), we should not be saying that the Hinduisms of more populous
and easily accessible locales are “inauthentic”. Just “different”. In
some particulars, at any rate. Generally speaking – the ‘sames’, the
core elements of resonancy … the *essence* of such things … is most
definitely both present and resonant, radiant, within the practices of
each sphere.

One just has to know how to look.

Jai Mata Di !
