+++
title = "Fire, Walk With Me – A Verse Of The Durgaxa0Suktam"
date = "May 28, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e443bb589a520b2d14b4bb0e53e38975.jpg?w=693)

“Bravery will take you into the most dangerous of places. Overwhelming
firepower will see you safely through them.”

” पृतनाजितँसहमानमुग्रमग्निँ हुवेम परमात्सधस्थात् ।  
स नः पर्षदति दुर्गाणि विश्वा क्षामद्देवो अति दुरितात्यग्निः ॥ “

“We Invoke From The Highest Place The Ugran Agni \[Powerful/Furious
Fire\], The SahaMana \[‘Conquering/Overpowering/Powerful
Spirit/Anger/Sentience’\] Unvanquishable In Battle ;

May She Greatly Protect Us From The Universe’s Durgaani \[‘Dangers’\],
Divinely Incinerating \[‘Ksamad-Devo’\] The Great Evils \[‘Durita-Ati’ –
also means ‘very difficult path’\] \[With Her\] Living/Sacred Blaze
\[‘Agni’\]”

‘Firepower’ is a particular favourite phrasing of mine for these
circumstances – because it is virtually a ready-made Indo-European
tautological pun. Proto-Indo-European knew two major words for ‘Fire’ –
‘Hngwnis’, for ‘Living Flame’, whence ‘Agni’ (and, of course,
‘Ignition’, etc.); and ‘Pehwr’ for the more conventional flame.

‘Power’ is not from ‘Pehwr’ – but rather from PIE ‘Potis’, which refers
to a Lord (whence Sanskrit पति (‘Pati’), Greek ‘Potis’ (and ‘Despotis’),
‘Despoina’ \[‘Lady of the House’, also a prominent epithet utilized to
refer to a certain Goddess without invoking Her name\], Russian Госпо́дь
\[‘Guest-Lord’; but actually meaning ‘God’ – recalling the Sacred
Hospitality template for the Worship of the Gods as Guests\], Lithuanian
and Latvian ‘Pats’ \[‘Self’\], etc.), via Latin ‘Potis’ – which means an
ability, a capability, a potential.

However, whilst ‘Fire’ may be etymologically derived from the PIE root
for *inanimate* Flame – it is very evidently apparent that the Fire
invoked here is quite different. The Living Flame, the Conduit to the
Divine, and the active force of Piety, Faith, Life-supporting heat and
light, Wisdom, and Illumination. PIE ‘Hngwnis’ – or, as we have seen,
Sanskrit: ‘Agni’. The God of Priests, Priest of the Gods, recipient of
the sacrifices, and Hallower of the Rites as one of the essential active
essences engaged therein.

In this context, then, we may quite legitimately think of the Goddess as
the ‘Flame-Thrower of Faith’!

The Sanskrit verse I have chosen is from the Durga Suktam which has
itself been brought out from the Mahanarayana Upanishad.

Within that latter context, it is more overtly an Agni hymnal.

However, there is no contradiction with the presentation of this as a
Durga Hymnal – as there is quite extensive expression in the Vedas for
the Goddess Herself being the ultimate Power presiding over the bestowal
(and, indeed, the Empowerment) of this Holy Flame.

We find in RV X 125 – the famed DeviSukta, dedicated to (and in the
literal words of) Vak (akin to ‘Voice’ – The Goddess as
(Sacred/Empowered) Speech) hailed for Her role in underpinning Agni and
for enabling the Fire which consumes the offering to burn and devour it
and gain nourishment therethrough.

We find in RV VIII 100 – Devi Vak being absolutely essential to the
Divine War Effort against the Demon-Dragon of the water (Vritra); in a
manner closely resonating with Athena’s guidance to Herakles and Iolaos
to utilize the Flame to fight the Hydra.

And we find in the Vedic ritual commentaries, inter many alia, Vak
hailed as being in the Sacrificial Blaze. To quote from the Shatapatha
Brahmana \[SB III 5 1 22-23\]:

“She then said to the gods, ‘Whatsoever blessing Ye will invoke through
Me, all that shall be accomplished unto You!’ So She went over to the
Gods.

And, accordingly, when he pours ghee on the high altar, while the fire
is held (over it) – since the Gods said to Her on that occasion, ‘The
offering shall reach Thee even before Agni’ – then that offering does
reach Her even before (it reaches) Agni; for this (high altar) is in
reality Vâk. And when he raises the high altar, it is for the
completeness of the sacrifice, for the sacrifice is Vâk (speech) and
that (high altar) is Vâk.”

It is therefore, of course, utterly uncoincidental that when the Devi
Mahatmyam describes the Arrival of Durga upon the field of war ‘gainst
the erstwhile unvanquishable Mahishasura (who had bound himself with the
conditional invulnerability that he could *only* be harmed by a woman,
as he did not consider females to be any form of threat) – we find Her
congealed from Fire.

For She Is the Overwhelming Fire-Power !

Jai Mata DI !
