+++
title = "On The Alcis Twins – The Heroic Horse-Twins Of Anotherxa0Name"
date = "May 30, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/castor_pollux_vichot1.jpg?w=768)

Our field is one wherein so often, we find fundamental contiguity of
Essence – obscurated via the seeming diversity of transposed expression.
So it is with the Alcis pairing.

These are described in Tacitus as being akin to the Classical Castor &
Pollux – the Helping Hero (Horse) twins known also variously as the
Asvins and the Nasatyas of the Vedic sphere. Dioscuri and Divo Napata –
the Sons of Heaven/Dyaus/Rudra.

In the Germanic sphere, we have attestations for Hengist and Horsa, of
course, as descended of Odin – yet these come far later and via
euhemerized account written by the then-vanquished enemies of the
Anglo-Saxon invasion. And do not quite match up with what little is
known to us of the Alcis, despite obviously all of these descending from
this same common Proto-Indo-European origin.

The major approaches to ‘unlocking’ the meaning of the Alcis have
understandably been linguistic. They have sought to connect the theonym
‘Alcis’ with, via archaic Nordic ‘Algiz’, the various terms for Stag
(indeed, Elk – which is similarly linguistically derived; all from PIE
‘Helkis’). Such an effort is logical (literally – it is made up of
words), but may appear somewhat ‘off-target’ in a comparative
mythological sense. Unless, of course, one presumes that the Scythian
custom of applying antlers to horses was being referenced – in which
case, the ‘Horse-Twins’ in a more martial array may have been intended.
Such a thing is not impossible, and I have previously sought to connect
this Scythian custom to the Marut etc. mounting upon antlered steeds in
the Vedas – but I digress.

A rather better approach is to anchor our understanding of the Alcis via
Proto-Germanic ‘Alhs’ – which refers to a sacred space such as a temple,
a settlement or home, or a place of refuge, or defence. It *may* have
some bearing upon the mysterious “ALU” bindrune, and therefore, for that
matter, our modern term of “Ale” … an amusing occurrence, if so, given
the strong linkage of the Horse-Twins to powerful brews (ref – the
Asvins and Soma, Hengist and Horsa and spiritous liquor, and Polydeuces
as ‘Much Sweet Wine’). Although in theory, ‘Ale’ is supposed to derive
from PIE ‘helut’ – a term with an uncertain ultimate origin either
connecting it to a magical empowerment/preparation, the ‘bitterness’ of
the brew, or its reddish-brown colouration.

It would be tempting to presume that given the context for Tacitus’
citation of the Alcis – talking about a sacred grove where worship could
take place – that he may have been in receipt of confused information,
and that it was the *grove* which was termed the Alcis rather than the
Brothers. This would seemingly accord with the aforementioned Germanic
utilization of “Alhs” derived conceptry, such as the Gothic ‘Alhs’
(Temple), Old English ‘Ealh’ … or, from outside the immediate Germanic
sphere (but most definitely proximate thereto), Lithuanian ‘Alkas’
(‘Altar’/’Idol’/’Holy Site’/’Sacred Grove’), and Latvian ‘Elkas’
(‘Idol’).

Except to make such a presumption is to miss the wood for the trees.

The reason that these ‘Alhs’ terms are designated such, and they appear
to bear resonancy with the Alcis as a theonym – is not because there is
some PIE term for ‘holy site’ which supports all of these
aforementioned. That exists, of course, and it is PIE ‘Helk’ (an
alternate reconstruction is, aptly enough, ‘Alk’). Yet this itself is
speculated to have as its ultimate root – PIE ‘Hlek’ ; with later
derivations including Ancient Greek ἀλέξω \[‘Alexo’ – ‘To Protect
Against’\] and ἀλκή \[‘Alke’ – ‘Defence / Martial Prowess’\], Sanskrit
‘Raksha’ and ‘Rakshati’ \[‘Guard’ and ‘To Guard’\], Old English
‘Ealgian’ \[‘To Protect’\], and Persian ‘Iaskar’ \[‘Army’\].  
What does ‘Hlek’ mean? ‘To Defend’, ‘To Protect’.

The Holy Place – the Helk – is therefore That Which Is Protected. Or,
perhaps, That Which Is *Protecting*. Or, most likely – Both.  
Yet how does this pertain to our Alcis Brothers?

Simple.

That ‘Nasatya’ theonym I had earlier mentioned for the Hindu occurrence
of the Divine Twins, the Helping/Healing Hero Horse Brothers. The root
for this is PIE ‘Nes’. This is also, entirely uncoincidentally, the root
for Ancient Greek ναός – ‘Naos’ – meaning a Temple.

To quote from one of my earlier works via way of explication for PIE
‘Nes’ –

“\[ A\] most intriguing term with what at first appears to be a quite a
diverse and manifold field of meaning: ‘to return (home)’, ‘to heal’,
‘to rescue’, ‘to join/come together’, ‘to become concealed’.

And yet it does not take more than a moment’s cognizance to divine the
shared underlying sense to all of these definitions and their subsequent
derivations in the latter Indo-European languages of yore (‘Nasatya’ –
as in the Asvins, the Helping, Healing, Heroic Horse-Twins is a great
example we have written previously upon; ‘Nostos’ is probably more
familiar to a Western audience from the Homeric epics).

The sense being communicated via ‘Nes’ is of a place of refuge – a place
of restoration, and the journeying or retrieval to go back thereto
(hence, the reinvigoration and renewal of health from injury or
impairment); a place or a state where one can be at ease, and quite
literally it would seem, ‘at home’.”

So, upon the face of it, PIE ‘Nes’ is most definitely resonant with the
notions of Protection, Place of Refuge, Place of Residence, Shelter, and
That Which Is Sacred (indeed, Restorative, therethrough) which inform
the Germanic ‘Alhs’.

Ancient Greek ‘Naos’ and Germanic ‘Alhs’ would appear to be quite close
in terms of these elements of their meaning and of their meaning’s
ultimate PIE underpinnings.

‘Alcis’, therefore, we can safely surmise to be exactly what is
understood via ‘Nasatyas’ – the Divine Twins, Sons of the Sky Father,
Who are so closely correlated with these essential attributes. They
Protect, They Rescue, They Unite, They Lead Their (Our) People(s) in
particular circumstances, and They also preside over elements pertaining
to a certain ‘Empowering Brew’.

As applies the Alcis, it would seem most logical to conclude that what
has happened is the same general *concept* which was also understood via
what became ‘Nasatya’, albeit perhaps with a slightly different nuance
upon it, was resultingly carried forward down the ages with a differing
name. A name which is still most definitely resonant with the shared
archaic conceptry, and its cousin-of-concept elsewhere across the
Indo-European expanse – yet which, if one did not know what one was
looking for, or perhaps looking *upon*, might represent quite the
quandary. In part because, other than the name itself and the brief
Interpretatio Romana provided by our Latin intermediary, the Alcis are
almost anonymous to our modern eyes.

A good example for this sort of occurrence – of a shared concept being
labelled slightly differently, and thence producing a still-resonant yet
outwardly obscurated linkage – is provided by the Father of the Divine
Twins. In the Vedic tradition, they are Divo Napata – the Sons of Heaven
/ Dyaus Pitar … but also spoken of as Sons of Rudra. In the Classical,
they are the Dioscuri, the Sons of Dios \[i.e. Zeus Pater / Jupiter\].
In the Germanic, we can reconstruct that Sons of Odin is what was
ultimately believed. And yet if you put all of these theonymics in a row
… you would have a devil of a time convincing some people that all of
these terms referred to the same God. You could place Dyaus Pitar , Zeus
Pater, and Jupiter alongside One Another as terms and that would get you
somewhere. But Odin? Rudra? No, for that it requires analyzing what
those latter-mentioned theonymics convey as Qualities of the Sky Father
deific, demonstrating Their fundamental coherency and coterminity as
such across the IE sphere \[an endeavour I shall not seek to reduplicate
*again* here\], and in the case of Rudra take advantage of the
lesser-known direct statements upon the matter in the course of Sanskrit
scripture.

This represents something of a problem for us viz. the Alcis.  
Because we are missing so much of the ‘Context’ via which such a
constellational tracing might otherwise be endeavoured. Not only for the
Alcis in specia, but also for the Divine Hero Helping Horse Twins in the
Germanic context all up.

In various of the PIE-descended popular mythologies, particular features
have become de-emphasized when we speak about seemingly almost any
figure of note. We do not find much in the way of direct manifestation
for the Horse-Twins in the later Germanic-sphere texts
post-Christianization (there are only a few mentions in isolated and
unsure manner in Sturluson’s Eddas; and Nennius’ History of the Britons
represents a quite literally ‘foreign’ perspective upon Them), and were
it not for Tacitus’ writing we should have precious little to go on for
the Germanic speaking peoples of his era – when this was still the
‘living religion’ actively participated in by those folk.

Even amidst the Greeks, it is evident that some things had changed and
shifted down the years – hence why we have the disagreements in their
texts over which of Castor or Polydeuces was the ‘divine twin’ (the
correct answer, most assuredly, should be ‘both’), and why the mention
for Castor and Pollux in relation to empowering preparations is so
fragmentary that we mostly know of it via the aptly twinned etymologies
for Their Names.

There are some *tantalizing* suggestions for the Algiz (as in the Rune)
conceptry and other such related occurrences elsewhere in the Germanic
corpus, and we may return to address these at a later time; but suffice
to say that we are basically left an occluded space whose features are
so time-worn as to make more than (suitably informed) conjecture very
difficult indeed.

Yet it is not a ‘blank space’ nor an ’empty slate’. Because there is
most definitely *something* there, and it is a series of something which
– as we can see via the linguistics, and the scant ‘comparative
understanding’ passed down to us via Tacitus – aligns quite remarkably
closely with what we *know* via the Vedas (and also via other
Indo-European comparanda) to be the essential characteristics of the
Divine Twins better attested elsewhere.

And we know all of this thanks to the Alhs, indeed – something precious,
the heritage, which Protected Protects.

So, by ‘Nasatizing’ the Alcis – we are doing just exactly that. We are
bringing Them home, and re-exalting Them to Their proper place of
sanctuary within our broader Indo-European ken of vision and of view. An
act of ‘healing’, one might say – and most certainly one of active
defence, carried out through this ‘bringing \[back\] together’.

As we have said: ‘Nes’, but also ‘Helk’.

Nasatyas – but also Alcis.
