+++
title = "Quirinus – Thexa0Roman"
date = "May 20, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/quirinus-coin.png?w=350)

Earlier this week, our associate Athanaricushad posted a rather novel
paper by another which proposed to explain the Roman theonym of Quirinus
via recourse to our old friend, the Proto-Indo-European Perkwunos – that
is to say, a potential linkage between this cryptic Roman deific and the
Striker/Thunderer.

Now, I am not in a position to assay the linguistics advanced within
said paper, because it is not my specialized field; although it did seem
a bit peculiar. One data-point advanced in favour of the theory,
however, was the occurrence of a Hercules Quirinus – which, upon the
face of it, would appear to confirm exactly that: namely, the notion of
this Quirinus being, well, the Striker/Thunderer, as Hercules (is).

Except not so fast.

Indo-European epithets and theonyms do not quite work that way.

In various cases, epithets are not unique to a single deity but are
shared amongst Them in a given Pantheon. This is especially the case
when they connote some physical site where multiple Gods may be
worshipped, or a concept which has resonancy for multiple Deities and
accompanying Divine Portfolio inclusions.

For example, I think it is Larissaeus that is an epithet of both Zeus
and Apollo … due to the situation of temples to Both in the arx Larissa
in the city of Argos. A similar form of the name occurs as an epithet
for Athena due to Her having a Temple located near the river Larissus.
Oh, and there’s also a Nymph of the name Larissa that is linked to the
former area, as well. In other words – attempting to suggest that all
four of these figures are, implicitly, the same deific (or, perhaps we
may say, running off the same archaic PIE deific complex), upon the
basis of this toponymical related epithet, would lead to questionable
identifications. Notwithstanding, of course, that two or three of the
four have reasonable arguments to be made for Sky Father resonancyin
various manners.

Another example, and indeed it is my general go-to upon these matters –
concerns Surya. Which, dependent upon context, either means the Sky
Father (as Sun), the Son of the Sky Father (that is the Sun), the Eye of
the Sky Father (again, the Sun), a Daughter of Surya, or a way of
phrasing things in the context of one of the Riddle Hymns which
potentially refers to Yama and the Realm of the Afterlife, etc. etc.
etc.

The better way to approach epithets such as these, I suspect, is to look
at what is being connoted – rather than Whom. What essential quality is
there which mandates a distinguishment, a ‘refinement’ from the
‘baseline’ form of the Deific and Their Theonym? What are we trying to
communicate here?

In short, and in this case specifically – what is it that the concept
or the quality of ‘Quirinus’ was actually supposed to represent in the
Roman mytho-political imagination.

And that’s where things get a bit complex, because our most usual tools
for analysis – especially as to the ‘deepa’ meaning – throw up a few
somewhat differing and potentially linguistically or contextually
questionable results.

The main thread should, of course, takeits lead from Latin Quiris,
Quirites … which we can say represents terms aligned to “Citizenship”.

Now, it gets interesting at that point, because *in theory* it’s got an
element for ‘civic’ rather than ‘military’ belonging to it … as in, it
is the Roman Citizen not as a soldier, but as a ‘fellow man’ \[and
indeed, there is a not entirely impossible Proto-Italic derivation that
would make it effectively ‘Fellow Man’ directly – ‘Kom Wiros’\] ;
although personally, I would perhaps be looking at ‘Koryos’ \[i.e. PIE
for ‘warband, army’\], especially given the folk-etymology of some
prominency at the time for it coming from a Sabine word, Cures, meaning
“Spear”. Spear-Man as an ethnonym is something we see even today with
“German” (and, come to think of it, the supposition of ‘Janus Quirinus’
as ‘Janus the Spear-Wielding’ … would go rather well with my as-yet
unpublished suppositions of the Two-Faced God in relation to Shiva-Rudra
\[i.e. ShulaPani\], and other such Sky Father deific expressions…
especially if I go by the potential PIE underpinning for ‘Janus’ making
Him a ‘wanderer’, a ‘traveller’ … )

How is this relevant for us? Well, if Quirinus is the ‘Citizen’, the
‘Roman’ it therefore makes *considerable sense* …. that we find the
Classical attestation amidst Plutarch for Quirinus as being Romulus in
deific form.

Just as Man is .. well, Mankind – the Kindred of Man(n)u(s) – so too is
the Roman Citizen, both a descendant of in the direct sense (at least
earlier) as well as a kinsman in a more … mytho-political sense (i.e.
the bonds of covenant) to the progenitor of Rome.

Except this does not quite account for that aforementioned distinction
between ‘Quiris’ as ‘\[Peacetime\] Citizen’, and the fact that Quirinus
is an epithet also applied to the God presiding over not only Peace, but
its antithesis – that being Janus as aforementioned.

My personal supposition is that Quiris had become a rather specific
derivative from the previous, broader meaning. That is to say, the
Romans had taken a term which had previously been broader in its scope
and ambit to refer to the Roman – and made a specialized form to refer
to him when he was not at war. If ‘Koryos’ was indeed the root for
Quiris and Quirinus, then that would suggest that the Romans
fundamentally had seen themselves as a people under arms and marshalled,
regimented as their natural state. One might make interesting comparison
with Tacitus’ description of a certain tribe of the Germanics being the
“Harii”, given that this ethnonym in Proto-Germanic effectively just
means ‘Raiding Party’ (and leaving aside the distinct possibility that
some miscommunication had ensued and that it was … not an ethnonym at
all but rather just somebody asking a Germanic “who/what are you?” and
the Germanic in question replying with “a Warrior/Raider”, and it going
from there).

However it has been congealed, ‘Quirinus’ as ‘Roman’ seems plausible. A
God – or perhaps more aptly, a ‘Quality’, an ‘Essence’ – of ‘The
Romans’.

There is some support for this theory to be found amidst the comparanda
of the Romans’ Latin phraseology to that of the Iguvine Tablets’
presentation of the beliefs of the Umbrian Grabovii. There, we find the
identified cognate for Quirinus to beVofionus. The etymology is, again,
somewhat open to interrogation; although one proposal has sought to
suggest PIE ‘Leudh’ / ‘Hlewdh’, meaning ‘People’ or ‘Growth’ \[and
therefore leading to supposition for the theonym meaning ‘Grower of the
People’, or ‘Strengthener of the People’\]. This has, understandably,
been connected to the figure of Toutatis among the Celts – with this
deriving from PIE ‘Tewteh’, a term referring to a ‘People’, and which
may itself come from PIE ‘Tewh’ to refer to ‘strength’, ‘swelling (up)’,
‘crowding \[together’\]. As a point of perhaps comparative interest, the
Hittite ‘Tuzzis’, which refers to an army or its encampment, is
potentially similarly derived.

My personal supposition is that partially what is meant, represented,
and intended by Quirinus is quite similar to what is understood by
Aryaman in the Vedic theology – ‘Aryaman’ having a theonym that is
virtually self-explanatory.

Although because it is often misinterpreted – ‘Arya’ in a Vedic context
is not really an ethnonym, any more than ‘Geir’ would be an ethnonym for
the Germanic . It is a specific term to connote an interpersonal
relationship – or, rather, what makes just such an interpersonal
relationship possible. It means somebody who is ‘proper’, because they
‘know the ways’ and thus can observe the customs of the tribe, the
people. I term it an “ethonym” as it connotes belonging to an ethos
rather than merely just an ethnos. It would be possible to be born to a
tribe ethnically of the Aryas, and yet not *be* Arya precisely because
one had no knowledge of how to be so in the first instance. So –
Aryaman, therefore, presides over exactly that. The proper, the
proprietary, the Way. And not merely the Milky Way which is His Path
\[c.f Odin / Irmin in likewise position celestially /
astrocartographically\]. It is precisely that quality, precisely that
participation therein, which makes an Indo-European Man part of his
ethnos : his allegiance and adherence to the Ethos, his tangible
embodiment of his loka-lized precepts of Cosmic Law.

Now, to bring this back to Quirinus – it is therefore unsurprising that
we should find Quirinus said to have a Consort, Hora. Hora, as we have
discussed elsewhere, has a meaning-field which has also given rise to
our modern ‘Hour’, is from the same root as ‘Year’, and can definitely
refer to ‘the proper time to do things’, in the sense that we must place
ourselves within the paradigmatic framework of Natural Law in our
conduct and our dispositions. However, there are also an array of other
quite important qualities associated with the Greek group of the Horae –
including Dike \[‘Justice’/’Righteousness’\], Irene \[‘Peace’\], and
Eunomia \[‘Good Order/Laws’\]. These are stated as Children of Themis
\[‘Divine Law’\] by Zeus, although I have suspected that it is more a
case of ’emanations’ – in the sense that specific qualities of the
Goddess that is Law, were understood instead by the Greeks to be
descendants thereof. Certainly, via the Classical interpretation of
Scythian Indo-European myth, we have some intriguing support for the
application of ‘Hora’ to refer to the Consort of the Sky Father – in
Serpentine form, no less.

The notion of the Sky Father deific being in a matrimonial relationship
with a Goddess that is Cosmic Order’s in-universe expression is quite
familiar to us from the Vedic sphere – Vak & Aditi, in specia spring to
mind. It is also well-known to us, albeit more obliquely, via the Nordic
texts – where we find mentions for Frigg being unparalleled in Her
connexion to Orlog \[‘Supernal Law’\] and Skadi acting as a
Black/Shadowy and Serpentine-associated Enforcer of same. Both are Wife
of Odin. Skadi, in particular, has a most celebrated role as the great
sanctioner against a certain figure who undermined the sacral bonds of
community and made himself an ‘outlaw’.

In terms of the Vedic sphere – it may be of interest to look at RV VII
66. This features Aditi, the Radiant Queen of the Heavens, and Wife of
the Sky Father – as She “Whose Statute Is Inviolate” ; but also,
reference to a Triad of deific facings: Varuna , Mitra , and Aryaman in
that order. There is more which plays upon my mind on that specific
front, but for now it is enough to note the Hymnal’s significant
emphasis :

“10 Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for their
tongue,  
They who direct the three great gatherings with their thoughts, yea, all
things with surpassing might.  
11 They who have stablished year and month and then the day, night,
sacrifice and holy verse,  
Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the Kings, have won dominion which none else may
gain.  
12 So at the rising of the Sun we think of you with hymns to-day,  
Even as Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman deserve: ye are the charioteers of Law.  
13 True to Law, born in Law the strengtheners of Law, terrible, haters
of the false,  
In their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and our
princes dwell.”

It is not hard to see the conceptual relationship between ‘bringing
\[the\] People together’ in the linguistics we have aforementioned
across several IE cultures, and what is contained in lines 10 and 13. It
is equally straightforward to see how ‘Hora’ pertains to line 11. And
how Law underpins and makes into an actual viable community, the
‘enclosure’ within which the persons of the Nation “dwell”.

Phrased succinctly and directly: I consider it quite strongly likely
that Quirinus is not merely ‘Romanness’, but is a Facing of the Sky
Father Himself. This would fit with my earlier briefly articulated
supposition viz. Janus, with the comparative evidence around Varuna and
Aryaman in just such a role; and, as it happens, the slightly
speculative linkaging of Quirinus to agriculture and vegetative growth
due to the presiding role of the Flamen Quirinalis over the
agrarian-associated Consualia observance. As we have covered elsewhere,
there is quite a prominent role for the Sky Father as He Who Makes The
Rains Run On Time – and, it would seem, He Makes The Grains Run On Time
likewise as well.

This raises an obvious problem for the identification of Romulus with
Quirinus, and Romulus’ WifeHersilia with Hora. These were genuine
beliefs amidst an array of Romans, although I would suspect that they
were somewhat later innovations. Linkages of the essential qualities
connoted by ‘Quirinus’ and ‘Hora’ to the founding Father and His Wife of
Rome; Romulus as an ‘expression’ or an ’emanation’ or an ‘avatar’ of
Quirinus with ‘Mythic Resonancy’ in retrospective analytical effect as
seen especially via the enactions of Hersilia ‘bringing together’ Roman
and Sabine into one people; or perhaps even something as simple as a
patronymic being taken for a direct theonymic in the manner of somebody
conflating Vivasvat with Vaivasvata Manyuby accident or design.

There is more which could – and most certainly should – be said upon all
of these matters. But for now, it is (almost) enough.

One point remains, however, as yet unaddressed. Namely – just what it is
which is supposedly meant by ‘Hercules Quirinus’.

Hercules Quirinus, I would suggest, would mean “Hercules the Roman” ,
the *specifically* Roman Hercules \[in contrast, not least, to various
*other* invocations of Hercules that may be more ‘foreign’ – and more
linked or even overtly keyed to foreign, non-Roman peoples … including
our friends, the Germanics, when it was remembered that Herakles = Thor;
Hercules Magusanus, for example\]; and the Hercules that would, as with
any *other* Roman \[that is to say, any other Quirites\] serve the Roman
State. Indeed, be one of an array of active expressions *of* said State
; a Son of Jupiter , just as the Roman State likewise was Divine.
