+++
title = "Divine Devi Durga Art For Mother’sxa0Day"
date = "May 9, 2021"

+++
![Art: ‘Invoking The War Goddess’ – by Mukesh
Singh](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/u7z0wzo.jpg?w=1024)

Today is Mother’s Day – and while we are not ordinarily given to marking
the faux-holidays of the 20th century, for this we make an exception. As
it is *always* good, upon principle, to acknowledge one’s Ma.

I have written *seriously extensively* upon the Indo-European Divine
Mother elsewhere – so we shall keep things succinct. A picture, as they
say, is worth a thousand words.

In this particular case – an illustration of an instance from Book 6 of
the Mahabharata wherein Arjuna calls upon Mother Durga on the eve of
war. Interestingly, Arjuna does this at the direction of Krishna – this
situation of a form of Vishnu urging prayer to the Divine Mother as we
Hindus know Her, being of obvious import to a Shakta interpretation of
the Divine.

This is because, for us, it is quite literally a case of Devi Uber
Alles. If one wishes to find the supreme sanction of Divine Law, Cosmic
Order – then there She is.

In any case, from the Ganguli translation:

“Arjuna said,–‘I bow to thee, O leader of Yogins, O thou that art
identical with Brahman, O thou that dwellest in the forest of Mandara, O
thou that art freed from decrepitude and decay, O Kali, O wife of
Kapala, O thou that art of a black and tawny hue, I bow to thee. O
bringer of benefits to thy devotees, I bow to thee, O Mahakali, O wife
of the universal destroyer, I bow to thee. O proud one, O thou that
rescuest from dangers, O thou that art endued with every auspicious
attribute. O thou that art sprung from the Kata race, O thou that
deservest the most regardful worship, O fierce one, O giver of victory,
O victory’s self, O thou that bearest a banner of peacock plumes, O thou
that art decked with every ornament, O thou that bearest an awful spear,
O thou that holdest a sword and shield, O thou that art the younger
sister of the chief of cow-herds, O eldest one, O thou that wert born in
the race of the cowherd Nanda! O thou that art always fond of buffalo’s
blood, O thou that wert born in the race of Kusika, O thou that art
dressed in yellow robes, O thou that hadst devoured Asuras assuming the
face of a wolf, I bow to thee that art fond of battle! O Uma,
Sakambhari, O thou that art white in hue, O thou that art black in hue,
O thou that hast slain the Asura Kaitabha, O thou that art yellow-eyed,
O thou that art diverse-eyed, O thou of eyes that have the colour of
smoke, I bow to thee. O thou that art the Vedas, the Srutis, and the
highest virtue, O thou that art propitious to Brahmanas engaged in
sacrifice, O thou that hast a knowledge of the past, thou that art ever
present in the sacred abodes erected to thee in cities of Jamvudwipa, I
bow to thee. Thou art the science of Brahma among sciences, and thou
that art that sleep of creatures from which there is no waking. O mother
of Skanda, O thou that possessest the six (highest) attributes, O Durga,
O thou that dwellest in accessible regions, thou art described as Swaha,
and Swadha, as Kala, as Kashta, and as Saraswati, as Savitra the mother
of the Vedas, and as the science of Vedanta. With inner soul cleansed, I
praise thee. O great goddess, let victory always attend me through thy
grace on the field of battle. In inaccessible regions, where there is
fear, in places of difficulty, in the abodes of thy worshippers and in
the nether regions (Patala), thou always dwellest. Thou always defeatest
the Danavas. Thou art the unconsciousness, the sleep, the illusion, the
modesty, the beauty of (all creatures). Thou art the twilight, thou art
the day, thou art Savitri, and thou art the mother. Thou art
contentment, thou art growth, thou art light. It is thou that supportest
the Sun and the Moon and that makes them shine. Thou art the prosperity
of those that are prosperous. The Siddhas and the Charanas behold thee
in contemplation.”

Sanjaya continued,–Understanding (the measure of) Partha’s devotion,
Durga who is always graciously inclined towards mankind, appeared in the
firmament and in the presence of Govinda, said these words.

‘”The Goddess said,–‘Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy foes, O
Pandava. O invincible one, thou hast Narayana (again) for aiding thee.
Thou art incapable of being defeated by foes, even by the wielder of the
Thunderbolt himself.’ “

जय माता दी !
