+++
title = "The Golden Radiancy Of Somnath Jyotirlinga  [Incredible Indo-European Holy Sites Series Partxa0V]"
date = "May 10, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e0tqxfjvgayhovf-1.jpg?w=576)

Apt for a Monday – the ShivLing at Somnath , one of the Twelve (although
by some counts thirteen) Jyotirlingam \[‘Starlight Lingam’\] sites;
‘Somnath’ meaning ‘Lord of the Soma’ – a prominent Shaivite epithet,
theonym, and role. Which it would be interesting to connect to Odin’s
role in the bringing of the Mead of Poetry.

A ShivLing, as we have discussed at greater length elsewhere, is
analogous to other Indo-European ritualine structures utilized for the
worship of the Sky Father deific, and correlate with the Axis Mundi of
this world. The Irminsuls of the Germanic peoples are a good comparative
example, and we have reasonably direct statements in both the Nordic and
Hellenic canons around offerings of milk (and honey) in the mythology.

The ShivLing itself is stated in our scriptural sources to be a
continuation of the Sthambha – sacral post – of the Vedic age; and we
likewise have attestation for the Sky Father deific appearing *as* a
Sthambha as Axis Mundi of the world(s).

The Jyotirlingam concept carries this understanding forwards as well –
although in rather ‘higher’ format. The Jyotis- element referring to the
‘Celestial’ characterization of the pillar, but also to the fact that it
is co-occurrent in each of the Three Layers / Three Worlds of the
Universe. We may therefore think of these as ‘linchpins’ of the cosmos
\[and ‘Cosmos’ in its archaic Greek sense meaning ‘Regime’, ‘Order’, is
quite relevant here likewise – the Axis Mundi is a salient of this
Supernal Order , Orlog , within our worlds .. hence why these are
attacked by demonic forces; the dragon-demons that gnaw upon the limbs
of Yggdrasil in the Nordic texts, for example; hence the ‘repairing’
taking place via these libations aforementioned\].

Somnath itself is a particularly interesting Jyotirlinga site, for
reasons I have partially elucidated in [my tribute (A)Arti-cle for
Indian Independence Day 2019 – “On The Gates of Somnath
Temple”](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/08/16/on-the-gates-of-somnath-temple-an-essay-of-rakshapala-for-both-swaraj-and-bandhan/)

It was raided, ransacked, and razed by Mahmud of Ghazni almost a
thousand years ago, and then again when it had been reconstructed …
several times over. Multiple Muslim warlords sought to enrich
themselves, or carry out acts of ‘iconoclasm’ and religious suppression
against it and the Hindusphere over a period of almost seven hundred
years.

In one of those curious turns of fate, one of the more noted efforts at
actually reconstructing the Temple took place in the 1800s under the
British – with the then Governor-General of India, Edward Law (also
known as Ellenborough after his aristocratic title as Earl thereof)
carrying back from Afghanistan elements he thought had been looted from
the site by Mahmud of Ghazni, so as to see them reinstalled at Somnath.
He got into considerable trouble with others in the British
establishment, such as the much-maligned (and deservedly so) Lord
Macaulay – who spoke in Parliament against him for this act, and
declared that the official policy of the British in India ought to be to
favour the ‘Mahometan’ over the adherent of the ‘Brahminical’ faith. And
further expressed his horror at what appeared to be a Hindufication of
both the Governor General and various of the British personnel under his
command which had been allegedly taking place at this time.

I have found it somewhat amusing that Macaulay, in the relevant speech
in Parliament, did not just declare Ellenborough to be a Shaivite as a
term of insult (in part precisely due to what he insisted the
Jyotirlingam had to represent) … but also said that if he had to choose,
Macaulay would much prefer to be a Vaishnava.

In any case – the Somnath Jyotirlinga temple was finally properly
reconstructed in 1951, as one of the early acts of the Congress
government (initiated in 1947 by Deputy Prime Minister ‘Sardar’ Patel).

And it is this modern place of worship which the below image comes to us
from.

A living expression of not only the ancient Hindu faith, standing where
it has stood for centuries upon centuries even in spite of all manner of
attempted mortal intervention , invasion, and intercession against same
…

… but also of the similar forms, with the same essence, that we had once
known in Europe, as well.

As we have said – the reason that these elements, the Jyotirlingam, and
the Lingodbhava , are ‘infinite’ is that they are unending. The
expressions of these elements found amidst this more sidereal world of
ours are more mutable in some ways … they can be hacked down, perhaps,
by men threatened by the manifestations:

But the *essences* are transcendental, supernal – and the ‘roots’, to
reference both the Nordic and Vedic conceptry quite directly, are beyond
what men may know.

And so these are able to be reconstructed, resurrected , and rebuilt –
they cannot be snuffed out by mortal hands, not truly, as they were not
produced by mortal hands to begin with.

Even though it is over to us, humans, to make active and tangible that
vital re-incarnation as necessary and as appropriate, and thence to
engage with these in proper worshipful conduct.

One day, we may have such sites as these in vital, active use in Europe
again, too.

But for now, it is enough to know that they still exist with our close
cousins in India.

ॐ नमः शिवाय
