+++
title = "On the Wolf Symbolism integral to Indo-European Warrior Tradition – An Excerpt From Speidel’s “Ancient Germanic Warriors: Warrior Styles from Trajan’s Column to Icelandicxa0Sagas”"
date = "May 5, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/31895245_201322317146767_2864008085599420416_n.jpg?w=703)

“Of all wild animals, wolves are closest to man in social instincts.
They respect rank, delight in each other’s company, and are so dedicated
to the pack that the Hittite king Hattusilis told his assembly, “May
your clan be one, like that of the wolves!” As dogs they are eager and
faithful beyond words. Wild wolves have even suckled and raised human
children. No other animal engages man’s feelings so strongly. It has
rightly been said that what links men who love wolves with those who
loathe them is the intensity of their feelings.

Wolf-warriors are the best-documented Indo-European warrior style,
originating long before and lasting long after the Indo-European
dispersal. They are found far more often than bear-, boar-, buck-,
marten-, horse- or any other animal-warriors. In the second millennium
BC, when our sources begin to flow, wolf-warriors are already well
attested. A Hittite army leader bore the name Lupakku (“Wolf”), and
since Indo-European animal names bespoke strength and luck, he very
likely was a wolf-warrior. Likewise the name of the Hittite Luvians
means “Wolf-People”: Hittite texts call them LU-MESH UR-BARRA,
“Men-Dog-Outside.”

Vedic India too had skin-clad wolf-warriors: Rudra, with his wolves
Bhava and Śarva and with a warband of eleven long-haired Rudriyas,
haunted the woods. Other early wolfwarriors are the mairyo youths of
ancient Iran: as a warrior band they were called “wolves” and fought in
a frenzy, though it is not known whether they wore wolfskins. Scythians
also fought as wolf-warriors, some of their youths being “valiant dogs.”

Mycenaeans very likely had wolf-warriors. A painted krater from Tiryns
of about 1200 BC shows four warriors on foot, two before a chariot and
two behind it. All four are armed with small round shields and javelins
much like Egyptian Shardana chariot runners of the time. “The pointed
crests on their heads,” it is said, “may represent a cap-helmet of some
kind”; the tails between their legs are very likely tails of an animal
skin. The men have been taken for tiger-warriors, but there were no
tigers in ancient Greece. Indo-European parallels and Homeric
wolf-sympathy suggest that they are wolf-warriors. If so, wolf-warriors
may have played a role in the chariot-based Indo-European expansion of
the mid-second millennium BC. Chariot crews needed runners beside them
to capture or Ancient Germanic warriors finish off enemy charioteers.
Fleet-footed young wolf-warriors could have played this tactical role.
Some Mycenaeans seem to have had wolf-names.

Homer too tells of wolf-warriors. He sees heroes such as Hector,
Diomedes, and Achilles as at times overcome by fighting madness; that
is, in the throes of “wolfishness,” a state akin to berserk
recklessness. Speed, stealth, and fighting madness characterized Greek
wolf-warriors, but Achilles’ captains flaunted wolfishness also as a
leadership quality:

Hungry as wolves that rend and bolt raw flesh, hearts filled with
battle-frenzy that never dies—off on the cliffs, ripping apart some big
antlered stag they gorge on the kill till all their jaws drip red with
blood, then down in a pack they lope to a pooling, dark spring, their
lean sharp tongues lapping the water’s surface, belching bloody meat,
but the fury, never shaken, builds inside their chests though their
glutted bellies burst—so wild the Myrmidon captains…

In Sparta, warrior training was the work of Lykurgos, the “Wolf-Worker.”
Lykurgos laid down a law that for a year (the “Krypteia”) young warriors
must hide and live outside society, fending for themselves as naked,
lone wolves. Elsewhere in Greece, Apollo the Wolf-God presided over the
training of young warriors.

Indo-European tribesmen brought the wolf-warrior style to Italy as well
as Greece. Vergil says that the warriors who founded Praeneste wore
wolf-hoods and fought with the left foot bare—a sign of skill,
toughness, and recklessness. The Hirpi Sorani wolfwarriors from north of
Rome, like later berserks, could not be hurt by fire: very likely they
fought in a trance of ecstacy that made them woundproof.

The wolf-warriors of Romulus founded Rome, and centuries later in the
battles against Hannibal the legions still had in their ranks velites,
young men who fought in the forefront and wore wolfskins. As the sight
of a wolf was an omen of victory to later Germanic warriors, so it was
to early Romans: when a wolf ran through their battle line at Sentinum
in 295 BC, Roman warriors welcomed it with shouts as the winning wolf of
Mars. By the time of Marius, however, Rome had lost her wolf-warriors.

Among Celts in Gaul, wolves, and dogs bred from wolves, enthralled
warriors. Celtic names like Cunopennus, Cunocennus, and Cunobarrus all
mean “dog-head” or “wolfhead”; that is, men who fought with dog or
wolf-skins over their heads. Very likely they looked like the Germanic
wolf-warriors portrayed on Trajan’s Column”

\~Excerpt from Chapter 1 Wolves from “Ancient Germanic Warriors: Warrior
Styles from Trajan’s Column to Icelandic Sagas by Michael P. Speidel
