+++
title = "Devi Durga As Mahishasura Mardini – Glorious Modern Hindu (A)Art(i) For Friday, Devi’sxa0Day"
date = "May 21, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/8d05778ac530069c48eef27e24ee6aa2.jpg?w=564)

Amazing modern (A)art(i) for Friday – Devi’s Day.

Durga as Mahishasura Mardini – the Destroyer of the Buffalo-Demon.
Dawon, Her Lion Vahana \[vehicle/steed\] is looming behind. And
Mahishasur, of course, is the exsanguinating horned figure under Her
Feet and Spear.

To quote from one of my previous works via way of explication –

“To this conflict, then, came the buffalo(-headed) demon, Mahishasur – a
shape-shifter whose beguiling ability to assume an array of (often more
innocuous) forms with his *exterior* nevertheless belied a fixed and
abhorrent internal consistency and perverse ‘purity’ of ‘purpose’ to see
the Gods cast down.

Prideful and pugilistic, the demon Mahishasur resolved to do this via
the by-now time-worn (aha) approach of first performing sufficient rites
and rituals of austerities to beseech Brahma to grant him a boon of
‘immortality’/’invincibility’, in order to make himself ‘inexorable’ in
his insurgency against the Divine Order and any such Divine Warrior as
might endeavour to stand in his toxic way.

However, the ‘rules’ and nature of Hindu ‘divine legalism’ I suppose one
might call it, do not allow for any being to be granted such inviolate
and perfected implacability. There always *must* be some exception, some
loophole – some ‘chink’ in the otherwise plenipotentiary armour granted
to them by Brahma, via which they surely shalt crumble apace.

\[…\]

Mahishasura, however, was not nearly so thoughtful or creative as these
others of his kind – and was beset, among other shortcomings, with a
chronic overabundance of arrogance and misplaced pride. Nor had he read
Lord of the Rings. He therefore selected as his boon from Lord Brahma,
that “no man” would be able to vanquish him – thusly phrased because he
was disdainful of women, and did not either believe or realize that a
woman could ever be a threat to one as self-regardedly mighty as he. (As
it happens, Mahishasur turns out to have a “weakness” of “women” in an
additional sense as well – that directly contributes to his downfall …
but more on that later at the appropriate time)

For a time, this boon allowed Mahishasur and his armies to prosecute
their ADharmic and Devacidal acrusade with quite marked success –
meeting The Gods in the field and routing Them, eventually coming close
to overrunning The Heavens themselves and forcing The Gods to retreat
off into the Mountains (which are,of course, HER Realm! – Parvati, ‘Of
The Mountains’) in order to contemplate making some form of heroic final
stand against the onrushing dark.

As should always be done in such circumstances, The Gods turn to piety –
invocations of sternest wrath and vengeance, and the pooling of Their
collective essences and empowerments to endeavour to find some solution
that will carry the day (in more than one sense of the term). Perhaps,
in the manner of many a soldier in what they perceive to be their last
moments, They thought of Their Ma (- particularly relevant to the place
that They were in). And SHE Answered.

However it transpired, They suddenly found amongst Them, the most
Glorious Yet Serene Wrath Of The Gods Made (Wo)Manifest. A most
exquisitely beautiful Devi, both radiantly regal and rapturously deadly.
(Eighteen Armed) Salvation, in other words – for Gods as well as Mortals
and indeed for Worlds Entire.

SHE took to the field of combat, rallying The Gods behind Her, and
singlehandedly (well … you know what I mean) laying waste to entire
enemy formations and their heavy machinery of war (indeed, there’s a
particular Shakta Hymn – the Mahishasura Mardini Stotram, that I
occasionally play for people. About the fourth verse or so, they tend to
be like “this sounds beautiful. What’s it mean?” At which point I
provide the translation of said verse, which is largely about first Devi
and then also Her Vahana ripping the faces off the enemy war-elephants,
and related acts pertaining to the subjugation and devastation of the
demonic foe).

Of course, especially given the craven nature of the demons, She was not
simply attracting attention for Her incredible combat prowess, and the
steady whirlwind of severed heads and lacerated limbs, fountains of gore
and earth-shaking fury which accompanied Her implacable advance across
the battlefield.

As mentioned above, She is also indescribably beautiful. And, as is ever
the case with the certain sort of male who is utterly dismissive of
women except perhaps as trinkets, as pretty-looking things to be
possessed in the manner of objects, trifling amusements, or as currency
… Mahishasur saw this incredible conflagration of (if She had so willed
it) Universe-Destroying potency carving Her way towards him – and rather
than doing something sensible or even simply perceiving that
Annihilation had literally arrived, he instead basically just thought
“nice looking woman .. I shall have her”, and proceeded to make a rather
indecent proposal in The Devi’s direction.

Evidently, in his overwhelming arrogance, Mahishasura had forgotten the
terms of his bargain with Brahma – that only a woman could destroy him …
and that not just *any* woman, but the Destroyer of Worlds and the
Unmaker of the Cosmos Itself (at the appointed time) stood before him,
bedecked with a most charming smile.

Devi’s response to his insolence was remarkably civil, given the
circumstances – as, instead of simply slaying him then and there where
he stood, She effectively invited him to partake of a more honourable
(for him, anyway) single combat – a Challenge. She did so by stating
that She would not allow Herself to be joined with any man who could not
best Her martially.

And, with his thinking perhaps I would surmise impaired by a lack of
full blood-flow to his brain for some reason (thus causing him to, you
know, somehow *not notice* the blood of a pretty sizeable portion of
what had up until just recently been his army spattered about Her),
Mahishasur chose to accept Devi’s Challenge.

Not least because I opened this piece with mention of the Theonym of
Durga – Mahishasura Mardini – it should come as absolutely no surprise
whatsoever to the reader to hear that Lady Katyayani eventually killed
Mahishasur. Although the “eventually” is not there to indicate any
enlengthening of proceedings through Mahishasur staging a
valiant-if-futile defence or anything like that. As he couldn’t. Nobody,
and *nothing* could have withstood the onslaught that then ensued. For
this was not even, except in exterior forms perceived by the entranced
witnesses through their eyes, a “combat” or a “duel” – as that would
imply the contest of two opposing forces with at least *some* active
input, interaction, and perhaps counter-attacking from the other party.

Instead, this was simply an Inevitability. With the only ‘delay’ in the
death of the demon being comprised of said Finality taking a certain
apportionment of extra time and miniscule effort to *properly* lay waste
to Mahishasur in both form and spirit – and in so doing, deliver a most
powerful message to any other would-be (usurper-)masters of the universe
down the ages.

The Sanction meted out against Mahishasur, then, went well beyond the
“clinical” (although both the precision and the overall objective of the
protection and maintenance of health with which Her blows were delivered
does render this a useful term of description for what had then ensued)
, and into the outright ‘cinematic’. By which I mean, She beat down upon
him so incredibly severely that She – and this is probably one of my
favourite details of the ‘duel’ – basically wound up *tap-dancing on his
head* (so to speak – there is also a visual metaphor going on here); a
studious and emphatically necessary brutality which persists to the
point She literally manages to pulverize the spirit out of him – it
leaves via the now-severed neck of the buffalo-form, and then
frantically attempts to adopt some shape or guise that would enable it
to flee to persist with its evil elsewhere and elsewhen. For
renunciation of its evil is not in its nature; meaning that the
cessation of its abomination can only be accomplished via the cessation
of its very being.

Something which Devi then finally delivers via the points of the
Trishula – the Trident (or ‘Three-Spear’, ‘Three-Point(s)’) that
represents mastery over the three worlds (and of the three energies),
and which is capable of destroying utterly whatsoever may find itself in
the Trishula’s path (other than Shiva & Shakti, Whose imperial emblem,
ensign, escutcheon, and ekpyrotic tool it is) including the universe
itself at the End of Time.  
Interestingly, the Trishula is also keyed to the area of the body
commensurate with the Ajna Chakra \[more commonly referred to as the
‘Third Eye’\] which She is also directly associated with – the
implication therefore also being that the destruction of Mahishasur was
thus an act of ‘enlightenment’ and ‘true-seeing’, while also situating
it in the broader context of similar such ann-eye-hilation instances
from Hindu mythology, as well as the broad power of Mahadev and Durga as
Tryambakam – ‘Three-Eyed’.”

Artist is Amol Hirawadekar

जय जय हे महिषासुरमर्दिनि रम्यकपर्दिनि शैलसुते

Jai Mata DI !
