+++
title = "The Divine Art Of Devi Kothixa0Temple"
date = "May 23, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_evd7xeaad2xt.jpg?w=755)

These absolutely beautiful frescos are from a Devi temple more than a
quarter of a millennium old in Chamba, Himachal Pradesh. The name of the
site is, aptly enough, Devi Kothi ‚Äì and the presiding form of the
Goddess is Chamunda.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_hn-hxmaudgp_.jpg?w=867)

Depicted, is the great battle of the Goddess against a demon army. An
artistic endeavour which [William Dalrymple, whose twitter-feed I got
these
off](https://twitter.com/DalrympleWill/status/1396048766348767234),
described as ‚Äúthe Sistine Chapel of Pahari art‚Äù.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_evdzweaqczw1.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_evsvwyaejdwv.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_fh8bxiainxrp.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_fhmzxsaa_oj0.jpg)

Unfortunately, they were recently damaged by a renovation effort by the
local Mandir‚Äôs committee. Perhaps understandably, they had sought to
‚Äòimprove‚Äô the structure using cement ‚Äì which ran into heritage
protections, and therefore made the work illegal. The work has now been
stopped ‚Äì although not afore the damage to the paintings had already
occurred üò¶

It is one of those things which frequently plays upon my mind when it
comes to the Hindusphere. In the West, many elements of religious
heritage ‚Äì they are museum-pieces. And that brings with it the greater
opportunities to protect them from damage and the ravages of time or
incautious use. Yet in India, it is Living Religion. And that means that
these archaic or indeed incredibly ancient sites are still in active,
daily use. And that brings with it a different and complicated set of
pressures likewise.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_hofgx0akkqip.jpg?w=654)

How to reconcile the two is a complex undertaking. Although I did note
somebody replying to the circumstance on twitter, who suggested: ‚ÄúMaybe
time to restore‚Ä¶I‚Äôm sure they can be painted back‚Ä¶not at all a tall
order in today‚Äôs time and age with so much technology at our Beck n
call‚Ä¶time to fight back‚Äù

I am not sure that it is so easy; and it is rare that one encounters
beauty such as this in the modern age ‚Äì but an admirable sentiment, all
the same.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_hoo6wqairgmm.jpg?w=844)

The site in context:

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_h4eqxsaamgwl.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_h4uhweaelix6.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/e1_h30wwuayk03n.jpg)

