+++
title = "The box"

+++
◊◊◊◊◊◊

Somakhya and Lootika raced up the metal rungs of the tall ladder which
led to the bracket atop which sat the great water tank. There, ensconced
from the spying eyes they did not know how much time passed in embraces
and caresses as though they were residing in the high realm of
sukhāvatī. Then by golden radiance glancing off her smooth, ivory-like
breasts Somakhya realized that the eye of the great pair of gods, the
mighty asura-s praised by their ancestors, was slipping beneath the
western peg fixed by the triple-striding Viṣṇu. They thought to
themselves that such indeed is the nature of the great ṛta upheld by the
regal asura-s, the sons of Aditi. As Somakhya was experiencing that
state of saṃyoga, Lootika too felt the same and had a foreboding of the
darkness that was to creep, hued like the other great king, the son of
Vivasvān. Somakhya remarked: “Verily all sukha is bounded and evanescent
for we are but mortals, much as Vidrum realized. Let us return to the
world of men in the glad glow of the saṃyoga we have enjoyed for the day
may dawn when even that might not be possible. Such is the inescapable
force of Kāla who drives us along the path at the end of which stands
the fierce king wielding the utkrāntida.” As they descended Lootika
said: “Let’s squeeze out the last moments of mirth when we can like the
flash of king Bhoja-deva of the paramāra-s even as our civilization
faded into the twilight of existence. Lootika: “Narrate to me the tale
of Vidrum from former times in that universe from which ours has
branched off.” Somakhya: “Since you ask, O tantunābhikā, we shall do so”

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Vidrum wanted a geometry box- the box which contained a divider, a
compass, protractor and a rubber. His parents told him that it was too
expensive for them to buy him such a box and instead directed him to use
one inherited from the long past days. He took that box and on pieces of
paper drew the figures he liked to draw. He then closed the box and went
away to play with his companion. After he did that he came home and was
alone in a silent room with the closed box lying on the floor on blank
sheet of paper. All of sudden he heard some noise. An imitation commando
badge that he had placed on a table rattled all on its own. Thinking
that there was a draft of wind from the window he went to close it lest
rain water get in at night. The window was indeed open and he caught the
sight of a rocket being fired by some revelers outside. He closed the
window and went out into the patio to watch the fireworks. After a while
he returned to the room and saw that a circle had been drawn with a red
pen on blank sheet on which his geometry box rested. The compass with a
pen screwed in was lying on the floor beside it. He was surprised as he
thought he had put all this inside the box. Just then his aunt called
him to go with her for an orchestra. He went to comb his hair looking
into the mirror, when he saw a demonic figure look over his shoulder and
smile. He let out an awful scream and his aunt and parents came running
in and asked what had happened. Fearing that they might take him to a
psychiatrist or suspect that he as imbibing some prohibited compounds,
he said that he had seen a snake on the window. They ran to check the
window out when fireworks lit the dark exterior illuminating a grave
that was in the yonder yard (They had gotten the plot for their house
cheap because it lay on a vast abandoned cemetery, a part of which was
still not cleared up for construction). While they went for the concert
Vidrum queried his folks as to where they had obtained the geometry box.
They told him that it was lying in the house from when they occupied it,
and that it was probably left behind by the contractor or the civil
engineer who built their dwelling.

Now Vidrum had a friend called Meghana whom he had strictly hidden from
his parents prying eyes because they feared he might fall prey to
passion and ruin his academics. Meghana lived in a house in the next
parallel street to the one on which his lay and outside the perimeter of
the original cemetery which was now encroached upon. An idol of the
goddess Sarasvatī, which was originally installed in the cemetery, was
now housed in a little roadside shrine near Meghana’s house. He would go
there in the guise of offering his prayers and catch her attention so
that the two could sneak away. One day Vidrum left behind his compass
box on Meghana’s desk at school and they returned home together. Vidrum
thought his parents and aunt were away at work that time, and he along
with Meghana was walking down his street, when to his horror he saw his
parents unexpectedly arriving. He quickly sprung away and ran into the
graveyard and hid behind a gravestone. His poor friend realizing what
had happened walked ahead as though nothing had happened. When she saw
his parents go inside, she went to the graveyard and called Vidrum. They
decide to exit from the other side of the graveyard and were running at
top speed when Meghana tripped on a protruding root of a large, old fig
tree. Her head struck a granite grave stone of a certain liṅgavanta
named Udgavkar and she died. Vidrum was terrified by the events and ran
home keeping everything to himself and shut himself up in the pretext of
studying. His parents told him that they had to attend the funeral of
Meghana and he burst into tears. They asked him to behave like a man and
left. At school he went to his late friend’s desk and took at look at
the box carefully. He saw the faint letters etched on it reading
Udgavkar the liṅgavanta from Hiriyuru. He was terrified beyond words and
threw it away on to the parapet of his school building.

◊◊◊◊◊◊◊

Many years later Vidrum was a student in medical school when he
examining a skeleton of juvenile specimen of Homo sapiens as a part of
his lesson in skeletal development. He saw that the specimen was a
female skeleton and had part of the cranium shattered. After that day in
the lab, Vidrum’s life was hardly pleasurable. He failed to study
properly for unknown reasons and he used to be thrown of his bed
repeatedly and some one would slap him repeatedly at night. He moved on
with his life, but it seemed he was still relentlessly pursued by
something.

Some years later he had bought a new car but the next day someone had
destroyed the front seat but everything else was intact. A few days
later he came home from his clinic. His life was full of the usual
realities of his profession – he was by now inured to peering down the
smelly orifices of other humans in various states of disease. While
displaying due compassion, deep within he was hardly moved by the news
that one patient or another being dragged away by the agents of the
great southern lord for their appointments with Citragupta; Nor did the
cries of those whose time had not yet come calling upon the
buffalo-rider to relieve them of their existence penetrate deep into his
armor of mental strength. But that day his mood was particularly low. He
washed his hands and sat for sometime in his plush chair in his study.
In his mind the day ran like a cinema reel. The reports came in for a
young woman he had been treating for a while. It was fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva. He had to break to her the news that it was much
worse than even the worst possibility they were considering prior to the
tests: she was going to literally turn to stone through complete
ossification of muscle, ligament and all. He vaguely recalled his friend
Somakhya had mentioned that this was a consequence of the mutation in
the TGF-beta-family receptor ACVR1 in course of his monolog on how
highly ossified vertebrates might have evolved – Vidrum had hardly made
much sense of what he had said then. Later in the day, on the way back
home he headed to the bank to deposit a set of checks he had gotten from
his patients when he thought he saw a woman in the middle of the road.
He fell into a ditch trying to avoid her. By the time he got his car and
himself out of the mess he found that he had lost his valet with those
checks. He wondered how some of his classmates wished to have his life;
he would gladly exchange his for theirs.

He then fired up the latest New England Journal of Medicine page and
started browsing the morbidly gruesome pictures of the “Image challenge”
pages; a few successful responses made him feel fired up and a bit more
upbeat. Then he turned to an article on genomics of myeloid leukemia –
its contents again starkly reminded him of his friend Somakhya’s
statement that the physicians should either become real biologists to
practice biology or leave it to real biologists to do so. He pushed
aside the journal and picked up his phone to call his servant. In a
little while she arrived and he said that he desired a meal of dry
fruits and nuts to be placed on the dinning table for supper. There
after he wondered if he should call Somakhya to tell him about the case
of FOP he had encountered. But before he could do so he slipped into a
reverie.

It was the first day after the vacation and everyone was back, getting
ready to enter the classroom. Vidrum walked in with some trepidation
thinking of the difficulties he might encounter in the curriculum, or
due to the cruelties of the teachers, or the conflicts with other boys.
His classroom was on the 2nd floor, and having arrived rather early he
stood outside it in the corridor looking at the quadrangle below.
Suddenly, he caught sight of her. Deep within him he experienced a
strange feeling something like he had never felt before in his whole
life to that point. It was a pleasurable feeling but he still could not
understand it as there was nothing he could compare it to. He felt a
yearning to reach her and talk to her but then the class began and he
was caught up with it. From time to time he would glance at her and only
felt that strange feeling increase within him. After the classes ended
he tried to reach her but he realized that she was walled off by a
formidable circle of other girls for whom he felt nothing (and he found
that interesting). Deep within he also sensed the possibility that he
might have to physically engage in conflict with other guys to attain
his goal. So he let it pass and started walking home quietly. Thus, time
passed and she now thickly crowded the dreams of Vidrum. Finally one
aṣṭami day, as though the wild and uncontrollable Sarasvatī he
worshiped near his house had smiled upon him, he got his chance. It was
a wet day and those youthful gods, the sons of Rudra, the dear friends
of Sarasvatī , were dancing with their spears in the sky making men
tremble. Vidrum set out for his classes. The mathematics teacher had
posed a terrible geometric construction. While some of the guys had
gotten it, all of the girls, except Lootika, had failed to achieve it.
The clever Lootika refused to show how it is done to the other girls. So
just before the class they were scampering to get it done by copying it
from the boys who had gotten it. Vidrum saw that she stood among girls
with her face clouded with some consternation – she had forgotten her
geometry box and could not copy the construction – in the rush to get it
done no one was paying her any attention. Vidrum saw his chance and
rushed to her side to give her his box and implements to let her achieve
the construction.

Now that he got to her he felt his life had changed. The strange
pleasant feeling he used to feel upon seeing her now turned into a
raging fire. He hoped that she would similarly burn within as though
possessed by the god Kumāra. But she seemed to be cold to him. Vidrum
went up to his friend Somakhya and discussed the predicament regarding
her. Somakhya said that an old poet from Kashmir had stated that the
māyā of śambara or the māyā of Viṣṇu might be penetrated but not that
of women. He asked Vidrum to stop fawning over her and to tactically
ignore her. A few days later the girls had again been stumped by a
dreadful trigonometric problem. As they were raking their heads they saw
Lootika smugly standing beside Vidrum and Somakhya. A couple of girls
came running up to them and asked them help with the problem. Lootika
turned to Somakhya and asked him not to help them; so he kept quiet. But
Vidrum helped them. Thereafter she who attracted him as a magnet came
running to Vidrum and asked for help. He turned to Lootika and asked if
he should help her. Lootika said that if she could not solve it by
herself why not let her face the teacher’s music. Vidrum with great self
effort turned down his chosen girl. Later that evening as he was
returning home she called out to him but he again ignored her. Now she
came running across the cemetery to come and intercepted him and asked
why he was so cross with her. With that he had won her and he rejoiced
in pleasant glow of satisfaction that exceeded the earlier feelings he
had felt.

But the story of Vidrum does not end there nor that of Somakhya or
Lootika, but they course on through the branching of the universes.
