+++
title = "The tale of the two classes of vaNij-s"

+++
It is with some trepidation that we discuss the vaNij-s for, belonging
to the head of the puruSha, we are removed from the arts and the ways of
theirs. But this is more a discussion on how their history played out in
more recent times a long way from the times when the ashvin-s aided
their widely famed representative aushija.

The primary strand of the topic of this note hit us long ago. When we
had once visited kauNDinyA, she introduced us to a coethnic of ours who
lived close to her realms. He informed us of his remarkable journey
which included fleeing from the island of Fiji. We had heard of the
Austronesian upheaval under a shavArAdhaka bully in Fiji against the
Hindus but did not have too many details of the event. He filled us in
with the intimate details of the unfolding events. The islands,
colonized during the great seafaring expansion of the Austronesians, had
become the home of several ferocious tribes that extensively practiced
cannibalism giving them the notorious moniker, the Cannibal Isles. Our
friend introduced us to the colorful cannibal chief Udre Udre who
wielding his heavy bludgeon had brained and eaten 800-1000 men.
Apparently he completely consumed each corpse not sparing any soft part
or marrow within the bones. To commemorate his achievement he piled a
monument of rocks one for each of his victims. We were curious to know
if his end fittingly came from kuru as no warrior on the islands could
defeat him, but for that we got no answer. Nevertheless, our friend
brought out an exotic curiosity, a bludgeon of a tribal male and showed
it to us. Sometime after the conquest of India in 1857 CE the English
turned their greedy eyes on the Cannibal Isles. The cannibals chiefs,
despite working up a great frenzy with their cudgels and mallets, proved
no match to the English artillery and were soon subjugated by them. The
English deposited several Hindus as serfs to work for them in the newly
acquired isles of Fiji. In the salubrious isles the Hindus grew even as
the English tacitly encouraged shavasAdhakas to convert the subjugated
cannibal tribes to the shavamata. Thus they came to be infected with a
disease more devastating than kuru: At least kuru was just a matter
among cannibals but the shavamata posed greatest danger to the
uninfected heathen Hindus. This process was not very different from what
happened under the noses of the Hindus in bhArata, despite brave Rani
Gaidinliu warnings and efforts, to our own head-hunters, the Naga
tribes, who today sing paeans to the preta and declare English to be
their tongue.

In the second half of the last century the English relinquished the
islands. The Hindus being much better equipped and adapted for a modern
nation than the descendents of the former cannibal tribes quickly took
over from where the English left and raised a reasonably flourishing
economy. Our coethnic was not part of the original Indian settlement in
Fiji. His family had moved there during the post-English economic upturn
as white collar professionals to partake of the wealth being generated.
The Austronesians not being adapted for such an economy fell behind.
However, the shavamata, despite its pretensions of being a religion of
love, had not dulled the warrior killer instincts of the recently
modernized Austronesians. Thus, instead of working on the economy, they
got back to doing what they were good at – raising a fighting force or
the Fijian army. Thus, on the island emerged two castes of different
ethnicity: The Indian business caste or the vaNij and the Austronesian
warrior caste. The latter not really getting much of the economic
expansion, turned jealous of the Indian vaNij-s and deployed their arms
against them. Being followers of the pretamata the Austronesians were
tacitly aided by the mlechCha-s who did not not want a Hindu island in
so strategic a place – after all in the future it could turn into
India’s much wanted Pacific base overlooking the mlechCha lands of
Australia and New Zealand. Thus, in few quick moves the Austronesians
backed by the mlechCha-s deprived the Hindus of their power, and sent
many of them scampering to India or Australia. India being a soft power
that could not do much when the Nagas were being infected by the
shavamata, could not do much beyond condemning the events in “strongest
terms” and calling for a equitable settlement. That is how our friend
landed back in the homeland with the cannibal’s bludgeon and hopes of
the great economic bubble in Fiji reduced to naught.

As we rode back home on our ashva we kept thinking of the griping
account we had just heard and the discussion we had there after. It
struck us that the Fijian venture of the Hindus had floundered because
they had completely neglected the use of arms and organizing a fighting
force. Instead they had only concentrated on the activities of the
vaNij. All their economic success was of no use because even a recently
civilized tribal population, which was much more attuned to war, was
able to easily overthrow them. A little later in life we read about a
new movement among mlechCha academics to redescribe Hindu
cosmopolitanism in the far East. They were doing following things:1)
They were down-sizing the role of Hindus and boosting the role of the
chIna-s, even though it was clear that in this sphere the chIna-s played
a minimal role in the historical period under consideration. 2) Other
than chIna-s, they were aggrandizing their own role and that of their
ideological cousins the marUnmatta-s and giving oversized roles for
“local movements”. 3) They were claiming that the Hindu (with a
particular emphasis on the bauddha component thereof) activity in the
far east was mainly driven by trade, with projection of soft-power that
entangled power-hungry locals seeking legitimization via imported
Brahminical constructs such as the manusmR^iti. These constructs were
claimed to be used to coercively dominate their fellow locals, with
brAhmaNa-s sanctifying this dominance in return for patronage. Based on
the Fijian situation we wondered: If the Hindus civilized and integrated
their Austronesian cousins in various isles in the great Malay
archipelago, why did they fail in recent times with the Fijians? Of
course we realized there were many factors: 1) The true military
conquerors of the Fijians were the English. This and subsequent mlechCha
intervention imposed the pretamata on them thereby preventing their
Hinduization. 2) Furthermore, there was probably to wide a cultural gap
between the Hindus and the ex-cannibal Austronesians of these isles to
allow a meaningful interaction. 3) The Hindus settled in these isles
were probably more insular in their attitude, which further diminished
their ability to Hinduize these Austronesians.But above all, we felt the
failure of the Hindus in Fiji lay in that they did not acquire kShatra
power. This might be compared to the situation in bhArata itself where
the deep contradictions in the traditions of the Gandhi-Nehru clique
played out against those represented by Savarkar during WW2, with later
arguing for armed power. Indeed, this brought home to us that the claims
of the mlechCha-s that the Hindu colonization of the east was merely one
of soft-power were wrong. The Hindus were able to hold their own because
there was actual kShatra presence that was enterprising enough to
inspire locals to fight under their banners. This in turn also inspired
locals to aspire to kShatra-hood by closely emulating the originals to
eventually join their ranks and engage in marriage with them. This
process might be compared with the Aryanization of the southern
peninsula of the Indian subcontinent: the northern kShatra immigrants
inspire similar aspirations among sufficiently enterprising individuals
in the local population who could emulate them. The brahma-kShatra
alliance was continued not because of the need for legitimizing
constructs from the brahma (after all if you have the power why do you
need someone whom your subjects understand even less than you to
“legitimize” your power) but because of the knowledge and
administrative skills brought in by them. Of course in this regard we
need to distinguish between the modes of transmission of Astika and
bauddha streams of the dharma because the latter is fundamentally a
missionary religion whereas the former is so, while capable of rather
effective assimilation. Nevertheless, the overall dynamics of
establishing dharma in a strong way does involve some gene transmission.

This led us to a tale of Hindu dispersal driven mainly by the 3rd varNa.
In a sense its rise and fall were to us reminiscent of the fate of the
Hindus of Fiji: vaNik with some brahma without kShatra. It is for this
reason we chose to preface a discussion of them with the tale of Fiji.
We first became aware of this from talking to some north Indian
vaishya-s whose people had very much been part of this story. On the
occasion of a marriage a coethnic somewhat tactlessly asked as to why
their women were more good-looking on an average than those of our own.
They vaishya-s gave a peculiar answer that got us thinking: They
declared that for centuries their people had sought central Asian women
in course of their business journeys and brought them back to
bhAratavarSha enriching their genotypes with raw material for good
looks. The discovery of the pre-mauryan Indian mirrors in Russia
indicated to us that such journeys had gone on for at least 2500 years
and certainly longer given the origins of part of our genetic heritage
and practically all of our culture from the Indo-Aryans. We were also
aware of the fact that some north Indian vaishyas had married women with
Mongol blood during the more recent centuries (we had first suspected
this from the looks of Igul). But credit must be given foremost to S.C
Levi for publishing a scholarly work on this matter about a decade ago
(though as disclaimer we should state that we do not share his secular
view of history; ours being a purely Hindu perspective). Levi had
narrated an interesting tale that we reproduce from his book in full
below (he uses Indian for the original Hindu which we restore):

*“A holiday was approaching and a teacher \[i.e. a mewlana\] in Bukhara
wanted to buy a gift of some fine clothing for the subject of his love.
He was very upset that he could not afford to buy the clothing and
afraid that should he not produce a gift he would be left alone. The
teacher and two of his students decided to go to the Hindu mohalla where
they would break into the house of a wealthy Hindu and steal his money.
They quietly snuck into the house, foot on shoulder, and found the box
(of jewels) they wanted. As they were quietly climbing back onto the
road the Hindu awoke; they jumped down from the house and took off
running down the street. Hearing the Hindu man’s cry, the Mir Shab
(nightwatchman) ran to the street and grabbed the three men. One of them
threw a rock at the policeman’s lantern and exclaimed, ‘Barak Allah,
Nadir Divan Begi\!’ To which another replied, ‘Hey, Emperor of the
Universe\! It wasn’t me. It was ‘Abd al-Wasi Qurchi.’ Thinking that he
had made a mistake and stopped Imam Quli Khan, Nadir Divan Begi and ‘Abd
al-Wasi Qurchi, the nightwatchman allowed the three thieves to pass,
along with the valuable box, without any problems. The next day the
enraged Hindu went to the court of Imam Quli Khan wearing black felt
around his neck and with his shirt ripped open \[expressing that he was
angry and had been wronged\]. Pleading for justice, he explained that
three men had robbed him and he had almost caught up with them when the
nightwatchman put out his own lantern and let the men go. Imam Quli Khan
looked from the Hindu to the nightwatchman and asked, ‘Why did you do
this?’ The nightwatchman did not answer and, getting upset, Imam Quli
Khan asked again. The nightwatchman requested a private discussion and
Imam Quli Khan called him forward and commanded, ‘Alright, speak\!’ He
explained what he saw to Imam Quli Khan and told him that he thought
that the three perpetrators were he himself and his two companions,
Nadir Divan Begi and ‘Abd al-Wasi Qurchi, out getting information about
the city. After an investigation the box was recovered and returned to
the Hindu merchant.”*

continued…
