+++
title = "Shiva and Cannabis/Bhang"
date = "2019-03-02"

+++


[Comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/hinduism/comments/9edzyp/shiva_hinduism_cannabis/e5rm3ix/)
from discussion [Valarauko’s comment from discussion "Shiva, Hinduism &
Cannabis."](https://www.reddit.com/r/hinduism/comments/9edzyp/shiva_hinduism_cannabis/).

(In case the comment gets deleted,I’m archiving it here):



On the onset, let’s clarify something. While the scriptural texts
mention cannabis, it’s unclear if the plant was known for its
psychotropic effects, or for its utility for hemp fibres. The handful of
times the plant is mentioned, from the context within the texts it’s
unknown how the ancients saw and used the plant.

That said, the texts are fairly clear that any mind altering substance
is frowned upon. This includes the traditionally available cannabis,
opium, betel nut, or alcohol. Mainstream Hinduism encourages engagement
with civil society and the inculcation of dharma as guiding principles.
Intoxication of any kind is seen as “checking out” of your societal
responsibility and is seen as a slippery slope.

There have been groups who see the mind altering features of drugs as a
tool to a greater purpose. The caveat is that these practices are only
among certain *dashnami sanyaasis*, people who have left civil society
behind and their only responsibility is to their own personal growth.
They see the consciousness altering drugs as a means to disrupt the hold
of maya on their perception. The goal is not to sit around and get high
all day. It’s a means to an end.

Unlike the popular opinion online, ganja and other intoxicants aren’t
used by mainstream Shaivite sects. In my reading of shaivite agamas,
I’ve never seen a use of intoxicants of any kind. Some temples offer
alcohol to Bhairava, but this isn’t universal, or indeed meant for
widespread consumption. In my reading its use is similar to the
Vaishnavite offering of the alcoholic Varuni mead to Balarama. It’s
offered, but not really consumed by devotees. Dhatura is offered to the
Linga, but not consumed. If anything, it is treated as nirmalyam, not
prasadam.

In another thread to your question somebody posted a link to a Quora
answer about the sacred nature of the cannabis plant. That answer gets a
lot of things wrong, and confuses a lot of things, so I’ll take the
opportunity to clarify this point here.

In the shaunakiya recension of the atharva veda, the text referring to
(“asvattha, darbha”, etc) isn’t in the verse mentioned, XI.8.15. It
doesn’t mention any plants by name. It talks about the constitution and
body parts of a man. The source probably means VIII.7.20, which does
mention some plants by name: the asvattha, darbha, soma, rice, and
barley as remedial. No cannabis. The verse they’re referring to is not
XI.8.15, but XI.6.15. Book 6 is invoking the various spirits for relief.
Each verse invokes and seeks blessings from each class of spirits and
deities, such as the Gandharvas, the winds, etc. In verse 15, the
various kinds of plants are invoked, and their lord, Soma. The five
plants mentioned represent the five kingdoms/classes of plants and not
particular plants. The five classes of plants invoked are darbha,
cannabis, barley, and an unknown saha (commentators usually refer to it
as a type of herb). Is there anything unusual or holy about these
specific plants in this context? Not really, when you consider the
preceding verses are invoking all manner of things; trees, birds, and
the verse immediately after invokes the blessings of niggards and
demons. The hymn is invoking the blessings of all plants, animals,
minerals, demons, snakes, and gods. These plants are not mentioned to be
especially pure or divine. By contrast, the list of plants mentioned in
book 8 (ie, not cannabis) are singled out as restorative and helpful.
It’s also worth noting here that from the context that cannabis is
mentioned, its unclear if the ancients valued it as a psychotropic, or
as the source of hemp fibres.

As for bhang and Shiva, I can find no scriptural basis for the popular
story that Shiva creates the cannabis plant, only a bunch of hearsay and
“folk” stories. As for consuming cannabis and listening to mantras, the
Shiva mahapurana specifically prohibits anybody consuming intoxicating
drinks (along with onions, garlic, and asafoetida, among others) from
hearing the text. I can find no mention of cannabis or its various forms
in the Shiva mahapurana. The closest explanation I can think of is the
hataki river, produced from the bodies of Shiva and Parvati. The heat
dries this to produce a kind of gold called hataka, which the
inhabitants make into gold ornaments. There is also mention of an
intoxicating drink (presumably from cannabis) called hataka, used to
seduce and delude men. There is no mention of hataka the drink as
anything to do with shiva. I suspect the two different uses of the word
hataka got confused over time, to the point that Shiva’s body produces
cannabis, instead of gold.

However,by the time of early modern India(Aurangzeb etc era),cannabis
had been associated with shiva by various ascetic orders. An example can
be found in the [Suraj Prakash
Granth.](https://www.manglacharan.com/home/out-of-all-drugs-cannabis-is-the-best-guru-gobind-singh)

What caused this change(almost complete abscence in earlier sources) to
revered as a meditational aid used by Shiva Himself?

