+++
title = "Hail Hydra-Slayer: On The Mythic Combat Of Herakles And Athena – Indra And Vak Saraswati, Against The Demon-Dragon Of Thexa0Water"
date = "July 31, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/cancer.jpg?w=652)

Herakles against the Hydra, Indra against Vritra – these are surely some
of the best-known mythic combats in each of the Greek/Classical and
Vedic/Hindu legendariums. Similarities immediately begin to suggest
themselves – clearly, each is a fight of the Thunderer/Striker against a
Demon-Dragon that is to be found ‘midst waters. However, there is
another, less frequently remarked upon coterminity. One that is rendered
all the more striking precisely because of its unexpectedness. And which
helps to more strongly demonstrate the fundamental kinship of the
Indo-European faith.

I am speaking, of course, about the *help* which both Herakles and Indra
had in Their respective dragon-slaying ventures. And no, I do not mean
Iolaus.

You see, in both cases, the essential ingredient of the
Striker/Thunderer’s Victory – is the aid and availment provided by a
certain Goddess. Hailed amidst the Greeks as Athena, known to the Vedic
religion as Vak and Saraswati. Without Her Intervention, the combats in
question may have turned out rather differently. And while it is true to
state that Athena’s direct and vital involvement in the myth is not
universally attested amidst the Greek canon – nor, for that matter, Vak
/ Saraswati’s involvement found overtly stated in *all* the RigVedic
accounts of Indra against Vritra – the fact that these two cultures
accord about the presence of the Goddess in the myth, and that Athena is
very much there in the oldest Greek version of the tale available to us
(that contained in Hesiod’s Theogony), would appear to suggest it
unlikely that it was a spontaneous case of ‘convergent evolution’ in two
cultures thousands of miles and a thousand years apart. Rather, I would
infer from this that it is a *shared tradition* – one which has its
ultimate origins back in the Proto-Indo-European mythology of the
Urheimat (potentially as one variety of the myth of the
Thunderer/Striker vs the Demon-Dragon, amidst others that may have been
in circulation even then). Or, at least, at the point wherein the Greeks
diverged from Indo-Iranian if you want to go down *that* alternate
hypothetical lineage of ethnogenesis.

This would accord rather well with the concordance of certain *other*
elements of the Greek scripture concerning Athena which find almost 1:1
parallel with RigVedic / Brahmana scriptural materials, as I have
already demonstrated in “MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War
\[Part 3\] – The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu”.

So, let us (briefly) compare what the two canons have to say upon the
matter.

Hesiod, writing in or about the 700s B.C. put it thus: “… thirdly
\[Echidna\] bore the grim Hydra of Lerna which Hera the goddess with
white arms fostered to gratify her implacable hostility to the might of
Herakles. But Herakles the son of Zeus and the son of Amphitryon killed
this monster with his pitiless sword, aided by warlike Iolaos and
instructed by Athena, the goddess of plunder.” (N.O. Brown translation;
others choose to phrase it as the Hydra dying at Herakles’ hand “by the
design of” or “through the plans of” Athena – which renders us with the
intriguing potentiality that rather than simply ‘instructing’ Herakles,
Athena may have placed Herakles up against the Hydra as a deliberate
stratagem to ensure the beast’s downfall) As I say, this is pretty much
the oldest directly available Greek source upon the matter, and is also
corroborated by artistic depictions found to date from the similar
period as well as later.

Other Greek (and later, Roman) sources across the next thousand years or
so are surprisingly sparse with the actual details of the encounter, and
go backward and forward about particular elements in a manner which
makes it hard to pin down definitive facts (for instance – whether the
Hydra is taken out of action by having its central head incapacitated,
whether it’s fire or its own burning blood which seals its fate, whether
Herakles makes use of His bow and arrows against the beast beforehand,
etc.); and whether they choose to mention Athena’s specific presence and
involvement there.

It seems evident that some of these writers and artisans were making
direct transpositions from living mytho-religious traditions, now
preserved for posterity – whereas others, as with some of the Classical
playwrights and literary authors,(including Plato), were utilizing these
traditions as more of a starting-point and a spring-bard in order to
showcase their own conceits. The combination of all of this making it
not hard to see how the Classical and later Modern-Pop-Cultural
impression of the combat wound up somewhat ‘jumbled’ in some particulars
as compared to the Vedic tradition’s preserved account from perhaps a
thousand years earlier.

The precise form of Athena’s assistance to Herakles is left almost
intentionally vague in most of these renditions, however given the
prominence of Fire as Problem-Solving-Tool presented in various of the
more enduringly popular accounts, it is unsurprising that some have
ascribed the spark for the concept to Her. Valerius Flaccus, for
instance, in his ‘Argonautica’, written seven centuries or more
following Hesiod, describes it thus: “The Tirynthian \[Herakles\]
wearied in fight against the Hydra’s dreadful hosts turned to the fires
of Pallas” (Mozley translation). Pallas, of course, being the well-known
epithet of Athena; and the Fires of Pallas assumedly referring to the
Fire that which Herakles was instructed to make use of against his
mortal foe, by Her.

If it were the ‘Provision of Insight’ which Athena’s aid to the Hero
took here, then this would indeed conceptually fit rather well with
various other instances and occurrences from the Classical milieu. Most
prominently, perhaps, Her impartment of a particular quality of ‘Menos’
to Diomedes immediately before the latter is empowered to be able to
fight *and win* against a succession of Greek Gods Who have taken to the
field of war afore Troy. Interestingly, if memory serves, in the cases
of both Diomedes and Achilles, Athena’s assistance is effectively
represented in poetic terms as ‘flame’, ‘fire’ about their brows. \[For
more detail upon this manifestation, please see my earlier
‘MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] – The Mind,
The Mania, The Manyu’\]

It would not, perhaps, be hard to see how over a thousand years or more,
the ‘received understanding’ of the myth might shift from Athena
providing empowerment, inspiration and insight to Herakles, accompanied
by a visually apparent ‘flame’, therefore enabling Him to slay the
dragon … through to Athena providing the inspiration to *use* flame to
enable the dragon to be slain.

There are also suggestions in various modern writeups that the manner of
Athena’s assistance to Herakles took the form of a (golden) sword, the
only weapon capable of truly killing the beast’s otherwise immortal
central head. However, I have as yet been unable to track down any
direct and primary-text attestation for this; and instead suspect it may
be something of a conflation between the boon-bestowing of various Gods
to Herakles at the outset of His Labours as mentioned in
Pseudo-Apollodorus’ Bibliotheca … and the bit immediately preceding that
in the Bibliotheca in which Athena *does* provide Herakles with weapons
in order to fight Erginus and the Minyans at Thebes.

But let us move over (and backwards in time) to the Vedic accounts of
relevancy here. These are contained in several RigVedic Hymnals and
their associated Brahmana commentary layer; and it is necessary to place
several of these alongside one another in order to get a more full
picture of proceedings than afforded by any of these sources alone. This
does not make it an act of artificial ‘conflation’ to bring these
elements together, however – only an acknowledgement that the short
portions of the relevant mythic recounting in each Hymnal are the result
of the Vedic Rsis \[Seers\] in question prioritizing what portion of the
tale was most important for the devotional purpose contained within each
at the time.

The main such Hymnal in question, being RV VIII 100 \[inexplicably
numbered RV VIII 89 in some Griffith versions\] – which is dedicated to
both Indra and Vak, and which contains a synopsis of various of the
assistances rendered to Indra afore His mighty combat against the
demon-dragon despoiler, Vritra. These include elements well-known and
talked about elsewhere, such as Shyena the Falcon (Agni) bringing the
Soma from the Heavens for Indra’s Empowerment (and I note that this
would therefore, too, connote ‘Fire’ as symbolic of both Divine
Inspiration, and the vitally important facilitator for Dragon-Slaying,
as we briefly examined earlier in reference to Herakles); but also – and
rather more interestingly, for our purposes – the strong element played
by the Goddess in Indra’s Victory ‘gainst Vritra.

A debt which Indra acknowledges in the course of the relevant Hymnal,
wherein He not only insists that Vak be given the honour-share of the
Soma sacrificial rite in recognition for Her contribution, but also
enthusiastically voices His acceptance of Her offer of assistance: “Thou
on my right shalt be my friend and comrade: then shall we two smite dead
full many a foeman.” \[RV VIII 100 2\]

The precise nature of Vak’s role in this triumph as seen through RV VIII
100 is a complex matter, and for reasons of space I have chosen to leave
its in-depth explication for another article more directly upon the
subject to be published in the near future. But suffice to say, there
are several strongly coterminous ways in which Vak contributes to the
conflict, contingent upon which account of the combat one is
prioritizing; with a general theme that it is pious co-operation *with*
Vak which makes available the essential tools to take down the Dragon.
These range in scope from Vak’s role in the proper sacrificial conduct
(and honouring therein of Her) which ‘unlocks’ the Soma for Indra’s use
\[for more details upon Vak/Saraswati’s role in this, please consult my
earlier ‘Soma Kvasir – The Eddic-Vedic Myth Of The Meath of Poetry’\],
through to Saraswati’s role in preparing Indra’s uniquely attuned weapon
for the especial vulnerability of the foe \[c.f the Shatapatha Brahmana
commentary upon the slaying of Namuci; which I shall cover at greater
length in the upcoming article\] or otherwise making it available from
the conceptual space of The Waters (with what that represents in terms
of congealed Cosmic Law actively weaponized for demon-slaying), Vak *as*
the Weapon when the conjuring of the Vajra is done via Sacred Speech as
was done by Brihaspati (alongside Indra in some versions, wherein the
Vajra may take the form of a Meteor, a mountain being dropped from the
Heavens in an act of orbital bombardment .. just to be sure; and which
interestingly accords with some of the Greek accounts having the death
of the Hydra only possible once Herakles does likewise and drops a
seriously large rock upon the beast’s ‘immortal’ head); as well as last,
but most certainly not least, the rather dramatic epithet of Saraswati
in RV VI 61 7 , ‘Vrtraghni’ – ‘Slayer of Vritra’. This theonym and its
closely related forms \[e.g. ‘Vritrahan’ etc.\] is also more frequently
encountered as an epithet of Lord Indra, although is also occasionally
found in reference to Agni \[for instance, RV III 16 1\]. ‘Fire’ as the
Dragon-Slayer would most certainly accord rather well with the design of
Athena for the Victory of Herakles – especially when it is ‘Agni’ in the
sense of more than mere ‘mortal’ and mundane ignition .. but rather, as
Pious Flame – the flame of Prayer, Sacrifice, and the direct conduit to
the Divine. Perhaps this also resonates with the ‘terrifying Golden
Path’ associated with Saraswati’s appearance as Vritraghni in RV VI 61.

‘Vritraghni’ / ‘Vritrahan’ can also be translated in other ways, of
course, as I explored in ‘Saraswati Puja – The Power Of The Smiter Of
Foes’; and in other contexts, ‘Smiter of Resistance’, has been offered,
due to ‘Vritra’ carrying a meaning of an ‘envelopment’ or an
‘encirclement’. These are, in effect, non-exclusive interpretations – as
Vritra’s role within the myth is precisely to be an ‘envelopment’ and
‘ensnarement’ of The Waters and other such wealth, while offering
resistance against his Divine Reclaimer Adversaries; a resistance which,
given Vritra’s serpentine nature, would quite plausibly entail just such
an enveloping constriction. The figure with the power to break through
his coils in order to liberate that which he had illegitimately seized,
therefore, would be Vritrahan at least thrice over. ‘Foe-Slayer’,
meanwhile, is supposed to suggest something more specific than the
general notion of a Deity carrying out the killing of their enemies.
After all, it would hardly be a noteworthy sobriquet if so. Instead, the
idea is to connote that the Deity in question is capable of vanquishing
*that tier* of foe – those equal to Vritra, a figure who was powerful
enough to give even much of the assembled Pantheon pause and require
quite especial preparatory measures before the chosen champion (in this
case, Lord Indra) is capable to take to the field with victory assured.

Although to bring the matter back to Vak / Saraswati in the context of
this specific myth – there seems no reason to de-emphasize the rather
literal and directly straightforward meaning of the epithet. It seems
quite clear that ‘but for’ Vak’s involvement in proceedings, Vritra
would not have been slain. The only serious question is just how ‘hands
on’ Vak’s contribution may have been. Whether it is, as we see in the
much later Varaha Purana when Devi kills the reincarnated Vritra (again)
personally (or, for that matter, the literal litany of Devi
demon-slaying which forms the elegant core of the Shakta scriptural
canon). Or whether it is closer to what we see in the DeviSukta \[RV X
125 6\] wherein Devi’s dual contribution is to empower the prime Divine
Weapon and its Wielder to actually work for its designated and
over-powering purpose – while planning and maneuvering in the manner of
a General, a ‘chessmaster’ or strategic planner, to ensure the combat
happens in the manner that ensures victory. And even if it is the latter
(and leaving aside the metaphysical aspect of Vak as *the* Weapon in
some understandings), this would still render Vak as much ‘Slayer of
Vritra’ as Napoleon was ‘Conqueror of Europe’. A General does not
necessarily personally take up arms in the field in order to be
responsible for a victory – indeed, the men and materials under their
command *are* the weapons with which they fight. A pattern which may
also bear itself out when we consider Athena’s utilization of Diomedes,
suitably divinely empowered and guided, to fight off various other
Olympians acting in service of the Trojans, Whom She was barred from
personally engaging. In one of those combats in particular, that of
Diomedes against the War God Ares, it may be Diomedes who *throws* the
spear at Ares – but it is (the invisible thanks to Hades’ helm) Athena
Who grabs and deflects Ares’ spear away from Her Favoured so that
Diomedes lives to take his shot … and it is Athena Herself Who “drove
the spear into the pit of Ares’ stomach” once he had launched it.
Perhaps a similar pattern helps to explicate the ‘Vritrahan / Vrtraghni’
theonym of Saraswati that She shares with Indra.

In any case, I have gone far enough for the moment with expository
details from this tradition and that, and should now move through to
this piece’s comparative conclusion.

What we can state for certain, is that both the Herakles contra Hydra
and Indra against Vritra myths are significantly coterminous. In each
case, the relevant Striker/Thunderer figure manages to successfully slay
a multi-headed and supernaturally protected demon-dragon figure with
watery associations. In each case, as well, there is some special and
specific positioning of the demon-dragon within the path of the heroic
figure – as He is on a redemptive arc to their journey which runs
headlong into the hand of an angry deity. For Herakles, this is the
Twelve Labours carried out in penitence for His slaying of His sons,
with the wrathful deity being Hera Who has personally nurtured the Hydra
for deployment against Herakles. For Indra, in various tellings He is
regarded as having attained the ire of Tvastr by killing Tvastr’s son
Trisiras (and, in the process, acquiring the moral iniquity of a
Brahmin-killer), thus leading to Tvastr’s sending of Vritra against Him
as revenge. And in each case, while the various tellings in circulation
may differ upon the various particulars of the matter, there is a
strongly recurrent theme of the Dragon-Slaying in question requiring
unusual means to be seen through to completion, facilitated through the
actions and potentially the direct interventions of a certain
Wisdom-Warrior Goddess. This may entail the provision of guidance or
insight to the Striker/Thunderer about *how* to fight the Dragon and
overcome its wardings, and it may involve the direct provision (or
guidance-of-munitions) of the weaponry via which the Dragon is
ultimately slain.

There are, to be sure, also significant differences – yet the curious
thing is that in many of these cases there is far greater divergence
*within the Classical or the Vedic canons themselves* over these details
than between the ‘broad outlines’ of the myth in question housed in
either corpus (for example, the number of accounts in each wherein
mention is not made of the presence of the Goddess, or some other Divine
Figure is present and involved). As previously explicated, an array of
this is almost certainly intentional. There are easily dozens of Vedic
Hymnals which deal in whole or in part with the fight of Indra against
Vritra; many of which have chosen to highlight, de-emphasize, or even
outright overlook certain details to the occurrence due to what’s most
relevant for their particular ritualine purpose. It would seem fairly
plausible that this concept would not be a Vedic innovation – but
rather, something which the (Post-)Proto-Indo-European forebears of both
Greek and Vedic civilization would also have made use of. Different
perspectives upon the same mythic occurrence, for different purposes,
and which therefore have slightly (or more than slightly) differing
details encapsulated therein.

Meanwhile, the Classical texts which touch upon the myth in question
span almost a millennium in their dates of composition (which also means
that they are between one and two millennia younger than their Vedic
counterparts – hence more time to diverge both internally and from the
foundational mythic kernel), and feature contributions (or co-options)
from quite the diverse spectrum of writers. Various forms of Greek,
Romans, playwrights looking to entertain, Historians looking to present
‘plausible’ sounding (to the ears of the day) vignettes of the past,
political propagandists, even potters, painters and sculptors – and the
occasional genuinely religious man – have all made their multifarious
manners of marks upon the Classical recollection of the myth of Herakles
against the Hydra over that time.

All of this, together, means that while the *precise* formulation of the
original Proto-Indo-European myth in question is almost certainly
irrecoverable … we can nevertheless state with great confidence that
what we have identified fits comfortably and consistently within the
general outlines of its bounds.

And marvel once again at the underlying unity of surface-seemingly
somewhat disparate Indo-European mythoreligious belief.

There is but one thing left to say, most apt for both a Friday (and also
for a Thursday):

वर्त्रघ्नी वष्टि सुष्टुतिम  
Vrtraghni Vasti Sustutim  
‘Foe-Slayer Claims Our Eulogy’
