+++
title = "The Radiant Queen of the Heavens – On Scythian Tabiti As Template For The Greater Indo-European Solar Goddess  [Part 2 – The Suns of the Sky Father and the Hiddenxa0Suns]"
date = "July 2, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/sol-invictus-cropped.png?w=659)

However, before we attempt to address Tabiti directly – as well as the
Queen of the Heavens Indo-European deific complex for which She stands –
it is first necessary to spend a bit more time sketching out the broader
Solar Goddess typology of the Indo-Europeans. This is because, as it
happens, there are several and varying ‘layers’ of Solar Goddess
occurring within the realms of the Indo-European mythology ; with the
ensuing garbled recollection of these forming the basis for much of the
subsequent complexity and indeed obscuration of the Solar Goddesses all
up – most especially in and of Their true, fundamental nature.

Perhaps ironically, given my opening remarks in the previous piece which
sought to lay at the feet of the Greeks and Romans the ‘blame’ for the
Modern mythperceptionof the Solar and Lunar deities as being male and
female respectively … the best immediate guide for our purposes to the
true nature of these things is nevertheless to be found amidst their
mythologies.

Now, before going further – it is necessary to make a note of my
earlier-stated position that a lot of what goes on in Greek mythology as
applies the Sky Father deific, is the result of the Greeks mangling
their own mythology. Partially with a view to ‘syncronizing’ it with the
incoming cultural influences of the Mesopotamians and others; but also,
perhaps, merely for other and more endogenous reasons of
mythopoliticalconvenience amidst themselves. The situation of the Sky
Father, therefore, is one of what I have taken to calling a Three-Three
split. Three generations refracted out from Him longitudinally –
Ouranos, Kronos, Zeus; but also three sibling-aspects refracted out
laterally – Zeus, Hades, Poseidon. I shall not make the case for this
contention once more in this piece for reasons of space, although
various elements of it can be found in my previous works such as
“Sky-Earth-Thunder – A Brief Comparative Model of the Divine Family” and
“Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On The
Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune Ouranos” – to name but two.

The reason that I mention this, is because I believe that a close
examination of various \*other\* relationships attested in Greco-Roman
mythology, evinces fundamentally the same pattern. That complex and
interwoven linkages between this or that suspiciously familiar seeming
‘Sky Father’-esque figure and maternal – yet \*Solar\* – Goddess or
Titaness … are because these are largely the fragmented recollections of
fundamentally the same pairing. As can be attested via the usual
sources: the theonymics and their etymology, as well as the mythological
associations of each.

We shall commence, as it were, at the end – at the point wherein these
mythogenetics had most resoundingly made ‘landfall’ within the mortal
realm. That of Zeus and Leda – the resulting progeny of which included
not only the famedDioscuri, but also Helen (yes, \*that\* Helen – ‘of
Troy’), Phoebe \[‘Shining’\], and several others besides. Conventional
Classical mythology insists that one of the Horse-Twins was of mortal
fathering and therefore not (as) divine; however the lack of such
comparative attestation in the other Indo-European mythologies detailing
the Dioscuri’sequivalent expressions would appear to suggest that this
was a Classical interpolation rather than endogenous to the ‘authentic’
and vastly more archaic source material. Presumably as a way of
‘splicing’ them and their accompanying sisters to the bloodline of a
particular Spartan king – Tyndareus. But I digress.

This matters. Because Helen (of Troy) is, funnily enough, a reasonably
well-attested Goddess in Her own rite. There was a prominent temple at
Sparta to Her, apparently as a Solar Goddess – which fits, after all,
with the etymology of the name ‘Helen’ (derived from the same ultimate
roots as ‘Selene’ and/or another term for ‘Torch’) – and without looking
too hard at all, we find an escalating pile-up of not-so-subtle hinting
as to Her divine nature strewn throughout the Iliad and other such
ancient Classical sources. The Spartan temple to Helen was, reportedly,
also consecrated to Menelaus at some later date – although there is room
for quite some conjecture as to just why that might have occurred. My
personal thought at this time is that it likely represents a) Menelaus
as a \*lunar\* deific – replicating the Marriage of Surya (Goddess) and
Soma (Lunar God) as found in the Surya’s Bridal Hymnal of the RigVeda
\[RV X 85\]; and/or b) the effective role of Menelaus & Helen as
pseudo-progenitors of the Spartan people (in much the same manner that
Romulus & Remus were not \*literally\* the progenitors of the Romans,
but nevertheless were incredibly important ‘foundational’ mythic figures
for them) – which would interestingly re-caste “Menelaus” as the “Spirit
of the People” \[‘Menos’+ ‘Laus’; for more expansive detail upon the
concept of “Menos” and “Manyu” in Indo-European thought, and with a
particular emphasis upon the Sky Father deific … please consult my
previous work – “MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part
3\] – The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu”\]. But again, I digress.

The more intriguing point to be raised, perhaps, as applies Helen and
Leda – is to do with Leda herself. As this is a name whose meaning has
been ‘hidden’. And I mean that both literally and figuratively – as the
name may potentially derive from similar sounding Ancient Greek terms
for a ‘hidden one’, an ‘obscured one’ – Leto. Although also potentially
from the Lycian ‘Iada’, meaning “Wife”. The notion of the mother of
certain of Zeus’ more prominent offspring being His ‘Wife’ is, perhaps,
a rather novel one – although it is not without some precedencyin other
various accountings ‘stablished via the comparative view (e.g. the
Etruscan Hercules – Hercle , and the Etruscan Minerva – Menrva, both
being regarded as children of Tinia (Jupiter) and Uni (Juno); or, as we
shall see, potentially also various of the Hindu view).

However, the main reason that I raise the name of “Leda” is due to the
conceptual overlap with both i) Classical “Leto”, and ii) Vedic
“Chhaya”. In the case of the former, we have what is clearly a Mother
Goddess figure – bearing not only the ‘national gods’ of the Lycians
\[by which is apparently meant Apollo & Artemis\], but also facilitating
the foundation of the Lycian nation via Wolves. Divine parentage and
Wolves as the founding elements of an Indo-European nation – now where
have we heard THAT before! Another origin myth for the Lycians records
their derivation from the Telchines – ascribed various parentages (that
are ultimately somewhat consistent if one knows how to look – squaring
Poseidon, Pontus, etc. with the Sky Father as Sea deific, for instance),
but of interest here due to their descent from Nemesis … also identified
in some Classical sources as the Mother of Helen via Zeus. The major
point to be extracted here – is the parentage of Apollo and Artemis …
as, in addition to the obvious Solar connotations of Apollo, there are
some striking further parallels that we shall subsequently explore.

In the case of the latter – Chhaya – the theonym means ‘Shadow’ or
‘Shade’, and refers to the ‘dark twin’ image of the more customarily
recognized Wife of Surya (God, this time, rather than the similarly
named Goddess), Saranyu \[‘Speedy’/’Swift Flowing’/’Agile’\]. It is not
hard to see how ‘Shade’ and ‘Hidden One’ might be figuratively
co-related; especially given the mythology around Chhaya has Her role
and result as providing an obscuration of sorts to Saranyu, Who can no
longer bear to stand the brightness of Her Husband. (There may also be
some mythic resonancy and yet-further archaic recollection of a shared
Indo-European narrative element here – as just as Surya eventually
catches up with Saranyu by approaching in animal form (They are both
horses), so too do we find Zeus making an approach to Leda and/or
Nemesis in animal shape. In the case of the Nemesis versions of the
myth, there may be various animal transformations by both parties –
although with either geese or swans being the form finally settled upon
by both Zeus and Nemesis for when the catching up occurs. Perhaps there
is some figurative resonance between the symbolism of Swans and that of
Horses – another piece for another time)

The progeny of Chhaya (and, for that matter, Saranyu) are further
interesting for our purposes – as we find these attested as Shaani,
Bhadra \[occasionally identified as Vishti\], and Tapati. Shaani,
perhaps surprisingly for one customarily regarded as ‘The Dark One’, has
some various points of coterminity with Apollo \[‘The Destroyer’, in a
certain sense; the Crow-Associated Driver-Out-Of-Evil via Shooting\],
however we shall leave an in-depth examination of these for some other
time. Bhadra, meanwhile, makes for a fine comparative with Artemis – a
fierce and occasionally rather unapproachable Goddess of the Hunt
(and/or a rather \*more\* approachable form of the Destroyer Goddess
Herself – the mythology and the linguistics are … complex, to say the
least; a pattern which repeats itself when we look at Diana, and not
simply in the vexed matters of parentage or consortry) \[the Underworld
associations of Vishti, meanwhile, are further resonant with the Diana
deific … but again, we’ll come to that in diue Time\]; while Tapati, She
of the Radiant, Solar, beauty beyond all others … should instantly
recall the mind, in some ways, to Helen Whom we had met earlier.

Of additional interest is the Manu ascribed to Chhaya’s motherhood – as
this provides both an accordance and a conceptual overlap with Her
somewhat-Sister, Sharanyu, wherein Surya fathers \*the\* Manu with the
latter \[along with, of course, Yama & Yami – the former of Whom has
some clear conceptual coterminity with ShaaniDev, and both with Shiva –
as I discussed in my previous work, “Saturday – Shani Dev’s Day –
Saturn’s Day”\]. I believe that in much the same manner as we have
encountered elsewhere in this piece, this is evidence that Chhaya and
Saranyu are not actually different Goddesses – but rather, are twin
Aspects of the same Solar (and, evidently, Shade) Mother Deific. Further
evidence for this assertion is provided by the markedly differing
Puranic-era accountings for the parentage of Revanta \[a lesser-known
Horse and Huntsman God, perhaps conceived as a triplet with the two
Asvins\] – some ascribing the Motherhood of Him to Saranyu, others to
Chhaya, and others again to Ratri \[‘Night’\].

In any case, it is the Horse-Twins that help to bind the whole bracket
of these aforementioned paragraphs together – as we find in the Vedic
accounting, the Asvins mothered by Saranyu to Surya; and in the Greek
accounting, by Leda to Zeus \[indeed, this is literally what Dioskuri
means – Boys/Sons of Dyaus – which directly accords with the “Divo
Napata” means of address for the Asvins in, for example, RV 1 117 12 &
RV 1 184 1\]. It should also be noted that the fatherhood of the Asvins
is \*also\* attested to Dyaus, to Rudra – and as I intend to expound
upon more at some later date, this helps to evince that Rudra is Dyaus
Pitar, and that Surya, Vivasvat, can \*also\* be utilized quite directly
to refer to Him rather than only to the Sun that is the Son of the Sky
Father. But more upon that last element later. It should also-also be
noted that there is some confusion and ambiguity as to whether Ushas
\[‘Dawn’ – and fairly directly cognate to Ancient Greek ‘Eos’, Roman
‘Aurora’ etc.\] is supposed to be the Sister, the Mother, or perhaps
even the Bride of the Asvins. I would hazard the speculation that it is
plausible for ‘Ushas’ to be doing quite a lot of work as a
theonymic-title, and therefore referring to \*several\* Goddesses \[in
much the same way, as we may see, that ‘Phoebe’ does\] in a somewhat
descriptive sense that may also encapsulate Her/Their functional role;
and with the familial etc. relationships attested, in some cases perhaps
not being entirely literally meant.
