+++
title = "The Radiant Queen of the Heavens – On Scythian Tabiti As Template For The Greater Indo-European Solar Goddess [Part 4 – The Moon, Mirrored, And Herxa0Daughters]"
date = "July 6, 2020"

+++
![](https://scontent.fakl1-3.fna.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/107102086_649666722312322_1636673716300309821_n.jpg?_nc_cat=105&_nc_sid=8024bb&_nc_ohc=Z4FsSEscdXEAX8xaBOl&_nc_ht=scontent.fakl1-3.fna&oh=ab7135fdec422e1758d129981b468c0f&oe=5F27AACF)

A further support for the ‘inversion’ possibility is granted via looking
at the actual mythology of the main Greek figure – Selene. As
aforementioned, Selene is usually identified as one of the Daughters of
Hyperion and Theia, although with two other possibilities which
occasionally come up – the paternity of Pallas (a name that does quite a
lot of work for the Greeks – potentially meaning the
Spear-Wielder/Shaker, or the Cloaked/Covered One, contingent upon which
etymology we’re going with), or of Helios. In either case, it would not
be hard to connect these to our previously ‘stablished Indo-European
typology of the Solar Goddess in question being a Daughter of the Sky
Father; as the Sky Father *also* having Radiant Solar characteristics in
the Daylight Sky, and frequently also being a Spear wielder and for that
matter, cloaked (or even concealed), is well attested.

She has three romantic pairings spoken of within the realms of the
Classic canon, one to Endymion, one to Helios, and one to Zeus. The
former of which features Selene sojurning at night to be with Her
sleeping beloved. And which already begins to suggest there’s something
else going on here than a Lunar deity – after all, we should ordinarily
expect a Lunar deific to be *in the sky* at night, rather than otherwise
engaged with a mortal elsewhere. The Sun, meanwhile, we would *not* be
anticipating to be in the Heavens at such an hour. Having, you might
perhaps suggest, gone to bed.

The middle pairing is interesting, for a number of reasons. First and
foremost, because the idea of the Sun marrying the Moon is a remarkably
common one within the Indo-European mythologies – and more usually goes
*the other way* in the archaic renditions of the typology. We have
already briefly mentioned the RigVedic accounting of the Marriage of
Suryaa to Soma , and this is joined by another prominent Baltic legend
that is almost certainly similarly derived. I would also add to this
scale the marriage of Helen to Menelaus, as previously indicated, but I
appreciate that this is an as-yet speculative identification,
particularly around the potential Lunar-Kingship deific associations of
Menelaus. So, the Greeks managing to preserve a consortship of Sun and
Moon … yet presenting this as the Solar Husband and Lunar Wife \[but,
importantly, in other Greek expressions of the typology that we have
aforementioned, retaining the consistent other features of the
*specific* marriage in question such as particular progeny\], helps to
firm up the likely explanation for what has happened here of a
‘flipping’ of the celestial associations for each partner, rather than
the invention or incorporation wholesale of another deity.

A further element to the pairing of Helios & Selene that is worth
mentioning, are Their children – the Horae. These are more usually
ascribed to the parentage of Zeus & Themis \[‘Divine Law’, ‘Custom’,
‘That Which Is Placed’\]; and variously represent a number of concepts
pertaining to regulation (whether of time or custom): such as the
Seasons, the custodians/presiders of Order in the world and the affairs
of men, and the material abundance (including of agricultural
production) resultant from same. It is not hard to see how these
Daughters would also have quite the Solar connotations – as in addition
to the Solar-Order and Solar-Rulership axials, the linkage between the
Sun and the Seasons via which time and the year is regulated, and the
Sun and the flourishing of plants and life, is manifestly obvious.
However, it is important to note that the main account for Helios –
Selene being the justly proud parents of such Daughters of the Sun, is a
relatively late one of the latter 300s AD; which, along with the more
usual ascribing of the parentage of the Horae to the similarly (if
somewhat subtly) solar-aligned Themis and Zeus, means that it is
understandable to perhaps be a bit more circumspect as to its
reliability. Even though its author, one Quintus Smyrnaeus, was a
deliberately close study of Homer in the course of his own work and
output.

The third pairing we have Greek support for, however, is much more
ancient – and predates the above by perhaps a thousand years or more.
This being the linkage of Zeus and Selene, resulting in the progeny of
Pandia (as attested in the relevant Homeric Hymn) and, in a roughly
contemporary work of Alcman, another daughter by the name of Ersa.

Now, “Pandia” is especially intriguing, for our purposes, due to the
complex network of associations with the Deific of the Daylight Sky
which are either directly in evidence, or may be reasonably inferred.
The term is usually translated as “All-Light”, however I do not think
that that quite does it justice. The “Dia” is a rather more specific
connotation – resonating more with Sanskrit ‘Dyu’ than ‘Deva’, I would
suspect : that is to say, the term for the bright, fiery-energized
daytime sky and its Heavens … rather than the more broadly connotated
“Deus”/”Deva”/”-Tyr” of “Divinity” (although this is a ‘cousin’ term, as
we know, effectively meaning “Shining One”, that does implicitly have
Solar connotations in its Celestial connexion). This is supported
further via the tentative identification of the Athenian (or, perhaps,
Pan-Greek) ‘Pandia’ festival with Zeus by a number of sources both
ancient and modern. It is possible to challenge the identification and
connotation, however – and some have alternatively suggested that the
notion of an “All-Bright” child of the Moon Goddess ought logically to
connote a Full Moon, thus rendering the Pandia a Full Moon observance.
But there is little evidence to support such a contention – and in any
case, it would seem rather curious were a term that has fairly
consistently come to refer to the Brightly Radiant Heavenly Father
\[‘Zeus’ – ‘Dios’ in adjectival form, and ‘Dia’ in the feminine
construction thereof\] and which takes its derivation (and its
cross-linguistic resonancy) from one(s) to refer to the Daylight Sky …
to speak about an event of the Night-Time. A Full Moon may be Bright,
but it is rarely sufficient to be ‘All-Bright’, ‘Pervasively
Brightening’ in the manner of the Sun of the Day.

What this means, in effect, is that the pairing of Zeus & Selene to
produce the Radiant Daughter that is Pandia – more overtly mirrors (by
which I mean, it has various things *exactly* the wrong way around)
various of the previously encountered mythic occurrences of a Solar
Marriage. Either the prominently attested ‘Vedic’ (but also Baltic)
style of incidence wherein the Female Solar deific marries a Lunar male
divinity (and it should be remembered that there is a prominent and
recurrent linking of the Lunar deifics and the Sky Father – the most
prominent of which, of course, being Lord Shiva Himself, variously
hailed as Chandrasekhara \[‘Moon-Crowned’\], Chandra \[‘Moon’\], ‘Soma’
\[the actual Moon deific married by Suryaa in the relevant RigVedic
hymnal upon the subject\], and other such terms besides; and/or the
notion of the Moon or Lunar figure as an arriving Prince/King in pursuit
of a suitable wife – consider Lord Rama, for instance, or the
aforementioned Menelaus) … or alternatively, the typology we have
earlier explored around Hyperion and Theia – wherein the Sky Father,
likely in Solar aspect, marries and sires with a Solar Goddess at least
one inheritor of the Mother’s Radiant Beauty (an attribute that,
entirely uncoincidentally, the Daughter Pandia is prominently ascribed
in the relevant Homeric hymnal; and which we also find in occurrence for
Helen, Tapati.).
