+++
title = "Shravan Maas – The Shaivite Holy Month, The Samudra Manthan, and The Self-Sacrifice of Yama andxa0Odin"
date = "July 20, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/13709867_10157199917130574_1104202044869570276_n.jpg?w=497)

Today marks the start of the Shaivite holy month of Shravan Maas \[at
least, according to my Mandir’s Gujarati derived calendar. In various
other parts of India it’s already been going for two weeks\].

I say ‘Shaivite holy month’, but it is not only Shiva-oriented
observances that take place during this time. Other prominent occasions
include Raksha Bandhan and Naga Panchami – and even an ongoing
Krishnaite devotion.

The salience of Lord Shiva during this time is due to the belief that
this is when He played His role at the Samudra Manthan \[‘Churning of
the Ocean of Milk’\] by sacrificing Himself in a way, to consume the
Halahala poison that had been unleashed in the pursuit of Amrit – and
which was threatening to extinguish all life that it came into contact
with.

Only Lord Shiva was able to withstand the dire hazard of the black
toxicant, and so moved to contain the Halahala by drinking it. This then
lodged in His Throat – potentially due to semi-strangulation by His Wife
to prevent it going any further, or simply being held there by other
means … permanently discolouring His throat a dark blue – what we would
term in Old Norse ‘bruise-black’; and thus explicating the Shaivite
theonym of ‘Neelakantha’ – ‘the Blue Throated’.

I personally believe that there are strong symbolic resonancies between
this portion of the myth and Odin’s self-sacrifice by hanging (not least
of which, the bruise-coloured markings presumably left upon the neck by
such a process) – with the Amrit likely being intriguingly correlate to
the Othrörir drunken by Odin following the conclusion to His ordeal.

This would further reaffirm the strong coterminity of Amrit
\[‘Immortality’ elixir\] and Soma \[the famed empowering brew which
finds its Nordic co-expression as Kvasir, the Meath of Poetry\] – as
Odrerir is better known as both the main vessel and the key quality
\[the impartment of ‘Furor’, Odin’s defining characteristic also –
indeed what He *is*, after a sort, just as Manyu is Rudra\] of the
Nordic divine drink in question.

I also believe that this occurrence finds at least symbolic resonancy in
the deliberate self-sacrifice of Brihaspat / Yama recorded in RV X 13 –
to quote, but briefly:

“4 He, for God’s sake, chose death to be His portion. He chose not, for
men’s good, a life eternal  
They sacrificed Bṛhaspati the Ṛṣi. Yama delivered up his own dear body.”

A God, in other words, Who Sacrifices Himself, Dies-But-Does-Not, and
thence re-ascends to the station of Lord of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead.

But the degree of coterminity of Shiva and Yama is somewhat
controversial, so I shall leave further explication upon that for some
other time (and we have already briefly looked at the relevant portion
of this RigVedic Hymnal in the course of “Part IV: Romulus And Remus
Reconstructed – The Sepulchral Legacy Of The Shadow-King \[Section
1\]”); I shall also leave for now unexplored the potential resonancy
with Nordic concepts of Eitr and Élivágar with what has gone on here.

For now, it is enough to state that we are Grateful to MahaKaal – the
*greater* blackness, the *greater* death than even the Halahala could
hope to endure – for interceding on our, on *all* of our collective
behalf, and removing the dire peril which weighed so heavily upon the
universe entire.

In such a manner, via the resonancy of the mythic recurrence, Devotees
also carry out pious worship during this time so as to invoke this
removal of travails in their own personal lives and communities as well.
Hence also, the well-known Shaivite theonyms as ‘The Remover’ of such
pains and difficulties.

We remind ourselves of the tremendous Sacrifice of the Great God, the
Living Death ; and we carry out sacrifices in turn so as to honour His
heroic example. To do our own veer-y small part to support and uphold
the life-giving Cosmic Order of the Universe under which we can
flourish.

There is a proverb that goes with all of this, as well.

It goes like this: “Amrit paane se pahle Vish peena padta hai” –

“Before one can get Amrit, one must drink poison.”

Jai MahaKaal !

ॐ नमः शिवाय
