+++
title = "On The World-Spear of the Sky Father – Trishula, Gungnir,xa0Pinaka"
date = "July 29, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/shiva-trishul.jpg?w=1000)

One of the most iconic identifying attributes of the Indo-European Sky
Father deific is His Spear. Whether Gungnir of Odin, the Trishula of
Mahadeva, or the javelin-like Thunderbolt of Zeus Pater/Jupiter
(interestingly frequently depicted as *three-pronged*), as soon as we
think of these deific expressions, the Weapon is never far from His
Hand. Indeed, ‘ShulaPani’ – Bearing the Spear in His Hand, is literally
a Shaivite theonym (‘GungnisVáfaðr’, meanwhile, we could perhaps
slightly figuratively translate as ‘Shakes-Spear’).

There are other forms which this Weapon may take, as well. Sometimes, it
is a Staff, particularly in the hands of the Wanderer (as in, for
example, the ‘Gand’ of ‘Gand-Alf’). On other occasions, we see it
manifested as something more exotic – like Hades’ Bident, or
Poseidon’sTrident, Dionysus’ Thyrsus, or even the Scythe of Kronos
(when it is not being an Adamantium Harpe, perhaps). The (oft-W(o)oden)
Sacrificial Post of the Indo-Europeans (an Irminsul, or Yupasthamba, for
example), is also relevant here. Continuing with the ‘Spear’
associations, it may be represented as a Lance or a pennant-affixed pole
borne by a rider. The Caduceus and/or Rod of Asclepius may form yet a
further example (as the ‘Wind Wanderer’ deific is strongly coterminous
with the Sky Father; and the Healing portfolio, likewise). Although
perhaps the best-known further form for this device in the Hindusphere
is one which is far less frequently thought of in its connection amidst
the Western Indo-Europeans: the Bow and Arrows, as wielded by
Shiva-Rudra.

Now, this may seem a bit of an over-extension of the concept – as, after
all, a staff or a spear is a single length of wood; and while a spear
can be thrown (and, in the case of Odin’s Spear, quite prominently is),
the form and function of shooting a bow and its arrows seem somehow
quite different to this. Except that this is a surprisingly misleading
skein of mythinterpretation. Consider what a Bow actually is – it, too,
is a single length of wood. Consider the manner and the mechanism in
which it exerts force – through the propelling of a sharp, piercing
length of wood through the air. And then consider one of the most
resonant of the traditional names for Shiva-Rudra’s Bow – Pinaka.
Derived from Proto-Indo-European ‘Pine’ (‘length of wood’, ‘staff’), it
means a Bow, a Staff, a Spear – and *especially*, quite pointedly, those
of Shiva. So, quite clearly, in the Vedic conceptual-syllabrythere was
not really much of an issue to be had with that same stave of ‘wood’
doing effective ‘double-duty’ as both Spear and Bow.

But what is this device, really? Why is it that the symbolism of a
simple length of wood is so powerful and so resonant as to survive for
thousands of years across seemingly almost the entire
Indo-European-isphere? (Albeit, it should be noted, with various of the
cosmological attributes that I am about to explicate, being found only
directly attested in the Hindu understanding, and then extrapolated out
by me therefrom to the non-Hindu examples of the Spear, in-line with the
otherwise strong concordance of these non-Hindu divine weapons with the
underlying typology in other areas; and in a manner which – to my mind,
at least – most cohesively establishes their thematic unity)  
  
Well, in order to answer that – we must go back to the Bow. More
specifically, Brihaspati’s Bow. Brihaspati, as should be well-known by
now for those who follow our work, we regard as another Aspect or Form
of Shiva – another Face of the Sky Father. His Weapon is quite
remarkable in that it is said that the bow-string for it is Rta Itself.
That is to say, Cosmic Order, made manifest as a pillar or a beam which
runs between the two points at either end of His Bow-stave. Why it is a
shaft, is because – much like Shiva-as-Lingodbhava – it is, in effect,
Brahman \[‘The Absolute’\] ‘intersecting’ with our reality. It is rather
like, if you were to imagine yourself a two-dimensional being on a
two-dimensional plane, encountering something three-dimensional which
intersected with your world, you should only be able to perceive it as a
line in front of you, its length fluctuating commensurate with whatever
width the part of the three-dimensional object in question intersecting
with your reality possessed. And now simply scale that analogy up to our
three spatial dimensions … and consider that the Rta , the Bow-String of
Brihaspati is an intersection from *beyond* dimensions … and you can see
why it may make sense to represent it as a line; particularly when the
Bow-stave itself can represent the curvature, the extent of the
Universe.

Hence my oft-quoted expression that the Long Arc of the Universe does
indeed bend toward Justice. For Justice is the Bow-String, and said
Long-Arch – is the ‘Arch’ in ‘Archer … A Bow! Wielded by the Great God,
Himself. The ‘Humkara’ twang of the bow-string being an in-universe
reverberation (or, I suppose, ’emanation’) of Rta that is therefore the
sonorous expression of Dharma Itself.

Yet how does a Bow-String relate to a Spear? Well, once again, the
Weapons of Lord Shiva hold the key.

Consider the Trishula. What is it? Literally translated, it would be
‘Three-Point’ or ‘Three-Spear\[head\]’. ‘Trident’, is the Western
equivalent (for that is most certainly the shape – although ‘Dent’,
obviously, means ‘Teeth’). And customarily affixed to it, we find the
Damaru – Shiva’sDrum. The Dhagad-Dhagad-Dhagad sound of which, being
generated even to this day when the Damaru-upon-a-Spear is utilized by
Shaivite worshippers, by rapidly turning the spear’s shaft back and
forth so the small cord-attached beaters strike the surface of the
drum-skin rapidly and in regular, rhythmic succession. The Damaru
affixed to Shiva’s Trishula is rotated in such a way, to produce the
sounds, the rhythm, which regulates the Universe’s dance entire.

So, what does this mean? Well, it positions the Trishula as being quite
literally at the center of everything – of the great pattern that is our
universe. It is, in other words, the Axis Mundi; and its wielder is the
true ChakraVartin – ‘One Whose Wheel Is In Motion’, according to His
Suzerain Design. The ‘Wheel’ here, of course, being the Worlds – and
drawing from the well-attested Vedic cosmology wherein the Axis Mundi is
a chariot-axle (also, occasionally even in the same breath, said to be
akin to a Tree, with the spokes of the wheels being like the Tree’s
branches … a World-Tree, you might say); and the Motion being the
unfolding of His Plan, His Design, His Script \[this is a rather direct
rendering of the relevant Sanskrit concept, in which ‘All The World’s A
Stage’ as a certain ‘Spear-Shaker’ put it, is taken rather directly as
the model for the Great God and Goddess’simmanency in the Universe as
both Actors/Scriptwriters and Starring Directors of the Cosmic Play\],
with the regular turning of said wheel and its speed, the fundamental
progression on through the ongoing Cycles of Time.

So now, we are starting to see just why it is that the Spear (or Staff,
or Bow\[-String\]) is such an enduring emblem of the Sky Father. It is
precisely because the Sky Father is Ishvara – the God-Emperor, as we
would say in Sanskrit. Who Rules the Universe Entire under His Mighty
Samrajya \[‘Imperium’, although more literally it is ‘Same-Rule’ – as in
.. ‘Same-Rule *Everywhere*‘, although also
‘Even-Rule/Fair-Rule/Just-Rule’\]. Who Holds The (Meta-)Physical
Reification Of The Cosmic Law In His Mighty Hands. And Who can and will,
entirely uncoincidentally, Strike Down With Great Vengeance And
FuuuriousUgra those who would poison and destroy the Dominion of the
DevaRajya. ‘Vengeance’, here, also being meant to stand for its
Proto-Indo-European etymological root – ‘Deyk’ – which means ‘To Point
Out’, and other than being a fine pun for the Spear’s fundamental
characteristic of employment, also comes to refer to ‘pointing out what
is righteous/just’ \[hence Ancient Greek: Dikaiosune –
Righteousness/Justice, I suppose ‘That Which Is Pointed Out’; and, of
course, Latin-derived terms like ‘Dictator’, ‘Vindicate’; as well as the
English – ‘Teach’\]. Exactly how the Law is made use of, even outside of
a sacral-political, mytho-cosmological sense.

The ‘Shula’ in ‘Trishula’ is also interesting, on a brief aside, for
another reason. As not only does the term ‘pointedly’ refer to a
‘sharpness’ which helps to inform its usage also as a designation for
the punishment for a dire criminal via his impalement thereupon (the
immanentization of Justice, once again), but can also refer to a
particularly steep mountain. A mountain, of course, being the major
mechanism via which Indo-European mythology treats the expression of the
Axis Mundi concept – and which has considerable overlap, also, with each
of the Tree and Goddess that are also thought of as this concept. This
three-fold coterminity, we can demonstrate in both linguistic and
mythological terms – as I did in the course of BHARAT MATA AND THE
INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY.

This may also have some comparative saliency for the three ‘Ass’ terms
in Old Norse – which, despite notionally diverged speculative
etymologies, effectively converge in terms of their meaning-fields. One,
the most prominent, being the ‘Ansuz’ and thence ‘Aesir’ related
designation for a God (and, in terms of the ‘Oss’ of the Icelandic
Younger Futhark Rune-Poem, referring to Odin quite specifically; the
underlying Indo-European etymological sense for this ‘Ass’ effectively
meaning ‘Sire’ – although it should be noted that in the Nordic
mythology, Odin is not *technically* ‘the King’, due in part to the
rather different mytho-political arrangements prevailing therein); the
other meaning various sorts of wooden beams upon which something is
dependent, such as the yard affixed to the mast of a ship from which the
sail is hung, or the main beam of a house (including, in more recent
times, the axle of a wheel) ; and the third, referring to a ridgeline.
These terms have remained remarkably phonetically close (to the point of
overt overlap) in the Nordic languages since.

Yet that is not the point that I had intended to make, which is much
simpler. The PIE underpinning for Sanskrit ‘Shula’ is ‘Keh’ (Sharp(en) …
which also gives us Ancient Greek ‘Konos’. Which is exceptionally
relevant for our purposes, due to what this term means in addition to
its rather obvious generalized sense of a ‘cone’ shape. A ‘Pine Cone’
(and, for that matter, the Pine *Tree* from which these descend –
although it should be noted that modern English ‘Pine’ is, in theory,
from another PIE root altogether, thus rendering its phonetic similarity
to Proto-Indo-European ‘Pine’ a case of convergent
re-evolution/re-emergence). Why am I gesticulating enthusiastically
about pine-cones? Because the Thyrsus of Dionysus is a staff that is
tipped with a pine-cone. This renders it simultaneously a Spear, yet
also a device wherein the spear-head is comprised of a symbol of life
and ensuing growth to soon begin. As I had briefly made mention of
earlier, the Old Norse ‘Ass’ of ‘Aesir’ (cognate with archaic Vedic
Sanskrit: ‘Asura’ … \[which should *not* be confused with the later
“A’Sura” – ‘non/anti-shining/light’\]) carries forward an Indo-European
concept for a powerful, mighty figure with a progenitive element. Hence
my rendering of it as ‘Sire’ , to recall both the Kingly and Fatherly
senses of the term. And hence also the latter’s direct relevancy when it
comes to the pine-cone spear-head of Dionysus.

The ‘Thyrsus’ element also links to the Scythians, as can be attested by
the repeated occurrence of it in regal names both mythic and
(semi-)historical – most prominently, both kings named Idanthyrsus.
Which is largely what we should expect, given the strong associations of
Scythia with Dionysus in the Greek imagination; as well as the strongly
plausible linkages of the Scythian culture and religious customs to the
relevant Indo-European deific complex (i.e. Shiva-Odin-Rudra-Vayu-Vata),
as I have discussed in several previous works. And which include, for
our purposes here, the ‘Skw’ etymology of ‘Scythian’ – which means,
effectively, ‘To Shoot’, ‘To Skewer’, ‘To Spear’. As the Great God on
Horseback (or, for that matter, riding a Bull or an antlered vahana that
is swift as the wind, or even in some cases, a chariot), is well-known
to do. All of which helps to illustrate the rather close adherence of
the Scythians to the archaic Indo-European mythocultural norms in a
manner which can be fairly said to entail ‘Carrying On The Ways Of The
Ancestors’, as a sort of yet-living ‘Wild Hunt’ or Ghost-Division …
Figures of Myth acting in reified resonancy with the Great(er) Myth, the
Greater Reality of our Ultimate Divine Origins.

But I have digressed, and rather wi(l)d(e)ly at that.

To bring it back to the Trishula Itself – the customary Hindu
explication of its symbolism is that the three points to the spear
symbolize various sets of three qualities or concepts that all together
connote … well … pretty much everything (so, for instance, the Three
Gunas, Three Worlds, Three Actions (‘Creation’, ‘Preservation’,
‘Destruction’), etc.). And therefore, that the Trishula represents the
universe under the dominion of Its Wielder. As well as , implicitly, the
power to *end* said Universe via His command and complete control of
each of the major forces therein which allow it to keep existing, or to
begin to be existing in the first place.

Our ‘Spear of the World-Axis’ concept is further strengthened by the
Skanda Purana’s identification of Mt Meru, just such an Axis Mundi, as
having three peaks, each of which is also keyed to one of the TriMurti
and therefore Their respective energetic- and portfolio- associations.

It may also be possible to ‘triangulate’ an additional support for this
in the ‘Western’ Indo-European mythologies if we consider the confluence
of the Nordic World-Tree Yggdrasil as an Ash, and the well-renowned
usage of the Ash tree for spear-crafting. This turns up in Old English,
wherein ‘Aesc’ (‘Ash \[Tree\]’) is a kenning for ‘Spear’, as well as
being the name for the Anglo-Saxon iteration of the Anzus rune. It is
also seriously prominent in Greek custom and mythology (for example, the
famed Spear of Peleus, as produced by Chiron, Hephaestus, and Athena,
and wielded to such great effect by Peleus’ Son, Achilles), to the point
that they appear to have had a specific adjective relating to the
Ash-usage in question – Eummelies\[‘Good-Ash’\], in reference to the
prominent man’s spar. Entirely uncoincidentally (to my mind, anyway), we
also find Poseidon appearing in relation to this as well – being
romantically linked to the nymph Melia (‘Ash Tree’). Which echoes the
pattern we have identified elsewhere of the Sky Father deific (and yes,
yes Poseidon is one – see my previous works such as SWEAR BY THE SEA,
SWEAR BY THE STARS, SWEAR BY THE SKY – On The Mytholinguistics Of Varuna
Neptune Ouranos, for instance; and remember that for the
Proto-Indo-Europeans, the Sky was also a kind of Sea) having a female
partner that is closely aligned with the element which comprises the
World-Spear. So, Shiva’s Parvati (Mountain) in relation to the
World-Mountain as Trishula; Brihaspati’s Vak (‘Sacred Speech’ – and
regarded as an in-universe expression of Rta, Herself; also specifically
identified in RV X 125 as being the force which makes Rudra’s Bow work –
the ‘bending’ which turns it from a stave into an arch, presumably by
acting as the bowstring and thusly producing the sacred ‘Humkara’ sound
(which can also mean a bowstring’s twang) when fired) in relation to the
Bow and Rta-Bow-String; the both ‘Mountain’ AND ‘Tree’ symbolism of
Odin’s Partner; and so on and so forth.

The *direct* mention of Yggdrasil providing the wood which forms
Gungnir, I have regrettably not been able to track down much further
than Wagner (who, despite his undeniable enthusiasm and potent-ial
inspiration, is not exactly a primary nor authoritative / authentic
source) … but off the basis of the above evidence, it would seem to be a
fairly reasonable and plausible continuance of the typology.

So, to bring it all back to the central shaft … what does all of this
mean. Why is it that the Sky Father is so irreducibly associated with a
Spear, a Weapon? Well, leaving aside the fact that this does not always
appear as a weapon (c.f the earlier points of commentary around the
Sacrificial Post, for example), the triple saliency is quite clear.
First and foremost, the Spear is a Power. In its way, this is expressed
as the Power of Existence (Rulership) and Its Cessation (Death), and
therefore is the Emblem of the Sky Father’s Regal Authority and Command
over the Cosmos. It is the Universe and Its Model – hence, it is the Sky
Father’s Potency, as it is the Universe in His Hands, working to His
Purpose. And yet, it is also something more than than that – which also
underpins and undergirds the DevaRayjaItself. Namely, Cosmic Law, Made
Manifest (hence also the Damaru via which the Law’s Regulation of the
Cosmos is symbolized most directly – The Universe Dances To The Beat Of
Its Drum). A most mighty thing for a Ruler to have at His Side, and
hence why none can stand against the weapon in question when it is
wielded – and none can truly escape it when it is thrown, fired, or
shot.

It appears as a Weapon, in no small part because that is what in a
certain ultimate sense, we tend to acknowledge as being Authority.
Although as I have repeatedly noted, in other texts or other verses of
the various Indo-European religions it also appears as other vitally
important elements which convey a similar saliency in their own
respective realms – the Sacrificial Post around which the religion is
formed and practiced, the Axis Mundi around which the Universe rotates
and is fundamentally organized, the Goddess around which so much of all
of the above is subtly orientated (and this also has some interesting
implications for the Ash Tree as an origin-point for Man, as well in
certain IE mythologies). If the Sky Father ‘Holds The Whole World In His
Hands’, as the song goes, it only makes sense for its prime apparition
to be as a weapon – for, as we have repeatedly demonstrated, the
Indo-European conception of the cosmos is that its fundamental essence
and expression is through War (see ‘ On The Mytholinguistics Of War
\[Part 1\] ‘; in particular, the portions on the subsequent derivations
of ‘Orlog’-like terms in Germanic, and the meaning of ‘BhutAtman’ in
Sanskrit).

The World-Spear is, in short, the Greatest of Weapons – the Greatest of
Spears – for the Greatest of Worlds. Namely, the one watched over by the
wise and piercing gaze of the Sky Father in both defence of the
immanency of Cosmic Order (Rta – Orlog – Dikaiosune) therein, as well as
wielding said Order’s Immanency as the most keen-ing weapon possible.

Whether it is encountered as the Spear, the Bident, the Trident, the
Bow-And-Arrow, the Staff of the Wanderer, the World-Mountain, the
World-Tree, the Sacral Pillar, or some other and yet more exotic form
besides … the World-Spear forms both the Greatest Weapon and the
Greatest Refuge for Our Values.

It is therefore only, enduringly apt that the Spear forms the emblematic
ensign for the Sky Father in so many forms across so many descendant
Indo-European mytho-cultures.

And it is *also* therefore only appropriate that we seek to illuminate
this shared heritage – upon a Wednesday (Woden’s Day) in Shravan Maas
(Shiva’s Month).

Jai Ishvara  
Jai ShulaPani, Hail GeirTyr  
Victory to the Spear-God

We Are All But The Weapon In HIS Mighty Hands !
