+++
title = "On the Imperial Hittite Double Eagle And Its Indo-Europeanxa0Symbolism"
date = "July 13, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/36972278_235529063726092_3308446456666390528_n.jpg)

\[Author’s Note: This piece was written in July 2018; we had omitted to
post it here at that time.\]  
  
Whether through the exploits of a certain fictional “Imperium”, or
simply due to an acquaintance with the flags and ensign of the
Byzantines, Holy Roman Empire, modern Russia … or Albania … many of us
have come into contact with the Double-Headed Eagle as an emblem of
Empire.

What many do not know, however, is that the symbol’s later uses are
themselves derivative of a far older and inexorably Indo-European
employment – by the Hittites.

This fine example pictured below, for instance, hailing from the Hittite
settlement at Alaca Hoyuk, circa 3300 years ago.

Academics disagree about the potential meanings ascribed to the
Double-Headed Eagle by the Hittites; with conjecture tending to focus
upon the surrounding elements – the prey often depicted in its talons,
and the regal figures it is often depicted supporting. The results of
this analysis, while hardly conclusive, tend therefore to suggest not
only the exercise of power upon the subjugated (for how else to construe
a hare in the talons of the Raptor Imperialis) – but also a ‘personal’
connection with the figure of the Emperor who lies at the heart of
almost any Imperial project.

Further symbolic associations which might be explored include the idea
that as the Eagle in question has two heads – that it is capable of
looking in both directions toward the Horizon. That is to say, that the
area under its ensign’s potential dominion is ‘limitless’ in effective
scope. And also the customary linkage of the Eagle with great eyesight
to see just what, and everything, which is going on within its realm or
demesne.

We might also, perhaps, connect it with other connotations – the Eagle
of Apotheosis so beloved of Roman and Roman-esque artistry; or of Zeus
in much the same manner.

In any case, whatever the precise details of its symbolic importance,
the Double-Eagle remains an impressively majestic figure.

It is interesting, indeed, that we see it replicated so frequently here
in the modern age…
