+++
title = "Homosexuality and the Germanicxa0Weltanschauung"
date = "July 30, 2020"

+++
Within the Germanic Faith we often face attacks and attempts at censor
from various currents of society who would seek to identify us as
divergent or even dangerous to the accepted ideas and behavior of modern
society. One of the most frequent of these attempts comes from the realm
of modern political ideologies, in this case the prevailing doctrine of
liberalism, which has sought to corrupt or ignore the sacred traditions
of our forefathers so as to make it more palatable for them.

In the following article, I will discuss the actual traditional beliefs,
mindset and worldview of our ancestors within the field of homosexuality
and other sexual deviances in order to showcase the incompatibility of
the modern with that of the ancient and true.

Nith And Ergi

No topic like this could begin without a discussion and examination of a
principal facet of our ancestors’ understanding of the world contained
in the terms “*Níð” (Nith)* and *“Ergi”,* of which a thorough
understanding of the Theological and Sociological significance is
crucial when discussing how our forefathers might have interpreted or
understood any modern behavior.

Nith is a Theological and Legal concept that can be best explained as
roughly analogous to the Christian use of “sin” as describing “an
offense against God”. The Germanic usage of Nith can be translated to
mean the terms: “libel, insult, scorn, lawlessness, cowardice, sexual
perversion, homosexuality” but also the terms “Untruth, bad, wrongness
and incomprehensibility” and best represents a similar terminology to
the Christian use, but with the added implication of a violation of
natural laws or the inherent structures of reality.

A person who commits Nith is termed a Nīðing (Nithing) and was
considered among the, if not the, most serious of legal and moral
accusations one could deliver. From níð are derived such words as
níðvisur (“insulting verses”), níðskald (“insult-poet”), níðingr
(“coward, outlaw”), griðníðingr (“truce-breaker”), níðstöng
(“scorn-pole”), also níða (“to perform níð poetry”), tunguníð (“verbal
níð”), tréníð (“timber níð”, carved or sculpted representations of men
involved in a homosexual act).

Ergi is a term closely related to Nith and is a noun meaning
“effeminacy, unmanliness” and holding connotations especially of
cowardice. It is often seen in the adjectival forms of the word “Argr”
and “Ragr” which hold the same meanings when describing an individual as
such. The term is also used especially in reference to homosexuality,
such as the term Rassragr meaning literally “ass-coward”, through the
connotations that such actions are unmanly, akin to women and indicative
of cowardice.

The Law Codes

Accusations of both Nith and Ergi, especially relating to the conduct of
homosexuals and other perversions are recorded in the written law codes
of both Iceland and Norway during the early post-conversion periods in
the 12th and 13th centuries, representing the earliest Norse accounts of
law other than scattered mentions of rulings delivered throughout the
sagas and most probably representing the predominant cultural baggage
retained from their recent pre-christian past.

The Grey Goose Laws (Icelandic: *Grágás*) was introduced in Iceland
during the pre-conversion period by an immigrant from Norway named
Úlfljótr sometime during the 920’s and were modeled on those from the
Norwegian west-coast law-province, Gulathing. It was first written down
later during the commonwealth period around the year 1117. It relates
the following regarding the subject:

“Then there are three terms which occasion bringing such a serious suit
against a man that they are worthy to outlaw him. If a man call a man
Ragr (Unmanly, Effeminate), or Stroðinn (Lit: “Screwed” or “Fucked”,
with the implication especially of sexual penetration) , or Sorðinn
(Diminutive of “*Sannsorðinn*”, demonstrably Stroðinn, objectively,
provably so), he shall proceed to prosecute as with other terms of
abuse, and indeed a man has the right to avenge with combat for these
terms of abuse.”

Likewise the later norweigian law code of the The Gulaþing *Law* says:

“ Concerning terms of abuse or insult. There are words which are
considered terms of abuse. Item one: if a man say of another man that he
has borne a child. Item two: if a man say of another man that he has
been homosexually used (*Sannsorðinn)*. Item three: if a man compare
another man to a mare, or call him a bitch or a harlot, or compare him
to any animal which bears young.”

Likewise we have the much much older works of Tacitus in his “Germania”
that records the following:

“The Assembly is competent also to hear criminal charges, especially
those involving the risk of capital punishment. The mode of execution
varies according to the offence. Traitors and deserters are hanged on
trees; cowards, the unwarlike, and sodomites are pressed down under a
wicker hurdle into the slimy mud of a bog. This distinction in the
punishments is based on the idea that offenders against the state should
be made a public example of, whereas deeds of shame should be buried out
of men’s sight.“

The former is of controversial origin given the precise translation
often used for the word “sodomite” as the original is a bit more
circumspect regarding the nature of the transgression perhaps partly due
to the terse nature of latin itself and possibly do to a reluctance to
discuss the topic openly, with Tacitus writing in latin: “et corpore
infames” meaning literally “Men (who commit crimes which are) bodily
infamous”. That the term refers to some kind of sexual perversion is
quite indisputable and aligns well with other attested germanic
prohibitions on Homosexual conduct, but which strictly speaking cannot
be so narrowly pinned down.

Theological sources

Aside from the historical sources condemning such behaviors, we find
matching instances of this related in the Poetic Edda, a work of
indisputable pre-christian origin owing to its complex and archaic
poetic schema and often thought to be the source work for Snorri’s later
Prose Edda.

The Lokasenna features several such instances throughout its ritual
insults mostly relating to the person of Loki and in clear reference to
his many actions of Nith such as birthing children, sex with animals,
and homosexual intercourse while assuming a female shape. His exchange
with the God Njord features an explicit slur towards this effect:

“Þat er válitit,  
þótt sér varðir vers fái,  
hós eða hvárs;  
hitt er undr, er áss ragr  
er hér inn of kominn,  
ok hefir sá börn of borit.”

“This is a small harm (in comparison to your deeds),  
That a woman may have a lover and a lord,  
But a wonder it is that this effeminate god  
Comes here, though babes he has borne.”

Here we can see Njord render to Loki the insult “áss ragr” calling him
mockingly an “Effeminate god” for the Nith of giving birthed children.
Critically we can see here our forefathers and the Gods disdain for
those that would violate the bounds of natural sexual order and the
proper behavior of men, with Njord even claiming that such a thing as
Adultery is a small matter in comparison.

Also in the Lokasenna we have Odin deliver a similar insult to Loki
saying:

“Veiztu, ef ek gaf  
þeim er ek gefa ne skylda,  
enom slævorom, sigr,  
átta vetra  
vartu fyr iörð neðan  
kýr mólkandi ok kona,  
ok hefir þú þar börn of borit,  
ok hugða ek þat args aðal.”

“Though I gave to him who deserved not the gift  
To the baser, the battle’s prize;  
Winters eight wast thou under the earth,  
Milking the cows as a maid,  
Ay, and babes didst thou bear;  
Unmanly thy soul must seem.”

Here we can see a dual association made between milking cows as a maid
(a domestic duty relegated to women) and a further reminder of Loki’s
habit of shape changing into women and the time he bore a child from the
stallion Svaðilfari. The actual insult at the end is of particular note:
“ok hugða ek þat args aðal” which could be rendered more literally as
“and your hugr is of an effeminate nature” showcasing that Loki’s crimes
of Ergi are properly to be thought of as resulting from spiritual
corruptions innate to his being.

A further example of prohibitions on sexual perversions among the Gods
can be taken from an account in the Thrymskvitha relating to the time
that Thor dressed as Freya to steal back his mighty hammer from the
Jotnar. When it is first proposed to him Thor is aghast at the prospect
and rejects it saying:

“Látum und hánum hrynja lukla  
ok kvenváðir um kné falla,  
en á brjósti breiða steina  
ok hagliga um höfuð typpum.”

“Then Thor the mighty his answer made:  
“Me would the gods unmanly call  
If I let bind the bridal veil.”

The former showcases that not only is Thor obliged to reject such an
action as wearing women’s clothing, but expresses his logic therein by
stating that if he was to do such a thing, that the other male gods
would disdain him as “unmanly”.

Castration Rape

To fully understand our ancestors worldview regarding homosexual acts
we must also discuss the practice of “castration rape” in which a
defeated foeman is anally violated by either another man or by a
physical implement with the intention of humiliating and unmanning them
by attaching to them the shame of Ragr and Nith.

Such instances are recorded sparsely by the Sagas and law codes of the
time, with the term “Klámhogg” meaning “shame-stroke” being used for any
injury on the buttocks or upper thigh of a man, with it ranking in
“*Grágás”* as a “Major Wound” on par with serious and life threatening
bodily injury.

Examples of this conduct can be seen in “Guðmundar saga dýra” And
Sturlunga Saga wherein Guðmundr intends to have a captive man and wife
both raped so as to cause them permanent social injury and preclude them
from being political rivals in the future, and also depicting the
castration of captured enemies for the same reasoning. It is not known
how common such actions are to be considered but it would be
historically comparable to other male dominated societies around the
world where similar behavior took place.

What must be fundamentally understood here is how our ancestors
understood such actions socially, and also why this was allowed
alongside such otherwise strong penalties for homosexuality.

We must firstly mention that penetrating another man was seen as
something so terribly violating as to constitute actual injury to their
body and soul and certainly not something one would engage in with
friends or loved ones, it being relegated to hated enemies at best. We
can therefore consider such things in the same category as rape and
killings: actions which were harshly known to our forefathers against
enemies but which were not tolerated within the bounds of the community.
One does not trust the man who desires to kill and rape his neighbors
and our ancestors would have exiled as outlaws anyone who seemed to have
this hostile desire.

Secondarily, we can understand the situation as being akin to the modern
practice of “Prison Rape” in which the principal intent of the deed is
done to humiliate and punish a hated foe and not out of a sexual desire
towards them. Our ancestors clearly differentiated between the
mechanical action of rape and the desire to possess another sexually and
romantically that constitutes the modern understanding of
homosexuality.

Indoeuropean Prohibitions on Homosexuality

Similar prohibitions against homosexual behavior are found throughout
the Indo-European world, from classical Greece to Vedic India,
showcasing that by no means are germanic thoughts on the matter to be
held as a unique divergence, but as part of an ancient ancestral
relegation of such activities as spiritually impure and criminally
inclined.

The Manusmriti (The Law of Manu) from the 2nd century BC records the
following regarding sexual conduct from Verse 11.174:

“If a twice-born man commits an unnatural offence with a male, or has
intercourse with a female, in an ox-cart, or in water, or during the
day,—he should take a bath along with his clothes.—”

Also from 11.67:

“Causing pain to a Brāhmaṇa (by a blow), — smelling at things that
should not be smelt, or at wine, — cheating — and sexual intercourse
with a man, — all this is declared to lead to loss of caste
(Gatibhramsa).”

Also from the Arthashastra written by the revered sage Chanakya, it
states the following:

“When a man has connection with a woman against the order of nature
(*a-yonau*), he shall be punished with the first amercement. A man
having sexual intercourse with another man shall also pay the first
amercement.”

(An Ammercement referring to the first degree of financial penalties of
between 48 to 96 panas, a sum of silver coinage that was significant to
anyone but the most wealthy of lords or kings and nigh ruinous to the
lower classes at that time period.)

We may shift our focus to the classical world to see the signs and
records of homosexual conduct being, if not declared utterly illegal and
forbidden, then signs of it as being among various scales of social
disdain and repugnance according to proper and traditional morality.

We may begin with the historical Trial referred to as “Against
Timarchus” conducted by the famous Athenian orator Aeschines. The gist
of the trial refers to Aeschines arguing that Timarchus (a wealthy and
connected politician) was not capable of addressing the assembly on the
basis that he had sexually prostituted himself as a youth and was known
to have been penetrated by a series of male lovers, rendering him
stripped of Athenian citizenship by this fact, saying:

“You will see, then, that Timarchus cannot blame the city for any part
of this prosecution, nor can he blame the laws, nor you, nor me, but
only himself. For because of his shameful private life the laws forbade
him to speak before the people, laying on him an injunction not
difficult, in my opinion, to obey—nay, most easy.

…

It was with such conduct as this in view that the lawgiver expressly
prescribed who were to address the assembly, and who were not to be
permitted to speak before the people.

…

Who then are they who in the lawgiver’s opinion are not to be permitted
to speak? Those who have lived a shameful life; these men he forbids to
address the people.

…

“The man who has failed to perform all the military service demanded of
him, or who has thrown away his shield.” And he is right. Why? Man, if
you fail to take up arms in behalf of the state, or if you are such a
coward that you are unable to defend her, you must not claim the right
to advise her, either. Whom does he specify in the third place? “Or the
man,” he says, “who has debauched or prostituted himself.” For the man
who has made traffic of the shame of his own body, he thought would be
ready to sell the common interests of the city also.”

We may also consult the matter of the Theban Sacred Band, a interesting
choice for such an article learned adherents of history might be
thinking, for as Plutarch records:

“The sacred band, we are told, was first formed by Gorgidas, of three
hundred chosen men, to whom the city furnished exercise and maintenance,
and who encamped in the Cadmeia; for which reason, too, they were called
the city band; for citadels in those days were properly called cities.
But some say that this band was composed of lovers and beloved, And a
pleasantry of Pammenes is cited, in which he said that Homer’s Nestor
was no tactician when he urged the Greeks to form in companies by clans
and tribes, since he should have stationed lover by beloved. For
tribesmen and clansmen make little account of tribesmen and clansmen in
times of danger; whereas, a band that is held together by the friendship
between lovers is indissoluble and not to be broken, since the lovers
are ashamed to play the coward before their beloved, and the beloved
before their lovers, and both stand firm in danger to protect each
other.“

Plutarch’s relation of this incredible claim is to be prefaced with the
admission that “But some say that this band was composed of lovers and
beloved” giving rise to the implication that many others disagreed with
this interpretation and indeed it may have been but a rumor, perhaps
devised by their political enemies the Athenians, who were themselves
rife with pedophiles and homosexuals such that they could scarcely
imagine any other scenario. This interpretation meets with an agreement
from Phillip II Antigonus, after the famous battle of Chaeronea.

Defeat of the sacred band came at the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BCE), the
decisive contest in which Philip II of Macedon, with his son Alexander,
extinguished the Theban hegemony. Alexander became the first to break
through the Band’s line, which had hitherto been thought invincible. The
traditional hoplite infantry was no match for the novel long-speared
Macedonian phalanx: the Theban army and its allies broke and fled, but
the Sacred Band, although surrounded and overwhelmed, refused to
surrender. It held its ground and fell where it stood. Plutarch records
that Philip II, on encountering the corpses “heaped one upon another”,
understanding who they were, exclaimed, perhaps in rejection of the
Athenian rumors and condemnation of this behavior in general:

“Perish any man who suspects that these men either did or suffered
anything unseemly.”

Likewise we can look to the Athenians chief rivals in the Spartans for a
thorough condemnation of homosexual and pedosexual conduct through the
laws of that great Lawgiver Lycurgus, as recorded by Xenophon:

“The customs instituted by Lycurgus were opposed to all of these. If
someone, being himself an honest man, admired a boy’s soul and tried to
make of him an ideal friend without reproach and to associate with him,
he approved, and believed in the excellence of this kind of training.
But if it was clear that the attraction lay in the boy’s outward beauty,
he banned the connection as an abomination; and thus he caused lovers to
abstain from boys no less than parents abstain from sexual intercourse
with their children and brothers and sisters with each other.”

I would likewise end this section of the article with a quote by
Plutarch on the matter:

“Alas for the evil days! Because all the Greeks know what is right and
fair, but the Spartans alone practice it.”

Counterpoints to Common Arguments

One of the more commonly seen arguments regarding the Germanic view of
homosexuality is to claim a passive/active distinction to their conduct
by transferring the well known classical Greco-Roman structure to the
Germanic peoples cultural beliefs. Part of this argument stems from a
political necessity of modern academia regarding the supposition that
ancient peoples did not conceive of homosexuality in the same manner we
do today, principally as a sexual orientation or identity, but merely as
a lone vice akin to desire for drink or intemperance that otherwise
“straight” men might engage in.

While politically convenient for a narrative that would see
homosexuality as modern sexual identity divorced entirely from the
prohibitions and structures of the ancient world, it runs into
significant trouble from our actual Germanic sources which do not appear
to support this interpretation, and indeed ascribe qualities to
homosexuals that we would recognize today such as exclusive sexual
interest in men and therefore an inability to produce children.

Take for instance the incident reported in Stúfs þáttr, an epilogue to
Laxdæla saga, in a conversation between the Norwegian king Haraldr
Harðráði (Harald Hardrada) and Stúfr, the son of Þórðr kottr (Þórðr the
Cat): puzzled by the unusual nickname, Harald asks Stúfr whether his
father Þórðr was “kottrinn inn hvati eða inn blauði”, “the hard or the
soft cat.” Stúfr declines to answer despite the implied insult, but the
king admits quickly that his question was foolish because “the person
who is soft (blauðr) could not be a father”.

While it is notable that the implication of the insult hardly needs to
be translated to our cultural context for us to understand what vexed
Stúfr so, it may be lost on modern audiences that the cat could be
strongly associated with both women in general (such as Freya’s chariot
being pulled by a pair) and also was the traditional attire of the
Volva-Seeresses who wore cat skin clothing.

What is most relevant here however is the kings quick admission that the
“soft cat” could not possibly have been the mans father, an obvious
reference to the inability of a homosexual to produce children and
directly contradictory to the academic argument that our ancestors
viewed them in terms of an active/passive sexual distinction rather than
a modern sexual identity.

Another common argument for the acceptance of homosexual conduct stems
from the association of such a revered and widely worshipped deity as
Odin Alfather himself with the institution of Seidr (sorcery) due to its
widespread association with the concept of Ergi in lawcodes and
prohibition of men practicising it.

This assumption stems from a modern academic argument that claims that
the reason Seidr was forbidden to men and reserved for women, was that
it featured rituals deemed intrinsically feminine or even relating to
female sexuality itself such as ritual penetration or the consumption of
male seed. An example of this prohibition on Seidr can be found in
Ynglingasaga:  
  
“Óðinn had the skill which gives great power and which he practiced
himself. It is called *seiðr*, and by means of it he could know the fate
of men and predict events that had not yet come to pass; and by it he
could also inflict death or misfortunes or sickness, or also deprive
people of their wits or strength, and give them to others. But this
sorcery is attended by such great *ergi* that men considered it shameful
to practice it, and so it was taught to priestesses”

It must be noted that no real description of Seidr rituals survives
handed down to us from which to base the judgement that the practice
contained some kind of sexual component or particularly feminine actions
itself, the argument being based entirely on the description of the
magic being “attended by such great Ergi”. This judgement however
disregards that the definition of “Ergi” is not entirely one identical
with a charge of homosexual conduct, but rather “unmanliness” among
which is implied cowardice and subterfuge.

We can interpret the passage of how and why this magic was associated
with unmanliness by simply describing its effects and noting that they
are cunning, manipulative and underhanded methods of attacking a foe
rather than the honest and simple practice of open hostility and combat
which our forefathers found to be unsuitable for proper men but
perfectly acceptable for women, who were not expected to engage in such
physical combat in the first place and for whom more manipulative and
indirect methods of conflict resolution were to be assumed.

A final rebuttal to common arguments for the acceptance of homosexuality
among the germanic people can be found relating to the work of Gesta
Danorum written by the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus in the late
12th century: though it should be noted that at this time Sweden had
still yet to formally convert and Heathenism was indeed practiced openly
in that country. Saxo records the following regarding the Huskarl
Starkather:

“After Bemoni’s death Starkather, because of his valour, was summoned by
the Biarmian champions and there performed many feats worthy of the
tellings. Then he entered Swedish territory where he spent seven years
in a leisurely stay with the sons of Frø, after which he departed to
join Haki, the lord of Denmark, for, living at Uppsala in the period of
sacrifices, he had become disgusted with the womanish body movements,
the clatter of actors on the stage and the soft tinkling of bells. It is
obvious how far his heart was removed from frivolity if he could not
even bear to watch these occasions. A manly individual is resistant to
wantonness. “

We must however keep in mind that this transmission of events is
extremely questionable for a number of reasons. Firstly, Saxo himself
was a Danish Christian writing during a period in which their
traditional national rival, Sweden, was also formally pagan and he may
have felt compelled to publish scandalous rumors about them on this
basis, and indeed Gesta Danorum is known for being wholly out of step
with other works of Germanic mythology and history.

Even if we assume that the accusations were truly delivered by
Starkather, we must also consider that this man had personal motives to
accuse his former lieges of improper conduct, as the kings Alrek and
Eirik of Uppsala were noted to have spent several years aviking before
settling down whence Starkather decided to leave their court for that of
their regional rival in Denmark. Accusations of Ergi-ness would fit a
typical motif of Norse insult wherein its well understood that no such
association is actually true, but that the severity of the insult
ensured that it filled the role of “fighting words” in the time period.

Finally, this description of the Odin-worshipping Danish Starkather’s
disgust with the cult of Freyr at Uppsala finds no historical purchase
in a similar treatment of priests of Freyr depicted in Iceland who were
well known as leading political figures and respected wealthy men such
as Hrafenkell Freysgothi, Þorgrímr Freysgoði, the Freys-gyðlingar family
noted to reside in the south-eastern quarter, and the Gothar of
Helgafjell. These men were all noted as widely respected members of
Iceland’s elite ruling class in that time period with no hint of any
sort of association of them or their priesthoods with Argr, Ragr, Ergi
or Nith.

-   A note should be made that despite using material from a wide
    variety of IE cultures and theological material, that no assumption
    as to the primacy of the germanic response to homosexual behavior
    should be implied.
