+++
title = "Sons of the Sun – A Brief Comparative Of The Indo-European Progenitorxa0Twins"
date = "July 5, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/arya-akasha-progenitor-twins-image.png?w=1000)

The Indo-European Myth of the Progenitor Twins is quite literally
foundational for who we are and how we relate to the people, the world
around us. It is therefore unsurprising that even despite occasional
alterations, it has remained so recognizably pervasive amidst the
descendant Indo-European peoples.

In our recent “Sons of the Sun” series, we took a look at how this myth
has been preserved in the Vedic Hindu religion, how it had been
deliberately distorted by the Zoroastrians, and how it was still
recognizably there ‘neath the Roman legends of Romulus and Remus –
albeit here, too, suffering some notable changes, depending upon
version, for likely political and mythic expediency.

It is also visible in other Indo-European peoples’ origin-tales as well;
and in future installments of the series I shall look in greater detail
at the Tuisto & Mannus of the Germanics, as recounted by Tacitus – as
well as the various Scythian and Greek-Speculation-About-Scythian
parallel versions of events.

The following chart summarizes the relevant mythologies so as to better
demonstrate their fundamental coterminity; although for reasons of
space, I have had to leave some explanatory elements out (including why
the Sky Father rather than Mars is the likely sire of Romulus & Remus;
why Vivasvat should be interpreted as Dyaus Pitar – as well as how this
relates to Tuisto; and just what happened with the Zoroastrians). Those
can largely be found in the relevant “Sons of the Sun” articles.

We can also present this in a more narrative flow:

The Far-Shining One (Vivasvat) \[Dyaus Pitar in Solar aspect\] fathers
the twin brothers \[potentially as part of a set of triplets – the
daughter Yami being the third sibling\], with a Mother \[Saranyu, Rhea
Silvia – river and earth associations abound\] Who becomes somewhat
remote – kidnapped, incarcerated, “vanishing” also from the lives of Her
Children at least for a time.

The male Progenitor Twins grow, and in adulthood their paths diverge.
Yama goes forth to find (indeed, *found*) the Realm of the Dead – an act
of self-sacrifice which grants Him a kingdom in the Heavens (or, in
later renditions, of the Underworld).

This matches and mirrors the Kingdom His Brother is soon to build; and
becomes the heaven where the spirits of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead –
the Forefathers (Pitrs) shall go. And, periodically, shalt return from
to be amongst Their descendants.

It is thus, at once, both the Past and also the Future.

Manu, meanwhile, becomes the progenitor of the Race of Man (more
narrowly understood as the teller’s *particular* group of Men in
subsequent ethnogenesis recollections of the Myth), and sets down pious
dictates for the proper conduct of rites and of society.

Understand Your Past – *Our* Past – Where You, We Have Come From :

Know Your Ancestors !

And therefore move forward – properly, piously – into the Future.
