+++
title = "Theology – The Indo-European Queen of thexa0Sciences"
date = "July 14, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/capture7.png?w=795)

“The Queen of the Sciences – Theology”

-   Ernst Junger,

Junger, writing in March of 1944, amidst the soon-to-be detritus of Nazi
Germany, correctly identified that the necessary precondition for much
of the unremitting horror of that part of the 20th century, had been the
morally rudderless and (de)ontologically groundless, baseless, condition
of materialism, scientism, which had displaced the prior fundamental
grund-norms of what is called Civilization.

His solution to this, was both radical and prescient – especially of the
later developments in quantum physics that have spanned out over the
past few decades.

Namely, he called for the *restoration* of Theology to its righteous
place as “Queen of the Sciences”.

It is something which many would angrily deride as a concept, today …
but the fundamental point, also, which he makes in the next paragraphs
of his diary following this most visionary statement, is that it is by
necessity and by desire a *both* rather than *either* paradigm.

*Both* science. *AND* Theology.

For either, out of balance, can be just as deadly – twice as deadly, in
point of artificial fact – as either entwained.

This is also, now that I think upon it, an intriguing yet subtle
Indo-Europeanism: for if we look at the etymology of the word ‘Queen” ,
it is no coincidence at all that in so many of our languages, the
“Queen” term, or its localized equivalent, is seriously close to the
terms for “Clan”, for “Tribe”, for “Gene”, for “Family”, for
“Generation”. A most eloquent example of which is provided via the
Sanskrit terms – Jani, Gna, and the like. Gna is a particular favourite
of mine, as it can also mean Speech or Song, as well as referring
through this to a Goddess, such as Vac – the Creator of the World
through such means. These link up very closely with “Jana”, with “Gana”
– terms meaning “Nation”, “Tribe”; for just as we call a King “Sire” –
the Pati, the Patri-arch, the Father of the Nation – so too, is a Queen
its righteous and rightful Mother. For a further discussion of this
phenomenon, consult my dual ‘Bharat Mata and the Indo-European Deific of
National Identity’, and ‘GHOST DIVISION: On The BhutaGana of Mahadev &
The Einherjar of Odin’ pieces.

The reason why I say it is a most appropriate underpinning ‘essence’ to
Junger’s phrasing, is because if we look back through the annals of
Science, we discover that, invariably, it has its roots in Theology. It
has ben born *from* Theology, often via the intermediary carrier of
Philosophy, and rather frequently with the Father or Midwife of War and
Politics.

If it should seem like Science has lost its way – as it most assuredly
did, to Junger, during those dark days of the mid-1940s … or, more
poignantly for us here in the aching twilight of the Modern Age, that
*we* have lost our way when the terrain seems only to be lit by , or
worse, only to be *comprised* of mere ‘science’ and ‘scientism’ – then
what is needed, most of all, is the Return to the Source which Junger’s
quote axiomatically implies and entails.

Respect for one’s Parents – one’s Mother, in particular – is amidst, if
not the *highest* acts of Hindu piety.  
  
#NAS

# 
