+++
title = "02 Preface"

+++




## PREFACE

  
TO THE FIRST EDITION.

It was in June, 1875, as I chanced to be for a day or two in Leipzig,
that I was unexpectedly invited to prepare the Sanskrit grammar for the
Indo-European series projected by Messrs. Breitkopf and Härtel. After
some consideration, and consultation with friends, I accepted the task,
and have since devoted to it what time could be spared from regular
duties, after the satisfaction of engagements earlier formed. If the
delay seems a long one, it was nevertheless unavoidable; and I would
gladly, in the interest of the work itself, have made it still longer.
In every such case, it is necessary to make a compromise between
measurably satisfying a present pressing need, and doing the subject
fuller justice at the cost of more time; and it seemed as if the call
for a Sanskrit grammar on a somewhat different plan from those already
in use — excellent as some of these in many respects are — was urgent
enough to recommend a speedy completion of the work begun.

The objects had especially in view of the preparation of this grammar
have been the following:

1\. To make a presentation of the facts of the language primarily as
they show themselves in use in the literature, and only secondarily as
they are laid down by the native grammarians. The earliest European
grammars were by the necessity of the case chiefly founded on their
native predecessors; and a traditional method was thus established
which has been perhaps somewhat too closely adhered to, at the expense
of clearness and of proportion, as well as of scientific truth.
Accordingly, my attention has not been directed toward a profounder
study of the grammatical science of the Hindu schools: their teachings I
have been contented to take as already reported to Western learners in
the existing Western grammars.

2\. To include also in the presentation the forms and constructions of
the older language, as exhibited in the Veda and the Brāhmaṇa.
Grassmann’s excellent Index-Vocabulary to the Rig-Veda, and my own
manuscript one to the Atharva-Veda (which I hope soon to be able to make
public^([\[1\]](#cite_note-1))), gave me in full detail the great mass
of Vedic material; and this, with some assistance from pupils and
friends, I have sought to complete, as far as the circumstances
permitted, from the other Vedic texts and from the various works of the
Brāhmana period, both printed and manuscript.

3\. To treat the language throughout as an accented one, omitting
nothing of what is known respecting the nature of the Sanskrit accent,
its changes in combination and inflection, and the tone of individual
words — being, in all this, necessarily dependent especially upon the
material presented by the older accentuated texts.

4\. To cast all statements, classifications, and so on, into a form
consistent with the teachings of linguistic science. In doing this, it
has been necessary to discard a few of the long-used and familiar
divisions and terms of Sanskrit grammar — for example, the
classification and nomenclature of „special tenses” and “general tenses”
(which is so indefensible that one can only wonder at its having
maintained itself so long), the order and terminology of the
conjugation-classes, the separation in treatment of the facts of
internal and external euphonic combination, and the like. But care has
been taken to facilitate the transition from the old to the new; and the
changes, it is believed, will commend themselves to unqualified
acceptance. It has been sought also to help an appreciation of the
character of the language by putting its facts as far as possible into a
statistical form. In this respect the native grammar is especially
deficient and misleading.

Regard has been constantly had to the practical needs of the learner of
the language, and it has been attempted, by due arrangement and by the
use of different sizes of type, to make the work as usable by one whose
object it is to acquire a knowledge of the classical Sanskrit alone as
those are in which the earlier forms are not included. The custom of
transliterating all Sanskrit words into European characters, which has
become usual in European Sanskrit grammars, is, as a matter of course,
retained throughout; and, because of the difficulty of setting even a
small Sanskrit type with anything but a large European, it is practiced
alone in the smaller sizes.

While the treatment of the facts of the language has thus been made a
historical one, within the limits of the language itself, I have not
ventured to make it comparative, by bringing in the analogous forms and
processes of other related languages. To do this, in addition to all
that was attempted beside, would have extended the work, both in content
and in time of preparation, far beyond the limits assigned to it. And,
having decided to leave out this element, I have done so consistently
throughout. Explanations of the origin of forms have been avoided, for
the same reason and for others, which hardly call for statement.

A grammar is necessarily in great part founded on its predecessors, and
it would be vain to attempt an acknowledgement in detail of all the aid
received from other scholars. I have had at hand always especially the
very scholarly and reliable brief summary of Kielhorn, the full and
excellent work of Monier Williams, the smaller grammar of Bopp (a
wonder of learning and method for the time when it was prepared), and
the volumes of Benfey and Müller. As regards to the material of the
language, no other aid, of course, has been at all comparable with the
great Petersburg lexicon of Böhtlingk and Roth, the existence of which
gives by itself a new character to all investigations of the Sanskrit
language. What I have not found there or in the special collections made
by myself or by others for me, I have called below “not quotable” — a
provisional designation , necessarily liable to correction in detail by
the results of further researches. For what concerns the verb, its forms
and of their classification and uses, I have had, as every one must
have, by far the most aid from Delbrück, in his Altindisches Verbum and
his various syntactical contributions. Former pupils of my own,
Professors Avery and Edgren, have also helped me, in connection with
this subject and with others, in a way and measure that calls for public
acknowledgment. In respect to the important matter of the declension in
the earliest language, I have made great use of the elaborate paper in
the Journ. Am. Or. Soc. (printed contemporaneously with this work, and
used by me almost, but not quite, to the end of the subject) by my
former pupil Prof. Lanman; my treatment of it is founded on his. My
manifold obligations to my own teacher, Prof. Weber of Berlin, also
require to be mentioned: among other things, I owe to him the use of his
copies of certain unpublished texts of the Brāhmana period, not
otherwise accessible to me; and he was kind enough to look through with
me my work in its inchoate condition, favoring me with valuable
suggestions. For this last favor I have likewise to thank Prof. Delbrück
— who, moreover, has taken the trouble to glance over for a like purpose
the greater part of the proof-sheets of the grammar, as they came from
the press. To Dr. L. von Schröder is due whatever use I have been able
to make (unfortunately a very imperfect one) of the important
Māitrāyaṇī-Sanhitā.^([\[2\]](#cite_note-2))

Of the deficiencies of my work I am, I think, not less fully aware than
any critic of it, even the severest, is likely to be. Should it be found
to answer its intended purpose well enough to come to another edition,
my endeavor will be to improve and complete it; and I shall be grateful
for any corrections or suggestions which may aid me in making it a more
efficient help to the study of the Sanskrit language and literature.

GOTHA, July 1879.

W.D.W.

## PREFACE

  
TO THE SECOND EDITION.

In preparing a new edition of this grammar, I have made use of the new
material gathered by myself during the intervening
years,^([\[3\]](#cite_note-3)) and also of that gathered by others, so
far as it was accessible to me and fitted into my
plan;^([\[4\]](#cite_note-4)) and I have had the benefit of kind
suggestions from various quarters — for all of which I desire to return
a grateful acknowledgment. By such help, I have been able not only to
correct and repair certain errors in omissions of the first edition, but
also to speak with more definiteness upon very many points relating to
the material and usages of the language.

In order not to impair the applicability of the references already made
to the work by various authors, its paragraphing has been retained
unchanged throughout; for increased convenience of further reference,
the subdivisions of paragraphs have been more thoroughly marked, by
letters (now and then changing a former lettering); and the
paragraph-numbers have been set at the outer instead of the inner edge
of the upper margin.

My remoteness from the place of publication has forbidden me the reading
of more than one proof; but the kindness of Professor Lanman in adding
his revision (accompanied by other timely suggestions) to mine, and the
care of the printers, will be found, I trust, to have aided in securing
a text disfigured by few errors of the press.

Circumstances beyond my control have delayed for a year or two the
completion of this revision, and have made it in some parts less
complete than I should have desired.

NEW-HAVEN, Sept. 1888.

W.D.W.

1.  [↑](#cite_ref-1) It was published, as vol. XII. of the Journal of
    the American Oriental Society, in 1861.
2.  [↑](#cite_ref-2) Since published in full by him, 1881–6.
3.  [↑](#cite_ref-3) A part of this new material was published by myself
    in 1885, as a Supplement to the grammar, under the title “Roots,
    Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language”.
4.  [↑](#cite_ref-4) Especially deserving of mention is Holtzmann’s
    collection of material from the Mahābhārata, also published (1884)
    in the form of a Supplement to this work; also Böhtlingk’s similar
    collection from the larger half of the Rāmāyaṇa.

