+++
title = "03 Introduction"

+++




## INTRODUCTION.

  
BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE INDIAN LITERATURE.

It seems desirable to give here such a sketch of the history of Indian
literature as shall show the relation to one another of the different
periods and forms of the language treated in the following grammar, and
the position of the works there quoted.

The name “Sanskrit” (**saṁskṛta**, 1087 d, *adorned, elaborated,
perfected*), which is popularly applied to the whole ancient and sacred
language of India, belongs more properly only to that dialect which,
regulated and established by the labors of the native grammarians, has
led for the last two thousand years or more an artificial life, like
that of Latin during most of the same period in Europe, as the written
and spoken means of communication of the learned and priestly caste; and
which even at the present day fills that office. It is thus
distinguished, on the one hand, from the later and derived dialects — as
the Prākrit, forms of language which have datable monuments from as
early as the third century before Christ, and which are represented by
inscriptions and coins, by the speech of the uneducated characters in
the Sanskrit dramas (see below), and by a limited literature; the Pāli,
a Prakritic dialect which became the sacred language of Buddhism in
Farther India, and is still in service there as such; and yet later and
more altered tongues forming the transition to the languages of modern
India. And, on the other hand, it is distinguished, but very much less
sharply and widely, from the older dialects or forms of speech presented
in the canonical literature, the Veda and Brāhmaṇa.

This fact, of the fixation by learned treatment of an authorized mode of
expression, which should thenceforth be used according to rule in the
intercourse of the educated, is the cardinal one in Indian linguistic
history; and as the native grammatical literature has determined the
form of the language, so it has also to a large extent determined the
grammatical treatment of the language by European scholars.

Much in the history of the learned movement is still obscure, and
opinions are at variance even as to points of prime consequence. Only
the concluding works in the development of the grammatical science has
been preserved to us; and though they are evidently the perfected fruits
of a long series of learned labors, the records of the latter are lost
beyond recovery. The time and the place of the creation of Sanskrit are
unknown; and as to its occasion, we have only our inferences and
conjectures to rely upon. It seems, however, altogether likely that the
grammatical sense of the ancient Hindus was awakened in great measure by
their study of the traditional sacred texts, and by their comparison of
its different language with that of contemporary use. It is certain that
the grammatical study of those texts (**çākhās**, lit’ly *branches*),
phonetic and other, was zealously and effectively followed in the
Brahmanic schools; this is attested by our possession of a number of
phonetico-grammatical treatises, **prātiçākhyas** (**prati çākhām**
*belonging to each several text*), each having for subject one principal
Vedic text, and noting all its peculiarities of form; these, both by the
depth and exactness of their own researches and by the number of
authorities which they quote, speak plainly of a lively scientific
activity continued during a long time. What part, on the other hand, the
notice of differences between the correct speech of the learned and the
altered dialects of the vulgar may have borne in the same movement is
not easy to determine; but it is not customary that a language has its
proper usages fixed by rule until the danger is distinctly felt of its
undergoing corruption.

The labors of the general school of Sanskrit grammar reached a climax in
the grammarian Pāṇini, whose text-book, containing the facts of the
language cast into the highly artful and difficult form of about four
thousand algebraic-formula-like rules (in the statement and arrangement
of which brevity alone is had in view, at the cost of distinctness and
unambiguousness), became for all after time the authoritative, almost
sacred, norm of correct speech. Respecting his period, nothing really
definite and trustworthy is known; but he is with much probability held
to have lived some time (two to four centuries) before the Christian
era. He has had commentators in abundance, and has undergone at their
hands some measure of amendment and completion; but he has not been
overthrown or superseded. The chief and most authoritative commentary on
his work is that called the **Mahābhāshya** *great comment*, by
Patanjali.

A language, even if not a vernacular one, which is in tolerably wide and
constant use for writing and speaking, is, of course, kept in life
principally by direct tradition, by communication from teacher to
scholar and the study and imitation of existing texts, and not by the
learning of grammatical rules; yet the existence of grammatical
authority, and especially of a single one, deemed infallible and of
prescriptive value, could not fail to exert a strong regulative
influence, leading to the avoidance of more and more of what was, even
if lingering in use, inconsistent with his teachings, and also, in the
constant reproduction of texts, to the gradual effacement of whatever
they might contain that was unapproved. Thus the whole more modern
literature of India has been Paninized, so to speak, pressed into the
mould prepared by him and his school. What are the limits of the
artificiality of this process is not yet known. The attention of
special students of the Hindu grammar (and the subject is so intricate
and difficult that the number is exceedingly small of those who have
mastered it sufficiently to have a competent opinion on such general
matters) has been hitherto mainly directed toward determining what the
Sanskrit according to Pāṇini really is, toward explaining the language
from the grammar. And, naturally enough, in India, or wherever else the
leading object is to learn to speak and write the language correctly —
that is, as authorized by the grammarians — that is the proper course to
pursue. This, however, is not the way really to understand the language.
The time must soon come, or it has come already, when the endeavor shall
be instead to explain the grammar from the language: to test in all
details, so far as shall be found possible, the reason of Pāṇini’s rules
(which contain not a little that seems problematic, or even sometimes
perverse); to determine what and how much genuine usage he had
everywhere as foundation, and what traces may be left in the literature
of usages possessing an inherently authorized character, though
unratified by him.

By the term “classical” or “later” language, then, as constantly used
below in the grammar, is meant the language of those literary monuments
which are written in conformity with the rules of the native grammar:
virtually, the whole proper Sanskrit literature. For although parts of
this are doubtless earlier than Pāṇini, it is impossible to tell just
what parts, or how far they have escaped in their style the leveling
influence of the grammar. The whole, too, may be called so far an
artificial literature as it is written in a phonetic form (see grammar,
**101a**) which never can have been a truly vernacular and living one.
Nearly all of it is metrical: not poetic works only, but narratives,
histories (so far as anything deserving that name can be said to exist),
and scientific treatises of every variety, are done into verse; a prose
and prose literature hardly has an existence (the principle exceptions,
aside from the voluminous commentaries, are a few stories, as the
**Daçakumāracarita** and the **Vāsavadattā**). Of linguistic history
there is next to nothing in it all; but only a history of style, and
this for the most part showing a gradual depravation, and increase of
artificiality and an intensification of certain more undesirable
features of the language — such as the use of passive constructions and
of participles instead of verbs, and the substitution of compounds for
sentences.

This being the condition of the later literature, it is of so much the
higher consequence that there is an earlier literature, to which the
suspicion of artificiality does not attach, or attaches at least only in
a minimal degree, which has a truly vernacular character, and abounds in
prose as well as verse.

The results of the very earliest literary productiveness of the Indian
people are the hymns with which, when they had only crossed the
threshold of the country, and when their geographic horizon was still
limited to the river-basin of the Indus with its tributaries, they
praised their gods, the deified powers of nature, and accompanied the
rites of their comparatively simple worship. At what period these were
made and sung cannot be determined with any approach to accuracy: it may
have been as early as 2000 B.C. They were long handed down by oral
tradition, preserved by the care, and increased by the additions and
imitations, of succeeding generations; the mass was ever growing, and,
with the change of habits and beliefs and religious practices, was being
variously applied — sung in chosen extracts, mixed with other material
into liturgies, adapted with more or less of distortion to help the
needs of a ceremonial which was coming to be of immense elaboration and
intricacy. And, at some time in the course of this history, there was
made for preservation a great collection of the hymn-material, mainly
its oldest and most genuine part, to the extent of over a thousand hymns
and ten thousand verses, arranged according to traditional authorship
and to subject and length and metre of hymn: this collection is the
**Rig-Veda** *Veda of verses* (ṛc) or of *hymns*. Other collections were
made also out of the same general mass of traditional material:
doubtless later, although the interrelations of this period are as yet
too unclear to allow of our speaking with entire confidence as to
anything concerning them. Thus, the **Sāma-Veda** *Veda of chants*
(sāman), containing only about a sixth as much, its verses nearly all
found in the Rig-Veda also, but appearing here with numerous differences
of reading: these were passages put together for chanting at the
soma-sacrifices. Again, collections called by the comprehensive name of
**Yajur-Veda** *Veda of sacrificial formulas* (**yajus**): these
contained not verses alone, but also numerous prose utterances, mingled
with the former, in the order in which they are practically employed in
the ceremonies; they were strictly liturgical collections. Of these,
there are in existence several texts, which have their mutual
differences: the **Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā** (in two slightly discordant
versions, **Mādhyandina** and **Kāṇva**), sometimes also called the
White Yajur-Veda; and the various and considerably differing texts of
the Black Yajur-Veda, namely the **Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā**, the
**Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā**, the **Kapiṣṭhala-Saṁhitā**, and the **Kāṭhaka**
(the two last not yet published). Finally, another historical
collection, like the Rig-Veda, but made up mainly of later and less
accepted material, and called (among other less current names) the
**Atharva-Veda** *Veda of the Atharvans* (a legendary priestly family);
it is somewhat more than half as bulky as the Rig-Veda, and contains a
certain amount of material corresponding to that of the latter, and also
a number of very brief prose passages. To this last collection is very
generally refused in the orthodox literature the name of Veda; but for
us it is the most interesting of all, after the Rig-Veda, because it
contains the largest amount of hymn-material (or mantra, as it it is
called, in distinction from the prose brāmaṇa), and in a language which,
though distinctly less antique than that of the other, is nevertheless
truly Vedic. Two versions of it are extant, one of them in only a single
known manuscript.

A not insignificant body of like material, and of various period
(although doubtless in the main belonging to the latest time of the
Vedic productiveness, and in part perhaps the imitative work of a yet
more modern time), is scattered through the texts to be later described,
the **Brāmaṇas** and the **Sūtras**. To assemble and sift and compare it
is now one of the pressing needs of Vedic study.

The fundamental divisions of the Vedic literature here mentioned have
all had their various schools of sectaries, each of these with a text of
its own, showing some differences from those of the other schools: but
those mentioned above are all that are now known to be in existence; and
the chance of the discovery of others grows every year smaller.

The labor of the schools in the conservation of their sacred texts was
extraordinary, and has been crowned with such success that the text of
each school, whatever may be its differences from the other schools, is
virtually without various readings, preserved with all its peculiarities
of dialect, and its smallest and most exceptional traits of phonetic
form, pure and unobscured. It is not the place here to describe the
means by which, in addition to the religious care of the sectaries, this
accuracy was secured: forms of text, lists of peculiarities and
treatises upon them, and so on. When this kind of care began in the case
of each text, and what of original character may have been effaced
before it, or lost in spite of it, cannot be told. But it is certain
that the Vedic records furnish, on the whole, a wonderfully accurate and
trustworthy picture of a form of ancient Indian language (as well as
ancient Indian beliefs and institutions) which was a natural and
undisturbed one, and which goes back a good way behind the classical
Sanskrit. Its differences from the latter the following treatise
endeavors to show in detail.

Along with the verses and sacrificial formulas and phrases in the text
of the Black Yajur-Veda are given long prose sections, in which the
ceremonies are described, their meaning and the reason of the details
and the accompanying utterances are discussed and explained,
illustrative legends are reported or fabricated, and various
speculations, etymological and other, are indulged in. Such matter comes
to be called **brāmaṇa** (apparently *relating to the brahman* or
*worship*). In the White Yajur-Veda, it is separated into a work by
itself, beside the **saṁhitā** or text of verse and formulas, and is
called the **Çatapatha-Brāmaṇa** *Brāhmana of a hundred ways*. Other
similar collections are found, belonging to various other schools of
Vedic study, and they bear the common name of **Brāhmaṇa**, with the
name of the school, or some other distinctive title, prefixed. Thus, the
**Āitareya** and **Kāuṣītaki-Brāhmaṇas**, belonging to the schools of
the Rig-Veda, the **Pañcaviṅça** and **Ṣaḍviṅça-Brāhmaṇas** and other
minor works, to the Sāma-Veda; the **Gopatha-Brāhmaṇa**, to the
Atharva-Veda; and a **Jāiminīya-** or **Talavakāra-Brāhmaṇa**, to the
Sāma-Veda, has recently (Burnell) been discovered in India; the
**Tāittirīya-Brāmaṇa** is a collection of mingled **mantra** and
**brāhmaṇa**, like the **saṁhitā** of the same name, but supplementary
and later. These works are likewise regarded as canonical by the
schools, and are learned by their sectaries with the same extreme care
which is devoted to the **saṁhitās**, and their condition of textual
preservation is of a kindred excellence. To a certain extent, there is
among them the possession of common material: a fact the bearings of
which are not yet fully understood.

Notwithstanding the inanity of no small part of their contents, the
Brāmaṇas are of a high order of interest in their bearings on the
history of Indian institutions; and philologically they are not less
important, since they represent a form of language in most respects
intermediate between the classical and that of the Vedas, and offer
specimens on a large scale of a prose style, and of one which is in the
main a natural and freely developed one — the oldest and most primitive
Indo-European prose.

Beside the Brāhmaṇas are sometimes found later appendices, of a similar
character, called **Āraṇyakas** (*forest-sections*): as the
**Āitareya-Āraṇyaka**, **Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka**, **Bṛhad-Āraṇyakas**, and
so on. And from some of these, or even from the Brāhmaṇas, are extracted
the earliest **Upaniṣads** (*sittings, lectures on sacred subjects*) —
which, however, are continued and added to down to a comparatively
modern time. The Upanishads are one of the lines by which the Brāhmaṇa
literature passes over into the later theological literature.

Another line of transition is shown in the **Sūtras** (*lines, rules*).
The works thus named are analogous with the Brāhmaṇas in that they
belong to the schools of Vedic study and are named from them, and that
they deal with the religious ceremonies: treating them, however, in the
way of prescription, not of dogmatic explanation. They, too, contain
some mantra or hymn-material, not found to occur elsewhere. In part
(**çrāuta** or **kalpa-sūtras**), they take up the great sacrificial
ceremonies, with which the Brāhmaṇas have to do; in part
(**gṛhya-sūtras**), they teach the minor duties of a pious householder;
in some cases (**sā-mayācārika-sūtras**) they lay down the general
obligations of one whose life is in accordance with prescribed duty. And
out of the last two, or especially the last, come by natural development
the law-books (**dharma-çāstras**), which make a conspicuous figure in
later literature: the oldest and most noted of them being that called by
the name of **Manu** (an outgrowth, it is believed by many, of the
Mānava Vedic school); to which are added that of Yājnavalkya, and many
others.

Respecting the chronology of this development, or the date of any class
of writings, still more of any individual work, the less that is said
the better. All dates given in Indian literary history are pins set up
to be bowled down again. Every important work has undergone so many more
or less transforming changes before reaching the form in which it comes
to us, that the question of original construction is complicated with
that of final redaction. It is so with the law-book of Manu, just
mentioned, which has well-founded claims to being regarded as one of the
very oldest works of the proper Sanskrit literature, if not the the
oldest (it has variously been assigned, to periods from six centuries
before Christ to four after Christ). It is so, again, in a still more
striking degree, with the great legendary epic of the **Mahābhārata**.
The ground-work of this is doubtless of very early date; but it has
served as a text into which materials of various character and period
have been inwoven, until it has become a heterogeneous mass, a kind of
cyclopedia for the warrior-caste, hard to separate into its constituent
parts. The story of **Nala**, and the philosophical poem
**Bhagavad-Gītā**, are two of the most noted of its episodes. The
**Rāmāyaṇa**, the other most famous epic, is a work of another kind:
though also worked over and more or less altered in its transmission to
our time, it is the production, in the main, of a single author
(Vālmīki); and it is generally believed to be in part allegorical,
representing the introduction of Aryan culture and dominion into
Southern India. By its side stand a number of minor epics, of various
authorship and period, as the **Raghuvaṅça** (ascribed to the dramatist
Kālidāsa), the **Māghakāvya**, the **Bhaṭṭikāvya** (the last, written
chiefly with the grammatical intent of illustrating by use as many as
possible of the numerous formations which, though taught by the
grammarians, find no place in the literature).

The **Purāṇas**, a large class of works mostly of immense extent, are
best mentioned in connection with the epics. They are pseudo-historical
and prophetic in character, of modern date, and of inferior value. Real
history finds no place in Sanskrit literature, nor is there any
conscious historical element in any of the works composing it.

Lyric poetry is represented by many works, some of which, as the
**Meghadūta** and **Gītogovinda**, are of no mean order of merit.

The drama is a still more noteworthy and important branch. The first
indications of dramatical inclination and capacity on the part of the
Hindus are seen in certain hymns of the Veda, where a mythological or
legendary situation is conceived dramatically, and set forth in the form
of a dialogue — well-known examples are the dialogue of Saramā and the
Paṇis, that of Yama and his sister Yamī, that of Vasishtha and the
rivers, that of Agni and the other gods — but there are no extant
intermediaries between these and the standard drama. The beginnings of
the latter date from a period when in actual life the higher and
educated characters used Sanskrit, and the lower and uneducated used the
popular dialects derived from it, the Prākrits; and their dialogue
reflects this condition of things. Then, however learning (not to call
it pedantry) intervened, and stereotyped the new element; a Prākrit
grammar grew up beside the Sanskrit grammar, according to the rules of
which Prākrit could be made indefinitely on a substrate of Sanskrit; and
none of the existing dramas need to date from the time of the vernacular
use of Prākrit, while most or all of them are undoubtedly much later.
Among the dramatic authors, Kālidāsa is incomparably the chief, and his
**Çakuntalā** is distinctly his masterpiece. His date has been a matter
of much inquiry and controversy; it is doubtless some centuries later
than our era. The only other worked deserving to be mentioned along with
Kālidāsa’s is the **Mṛcchakaṭī** of Çūdraka, also of questionable
period, but believed to be the oldest of the extant dramas.

A partly dramatic character belongs also to the fable, in which animals
are represented as acting and speaking. The most noted works in this
department are the **Pañcatantra**, which through Persian and Semitic
versions has made its way all over the world, and contributes a
considerable quota to the fable-literature of every European language,
and, partly founded on it, the comparatively recent and popular
**Hitopadeça** (*salutary instruction*).

Two of the leading departments of Sanskrit scientific literature, the
legal and the grammatical, have already been sufficiently noticed; of
those remaining, the most important is by far the philosophical. The
beginnings of philosophical speculation are seen already in some of the
later hymns of the Veda, more abundantly in the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas,
and then especially in the Upanishads. The evolution and historical
relation of the systems of philosophy, and the age of their text-books,
are matters on which much obscurity still rests. There are six systems
of primary rank, and reckoned as orthodox, although really standing in
no accordance with approved religious doctrines. All of them seek the
same end, the emancipation of the soul from the necessity of continuing
its existence in a succession of bodies, and its unification with the
All-soul; but they differ in regard to the means by which they seek to
attain this end.

The astronomical science of the Hindus is a reflection of that of
Greece, and its literature is of recent date; but as mathematicians, in
arithmetic and geometry, they have shown more independence. Their
medical science, although its beginnings go back even to the Veda, in
the use of medicinal plants with accompanying incantations, is of little
account, and its proper literature by no means ancient.

