+++
title = "06 Chapter II PRONUNCIATION"

+++




## CHAPTER II.

  
SYSTEM OF SOUNDS; PRONUNCIATION.

I. Vowels.

19\. The `a, i`, and `u`-vowels. The Sanskrit has these three earliest
and most universal vowels of Indo-European language, in both short and
long form — अ `a` and आ `ā`, इ `i` and ई `ī`, उ `u` and ऊ `ū`. They are
to be pronounced in the “Continental” or “Italian” manner — as in *far*
or *farther*, *pin* and *pique*, *pull* and *rule*.

20\. The `a` is the openest vowel, an utterance from the expanded
throat, stands in no relation of kindred with any of the classes of
consonantal sounds, and has no corresponding semivowel. Of the close
vowels `i` and `u`, on the other hand, `i` is palatal, and shades
through its semivowel `y` into the palatal and guttural
consonant-classes; `u` is similarly related, through its semivowel `v`,
to the labial class, as involving in its utterance a narrowing and
rounding of the lips.

a\. The Paninean scheme (commentary to `Pāṇini`’s grammar i. 1. 9)
classes `a` as guttural, but apparently only to give that series as well
as the rest a vowel; no one of the `Prātiçākhyas` puts `a` into one
class with `k` etc. All of these authorities concur in calling the `i`-
and `u`-vowels respectively palatal and labial.

21\. The short `a` is not pronounced in India with the full openness of
`ā`, as its corresponding short, but usually as the “neutral vowel”
(English so-called “short *u*”, of *but, son, blood*, etc.). This
peculiarity appears very early, being acknowledged by `Pāṇini` and by
two of the `Prātiçākhyas` (APr. i. 36; VPr. i. 72), which call the
utterance `saṁvṛta`, *covered up, dimmed*. It is wont to be ignored by
Western scholars, except those who have studied in India.

22\. The `a`-vowels are the prevailing vowel-sounds of the language,
being about twice as frequent as all the others (including diphthongs)
taken together. The `i`-vowels, again, are about twice as numerous as
the `u`-vowels. And, in each pair, the short vowel is more than twice
(2½ to 3 times) as common as the long.

a\. For more precise estimates of frequency, of these and of the other
alphabetic elements, and for the way in which they were obtained, see
below, 75.

23\. The `ṛ`- and `ḷ`-vowels. To the three simple vowels already
mentioned the Sanskrit adds two others, the `ṛ`-vowel and the `ḷ`-vowel,
plainly generated by the abbreviation of syllables containing
respectively a र् `r` or ल् `l` along with another vowel: the ऋ `ṛ`
coming almost always (see 237, 241–3) from अर् `ar` or र `ra`, the `ḷ`
from अल् `al`.

a\. Some of the Hindu grammarians add to the alphabet also a long `ḷ`:
but this is only for the sake of an artificial symmetry, since the sound
does not occur in a single genuine word in the language.

24\. The vowel ऋ `ṛ` is simply a smooth or untrilled *r*-sound, assuming
a vocalic office in syllable-making — as, by a like abbreviation, it has
done also in certain Slavonic languages. The vowel ऌ `ḷ` is an *l*-sound
similarly uttered — like the English l-vowel in such words as *able,
angle, addle*.

a\. The modern Hindus pronounce these vowels as *ri, rī, li* (or even
*lri*), having long lost the habit and the facility of giving a vowel
value to the pure *r*- and *l*-sounds. Their example is widely followed
by European scholars; and hence also the (distorting and altogether
objectionable) transliterations `ṛi`, `ṛī`, `ḷi`. There is no real
difficulty in the way of acquiring and practising the true utterance.

b\. Some of the grammarians (see APr. i. 37, note) attempt to define
more nearly the way in which, in these vowels, a real *r*- or
*l*-element is combined with something else.

25\. Like their corresponding semivowels, `r` and `l`, these vowels
belong respectively in the general lingual and dental classes; the
euphonic influence of `ṛ` and `ṝ` (189) shows this clearly. They are so
ranked in the Paninean scheme; but the Prātiçākhyas in general strangely
class them with the `jihvāmūlīya` sounds, our “gutturals” (39).

26\. The short `ṛ` is found in every variety of word and of position,
and is not rare, being just about as frequent as long `ū`. Long `ṝ` is
very much more unusual, occurring only in certain plural cases of
noun-stems in `ṛ` (371 b, d, 375). The `ḷ` is met with only in some of
the forms and derivatives of a single not very common verbal root
(`kḷp`).

27\. The diphthongs. Of the four diphthongs, two, the ए `e` and the ओ
`o`, are in great part original Indo-European sounds. In the Sanskrit,
they wear the aspect of being products of the increment or strengthening
of इ `i` and उ `u` respectively; and they are called the corresponding
`guṇa`-vowels to the latter (see below, 235 ff.). The other two, ऐ `āi`
and औ `āu`, are held to be of peculiar Sanskrit growth; they are also in
general results of another and higher increment of इ `i` and उ `u`, to
which they are called the corresponding `vṛddhi`-vowels (below, 235
ff.). But all are likewise sometimes generated by euphonic combination
(127); and ओ `o`, especially, is common as a result of the alteration of
a final अस् `as` (175).

28\. The ए `e` and ओ `o` are, both in India and Europe, usually
pronounced as they are transliterated — that is, as a long *e*- (English
“long *a*”, or *e* in *they*) and *o*-sounds, without diphthongal
character.

a\. Such they apparently already were to the authors of the
Prātiçākhyas, which, while ranking them as diphthongs (`sandhyakṣara`),
give rules respecting their pronunciation in a manner implying them to
be virtually unitary sounds. But their euphonic treatment (131–4)
clearly shows them to have been still at the period when the euphonic
laws established themselves, as they of course were at their origin,
real diphthongs, *ai* (*a* + *i*) and *au* (*a* + *u*). From them, on
the same evidence, the heavier or `vṛddhi` diphthongs were distinguished
by the length of their *a*-element, as *āi* (*ā* + *i*) and *āu* (*ā* +
*u*).

b\. The recognizable distinctness of the two elements in the
`vṛddhi`-diphthongs is noticed by the Prātiçākhyas (see APr. i. 40,
note); but the relation of those elements is either defined as equal, or
the *a* is made of less quantity than the *i* and *u*.

29\. The lighter or `guṇa`-diphthongs are much more frequent (6 or 7
times) than the heavier or `vṛddhi`-diphthongs, and the `e` and `āi`
than the `o` and `āu` (a half more). Both pairs are somewhat more than
half as common as the simple `i`- and `u`-vowels.

30\. The general name given by the Hindu grammarians to the vowels is
`svara` *tone*; the simple vowels are called `samānākṣara` *homogeneous
syllable*, and the diphthongs are called `sandhyakṣara`
*combination-syllable*. The position of the organs in their utterance is
defined to be one of openness, or of non-closure.

a\. As to quantity and accent, see below 76 ff., 80 ff. 

II\. Consonants

31\. The Hindu name for ‘consonant’ is `vyañjana` *manifester*. The
consonants are divided by the grammarians into `sparça` *contact* or
mute, `antaḥsthā`, *intermediate* or semivowel, and `ūṣman` *spirant*.
They will here be taken up and described in this order.

32\. Mutes. The mutes, `sparça`, are so called as involving a complete
closure or contact (`sparça`), and not an approximation only, of the
mouth-organs by which they are produced. They are divided into five
classes or series (`varga`), according to the organs and parts of organs
by which the contact is made; and each series is composed of five
members, differing according to the accompaniments of the contact.

33\. The five mute-series are called respectively guttural, palatal,
lingual (or cerebral), dental, and labial; and they are arranged in the
order as just mentioned, beginning with the contact made furthest back
in the mouth, coming forward from point to point, and ending with the
frontmost contact.

34\. In each series there are two surd members, two sonant, and one
nasal (which is also a sonant): for example, in the labial series प् `p`
and फ् `ph`, ब् `b` and भ् `bh`, and म् `m`.

a\. The members are by the Hindu grammarians called respectively *first,
second, third, fourth*, and *last* or *fifth*.

b\. The surd consonants are known as `aghoṣa` *toneless*, and the
sonants as `ghoṣavant` *having tone*; and the descriptions of the
grammarians are in accordance with these terms. All alike recognize a
difference of tone, and not in any manner a difference of force, whether
of contact or of expulsion, as separating the two great classes in
question. That the difference depends on `vivāra` *opening* or `saṁvāra`
*closure* (of the glottis), is also recognized by them.

35\. The first and third members of each series are the ordinary
corresponding surd and sonant mutes of European languages: thus, क् `k`
and ग् `g`, त् `t` and द् `d`, प् `p` and ब् `b`.

36\. Nor is the character of the nasal any more doubtful. What म `m` is
to प् `p` and ब् `b`, or न् `n` to त् `t` and द् `d`, that is also each
other nasal to its own series of mutes: a sonant expulsion into and
through the nose, while the mouth-organs are in the mute-contact. 

a\. The Hindu grammarians give distinctly this definition. The nasal
(`anunāsika` *passing through the nose*) sounds are declared to be
formed by mouth and nose together; or their nasality (`ānunāsikya`) to
be given them by unclosure of the nose.

37\. The second and fourth of each series are aspirates: thus, beside
the surd mute क् `k` we have the corresponding surd aspirate ख् `kh`,
and beside the sonant ग् `g`, the corresponding sonant aspirate घ् `gh`.
Of these, the precise character is more obscure and difficult to
determine.

a\. That the aspirates, all of them, are real mutes or contact sounds,
and not fricative (like European *th* and *ph* and *ch*, etc.), is
beyond question.

b\. It is also not doubtful in what way the surd `th`, for example,
differs from the unaspirated `t`: such aspirates are found in many
Asiatic languages, and even in some European; they involve the
slipping-out of an audible bit of *flatus* or aspiration between the
breach of mute-closure and the following sound, whatever it may be. They
are accurately enough represented by the `th` etc., with which, in
imitation of the Latin treatment of the similar ancient Greek aspirates,
we are accustomed to write them.

c\. The sonant aspirates are generally understood and described as made
in a similar way, with a perceptible *h*-sound after the breach of
sonant mute-closure But there are great theoretical difficulties in the
way of accepting this explanation; and some of the best phonetic
observers deny that the modern Hindu pronunciation is of such a
character, and define the element following the mute as a “glottal
buzz”, rather, or as an emphasized utterance of the beginning of the
succeeding sound. The question is one of great difficulty, and upon it
the opinions of the highest authorities are much at variance. Sonant
aspirates are still in use in India, in the pronunciation of the
vernacular as well as of the learned language.

d\. By the Prātiçākhyas, the aspirates of both classes are called
`soṣman`: which might mean either *accompanied by a rush of breath*
(taking `ūṣman` in its more etymological sense), or *accompanied by a
spirant* (below, 59). And some native authorities define the surd
aspirate as made by the combination of each surd non-aspirate with its
own corresponding surd spirant, the `h`-sound (below, 65). But this
would make the two classes of aspirates of quite diverse character, and
would also make `th` the same as `ts`, `ṭh` as `ṭṣ`, `ch` as `cç` —
which is in any measure plausible only of the last. Pāṇini has no name
for aspirates; the scheme given in his comment (to i. 1. 9) attributes
to them `mahāprāṇa` *great expiration*, and to the non-aspirates
`alpaprāṇa` *small expiration*.

e\. It is usual among European scholars to pronounce both classes of
aspirates as the corresponding non-aspirates with a following `h`: for
example थ् `th` nearly as in English *boathook*, फ् `ph` as in
*haphazard*, ध् `dh` as in *madhouse*, भ् `bh` as in *abhor*, and so on.
This is (as we have seen above) strictly accurate only as regards the
surd aspirates.

38\. The sonant aspirates are (in the opinion of most), or at least
represent, original Indo-European sounds, while the surd aspirates are a
special Indian development. The former are more than twice as common as
the latter. The unaspirated (non-nasal) mutes are very much more
frequent (5 times) than the aspirates (for the special frequency of `bh`
and the original `gh`, see 50 and 66); and among them the surds are more
numerous (2½ times) than the sonants. The nasals (chiefly `n` and `m`)
are nearly as frequent as the surd non-aspirates.

We take up now the several mute series.

39\. Guttural series: क् `k`, ख् `kh`, ग् `g`, घ् `gh`, ङ् `n̄`. These
are the ordinary European *k* and *g*-sounds, with their corresponding
aspirates and nasal (the last, like English *ng* in *singing*).

a\. The gutturals are defined by the Prātiçākhyas as made by contact of
the base of the tongue with the base of the jaw, and they are called,
from the former organ, `jihvāmūlīya` *tongue-root sounds*. The Paninean
scheme describes them simply as made in the throat (`kaṇṭha`). From the
euphonic influence of a `k` on a following `s` (below, 180), we may
perhaps infer that in their utterance the tongue was well drawn back in
the mouth.

40\. The `k` is by far the commonest of the guttural series, occurring
considerably more often than all the other four taken together. The
nasal, except as standing before one of the others of the same series,
is found only as final (after the loss of a following `k`: 386, 407) in
a very small number of words, and as product of the assimilation of
final `k` to a following nasal (161).

41\. The Sanskrit guttural series represents only a minority of
Indo-European gutturals; these last have suffered more and more general
corruption than any other class of consonants. By processes of
alteration which began in the Indo-European period, the palatal mutes,
the palatant sibilant `ç`, and the aspiration `h`, have come from
gutturals. See these various sounds below.

42\. Palatal series: च् `c`, छ् `ch`, ज् `j`, झ् `jh`, ञ् `ñ`.

The whole palatal series is derivative, being generated by the
corruption of original gutturals. The `c` comes from an original `k` —
as does also, by another degree of alteration, the palatal sibilant `ç`
(see below, 64). The `j`, in like manner, comes from a `g`; but the
Sanskrit `j` includes in itself two degrees of alteration, one
corresponding to the alteration of `k` to `c`, the other to that of `k`
to `ç` (see below, 219). The `c` is somewhat more common than the `j`
(almost as four to three). The aspirate `ch` is very much less frequent
(a tenth of `c`), and comes from the original group `sk`. The sonant
aspirate `jh` is excessively rare (occurring but once in RV., not once
in AV., and hardly half-a-dozen times in the whole other language);
where found, it is either onomatopoetic or of anomalous or not
Indo-European origin. The nasal, `ñ`, never occurs except immediately
before — or, in a small number of words, also after (201) — one of the
others of the same series.

43\. Hence, in the euphonic processes of the language, the treatment of
the palatals is in many respects peculiar. In some situations, the
original unaltered guttural shows itself — or, as it appears from the
point of view of the Sanskrit, the palatal reverts to its original
guttural. No palatal ever occurs as a final. The `j` is differently
treated, according as it represents the one or the other degree of
alteration. And `c` and `j` (except artificially, in the algebraic rules
of the grammarians) do not interchange, as corresponding surd and
sonant.

44\. The palatal mutes are by European scholars, as by the modern Hindus
also, pronounced with the compound sounds of English *ch* and *j* (in
*church* and *judge*).

a\. Their description by the old Hindu grammarians, however, gives them
a not less absolutely simple character than belongs to the other mutes.
They are called `tālavya` *palatal*, and declared to be formed against
the palate by the middle of the tongue. They seem to have been, then,
brought forward in the mouth from the guttural point, and made against
the hard palate at a point not far from the lingual one (below, 45), but
with the upper flat surface of the tongue instead of its point. Such
sounds, in all languages, pass easily into the (English) *ch*- and *j*-
sounds. The value of the `ch` as making the preceding vowel “long by
position” (227), and its frequent origination from `t` + `ç` (203), lead
to the suspicion that it, at least, may have had this character from the
beginning: compare 37 d, above.

45\. Lingual series: ट् `ṭ`, ठ् `ṭh`, ड् `ḍ`, ढ् `ḍh`, ण् `ṇ`. The
lingual mutes are by all the native authorities defined as uttered with
the tip of the tongue turned up and drawn back into the dome of the
palate (somewhat as the usual English smooth *r* is pronounced). They
are called by the grammarians `mūrdhanya`, literally *head-sounds*,
*capitals*, *cephalics*; which term is in many European grammars
rendered by ‘cerebrals’. In practice, among European Sanskritists, no
attempt is made to distinguish them from the dentals: ट् `ṭ` is
pronounced like त् `t`, ड् `ḍ` like द `d`, and so on with the rest.

46\. The linguals are another non-original series of sounds, coming
mainly from the phonetic alteration of the next series, the dentals, but
also in part occurring in words that have no traceable Indo-European
connection, and are perhaps derived from the aboriginal languages of
India. The tendency to lingualization is a positive one in the history
of the language: dentals easily pass into linguals under the influence
of contiguous or neighboring lingual sounds, but not the contrary; and
all the sounds of the class become markedly more frequent in the later
literature. The conditions of their ordinary occurrence are briefly
these: 1. `ṣ` comes from s, much more rarely from `ç`, `j`, `kṣ`, in
euphonic circumstances stated below (180, 218 ff.); 2. a dental mute
following `ṣ` is assimilated into it, becoming lingual (`ṭ`, `ṭh`, `ṇ`:
197); 3. `n` is often changed to `ṇ` after a lingual vowel or semivowel
or sibilant in the same word (189 ff.); 4. `ḍh`, which is of very rare
occurrence, comes from assimilation of a dental after `ṣ` (198 a) or `h`
(222); 5. `ṭ` and `ḍ` come occasionally by substitution for some other
sound which is not allowed to stand as final (142, 145–7). When
originated in these ways, the lingual letters may be regarded as normal;
in any other cases of their occurrence, they are either products of
abnormal corruption, or signs of the non-Indo-European character of the
words in which they appear.

a\. In a certain number of passages numerically examined (below, 75),
the abnormal occurrences of lingual mutes were less than half of the
whole number (74 out of 159), and most of them (43) were of `ṇ`: all
were found more frequent in the later passages. In the Rig-Veda, only 15
words have an abnormal `ṭ`; only 6, such a `ṭh`; only 1, such a `ḍh`;
about 20 (including 9 roots, nearly all of which have derivatives) show
an abnormal `ḍ`, besides 9 that have `ṇḍ`; and 30 (including 1 root)
show an `ṇ`.

b\. Taken all together, the linguals are by far the rarest class of
mutes (about 1½ per cent. of the alphabet) — hardly half as frequent
even as the palatals.

47\. Dental series: त् `t`, थ् `th`, द् `d`, ध् `dh`, न् `n`. These are
called by the Hindus also `dantya` *dental*, and are described as formed
at the teeth (or at the roots of the teeth), by the tip of the tongue.
They are practically the equivalents of our European *t*, *d*, *n*.

a\. But the modern Hindus are said to pronounce their dentals with the
tip of the tongue thrust well forward against the upper teeth, so that
these sounds get a slight tinge of the quality belonging to the English
and Modern Greek *th*-sounds. The absence of that quality in the
European (especially the English) dentals is doubtless the reason why to
the ear of a Hindu the latter appear more analogous with his linguals,
and he is apt to use the linguals in writing European words.

48\. The dentals are one of the Indo-European original mute-classes. In
their occurrence in Sanskrit they are just about as frequent as all the
other four classes taken together.

49\. Labial series: प् `p`, फ् `ph`, ब् `b`, भ् `bh`, म् `m`. These
sounds are called `oṣṭhya` *labial* by the Hindu grammarians also. They
are, of course, the equivalents of our *p*, *b*, *m*.

50\. The numerical relation of the labials are a little peculiar. Owing
to the absence (or almost entire absence) of *b* in Indo-European, the
Sanskrit `b` also is greatly exceeded in frequency by `bh`, which is the
most common of all the sonant aspirates, as `ph` is the least common of
the surd. The nasal `m` (notwithstanding its frequent euphonic mutations
when final: 212 ff.) occurs just about as often as all the other four
members of the series together.

a\. From an early period in the history of the language, but
increasingly later, `b` and `v` exchange with one another, or fail to be
distinguished in the manuscripts. Thus, the double root-forms `bṛh` and
`vṛh`, `bādh` and `vadh`, and so on. In the Bengal manuscripts, `v` is
widely written instead of more original `b`.

51\. Semivowels: य् `y`, र् `r`, ल् `l`, व् `v`.

a\. The name given to this class of sounds by the Hindu grammarians is
`antaḥsthā` *standing between* — either from their character as
utterances intermediate between vowel and consonant, or (more probably)
from the circumstance of their being placed between the mutes and
spirants in the arrangement of the consonants.

b\. The semivowels are clearly akin with the several mute series in
their physical character, and they are classified along with those
series — though not without some discordances of view — by the Hindu
grammarians. They are said to be produced with the organs slightly in
contact (`īṣatspṛṣṭa`), or in imperfect contact (`duḥspṛṣṭa`).

52\. The र् `r` is clearly shown by its influence in the euphonic
processes of the language to be a lingual sound, or one made with the
tip of the tongue turned up into the dome of the palate. It thus
resembles the English smooth *r*, and, like this, seems to have been
untrilled. 

a\. The Paninean scheme reckons `r` as a lingual. None of the
Prātiçākhyas, however, does so; nor are they entirely consistent with
one another in its description. For the most part, they define it as
made at “the roots of the teeth”. This would give it a position like
that of the vibrated *r*; but no authority hints at a vibration as
belonging to it.

b\. In point of frequency, `r` stands very high on the list of
consonants; it is nearly equal with `v`, `n`, `m`, and `y`, and only
exceeded by `t`.

53\. The ल् `l` is a sound of dental position, and is so defined and
classed by all the native authorities.

a\. The peculiar character of an *l*-sound, as involving expulsion at
the side of the tongue along with contact at its tip, is not noticed by
any Hindu phonetist.

b\. The semivowels `r` and `l` are very widely interchangeable in
Sanskrit, both in roots and in suffixes, and even in prefixes: there are
few roots containing a `l` which do not show also forms with `r`; words
written with the one letter are found in other texts, or in other parts
of the same text, written with the other. In the later period of the
language they are more separated, and the `l` becomes decidedly more
frequent, though always much rarer than the `r` (only as 1 to 7 or 8 or
10).

{`anchor|54`}54. Some of the Vedic texts have another *l*-sound, written
with a slightly different character (it is given at the end of the
alphabet, 5), which is substituted for a lingual `ḍ` (as also the same
followed by `h` for a `ḍh`) when occurring between two vowels. It is,
then, doubtless a lingual *l*, one made by breach (at the side of the
tongue) of the lingual instead of the dental mute-closure.

a\. Examples are ईळे `īḻe`, for ईडॆ `īḍe`, but ईड्य `iḍya`; मीळ्हुषॆ
`mīḻhuṣe`, for मीढुषे `mīḍhuṣe`, but मीढ्वान् `mīḍhvān`. It is
especially in the Rig-Veda and its auxiliary literature that this
substitution is usual.

55\. The य् `y` in Sanskrit, as in other languages generally, stands at
the closest relationship with the vowel इ `i` (short or long); the two
exchange with one another in cases innumerable.

a\. And in the Veda (as the metre shows) an `i` is very often to be read
where, in conformity with the rules of the later Sanskrit euphony, a `y`
is written. Thus the final `i`-vowel of a word remains `i` before an
initial vowel; that of a stem maintains itself unchanged before an
ending; and an ending of derivation — as `ya`, `tya` — has `i` instead
of `y`. Such cases will be noticed in more detail later. The constancy
of the phenomenon in certain words and classes of words shows that this
was no merely optional interchange. Very probably, the Sanskrit `y` had
everywhere more of an `i`-character than belongs to the corresponding
European sound. ⁠**`56.`** The **`y`** is by its physical character a
palatal utterance; and it is classed as a palatal semivowel by the Hindu
phonetists. It is one of the most common of Sanskrit sounds.

⁠**`57.`** The **व् `v`** is pronounced as English or French *v* (German
*w*) by the modern Hindus — except when preceded by a consonant in the
same syllable, in which case it has rather the sound of English *w*; and
European scholars follow the same practice (with or without the same
exception).

⁠ **`a.`** By its whole treatment in the euphony of the language,
however, the **`v`** stands related to an *u*-vowel precisely as **`y`**
to an *i*-vowel. It is, then, a *v* only according the original Roman
value of that letter — that is to say, a *w*-sound in the English sense;
though (as was stated above for the **`y`**) it may well have been less
markedly separated from *u* than English *w*, or more like French *ou*
in *oui* etc. But, as the original *w* has in most European languages
been changed to *v* (English), so also in India, and that from a very
early time: the Paninean scheme and two of the Prātiçākhyas (VPr. and
TPr.) distinctly define the sound as made between the upper teeth and
the lower lip — which, of course, identifies it with the ordinarily
modern *v*-sound. As a matter of practice, the usual pronunciation need
not be seriously objected to; yet the student should not fail to note
that the rules of Sanskrit euphony and the name of “semivowel” have no
application except to a *w*-sound in the English sense: a *v*-sound
(German *w*) is no semivowel, but a spirant, standing on the same
articulate stage with the English *th*-sounds and the *f*.

⁠**`58.`** The **`v`** is classed as a labial semivowel by the Hindu
phonetical authorities. It has a somewhat greater frequency than the
**`y`**.

a\. In the Veda, under the same circumstances as the `y` (above, 55 a),
`v` is to be read as a vowel, `u`.

b\. As to the interchange of **`v`** and **`b`**, see above, **`50 a`**.

59\. Spirants. Under the name **`ūṣman`** (literally *heat, steam,
flatus*), which is usually and well represented by *spirant*, some of
the Hindu authorities include all remaining sounds of the alphabet;
others apply the term only to the three sibilants and the aspiration —
to which it will here also be restricted.

a\. The term is not found in the Paninean scheme; by different treatises
the guttural and labial breathings, these and the `visarga`, or all
these and `anusvāra`, are also (in addition to the sibilants and `h`)
called `ūṣman` (see APr. i., 31 note). The organs of utterance are
described as being in the position of the mute-series to which each
spirant belongs respectively, but unclosed, or unclosed in the middle.

60\. The स् s. Of the three sibilants, or surd spirants, this is the one
of plainest and least questioned character: it is the ordinary European
*s* — a hiss expelled between the tongue and the roof of the mouth
directly behind the upper front teeth.

a\. It is, then, dental, as it is classed by all the Hindu authorities.
Notwithstanding the great losses which it suffers in Sanskrit euphony;
by conversion to the other sibilants, to r, to visarga, etc., it is
still very high among the consonants in the order of frequency, or
considerably more common than both the other two sibilants together.

61\. The ष् ṣ. As to the character of this sibilant, also, there is no
ground for real question: it is the one produced in the lingual
position, or with the tip of the tongue reverted into the dome of the
palate. It is, then, a kind of *sh*-sound; and by European Sanskritists
it is pronounced as an ordinary *sh* (French *ch*, German *sch*), no
attempt being made (any more than in the case of the other lingual
sounds: 45) to give it its proper lingual quality.

a\. Its lingual character is shown by its whole euphonic influence, and
it is described and classed as lingual by all the Hindu authorities (the
APr. adds, i. 23, that the tongue in its utterance is trough-shaped). In
its audible quality, it is a *sh*-sound rather than a *s*-sound; and, in
the considerable variety of sibilant-utterance, even in the same
community, it may coincide with the *sh* of some among ourselves. Yet
the general and normal *sh* is palatal (see below, 63); and therefore
the sign ṣ, marked in accordance with the other lingual letters, is the
only unexceptionable transliteration for the Hindu character.

b\. In modern pronunciation in India, ṣ is much confounded with kh; and
the manuscripts are apt to exchange the characters. Some later
grammatical treatises, too, take note of the relationship.

62\. This sibilant (as was noticed above, 46, and will be more
particularly explained below, 180 ff.) is no original sound, but a
product of the lingualization of s under certain euphonic conditions.
The exceptions are extremely few (9 out of 145 noted occurrences: 75),
and of a purely sporadic character. The Rig-Veda has (apart from √ sah,
182 b) only twelve words which show a ṣ under other conditions.

a\. The final ṣ of a root has in some cases attained a more independent
value, and does not revert to s when the euphonic conditions are
removed, but shows anomalous forms (225–6).

63\. The श् ç. This sibilant is by all the native authorities classed
and described as palatal, nor is there anything in its history or
euphonic treatment to cast doubt on its character as such. It is, then,
made with the flat of the tongue against the forward part of the palatal
arch — that is to say, it is the usual and normal *sh*-sound. By
European scholars it is variously pronounced — more often, perhaps, as
*s* than as *sh*.

a\. The two *sh*-sounds, ṣ and ç, are made in the same part of the mouth
(the ṣ probably rather further back), but with a different part of the
tongue; and they are doubtless not more unlike than, for example, the
two *t*-sounds, written ṭ and t; and it would be not less proper to
pronounce them both as one *sh* than to pronounce the linguals and
dentals alike. To neglect the difference of s and ç is much less to be
approved. The very near relationship of ṣ and ç is attested by their
euphonic treatment, which is to a considerable extent the same, and by
their not infrequent confusion by the writers of manuscripts.

64\. As was mentioned above (41), the ç, like c, comes from the
corruption of an original *k*-sound, by loss of mute-contact as well as
forward shift of the point of production. In virtue of this derivation,
it sometimes (though less often than c) “reverts” to k — that is, the
original k appears instead of it (43); while, on the other hand, as a
*sh*-sound, it is to a certain extent convertible to ṣ. In point of
frequency, it slightly exceeds the latter.

65\. The remaining spirant, ह् h, is ordinarily pronounced like the
usual European surd aspiration h.

a\. This is not, however, its real character. It is defined by all the
native authorities as not a surd element, but a sonant (or else an
utterance intermediate between the two); and its whole value in the
euphony of the language is that of a sonant: but what is its precise
value is very hard to say. The Paninean scheme ranks it as guttural, as
it does also a: this means nothing. The Prātiçākhyas bring it into no
relation with the guttural class; one of them quotes the opinion of some
authorities that “it has the same position with the beginning of the
following vowel” (TPr. ii. 47) — which so far identifies it with our h.
There is nothing in its euphonic influence to mark it as retaining any
trace of gutturally articulated character. By some of the native
phonetists it is identified with the aspiration of the sonant aspirates
— with the element by which, for example, gh differs from g. This view
is supported by the derivation of h from the aspirates (next paragraph),
by that of ḷ + h from ḍh (54), and by the treatment of initial h after a
final mute (163).

66\. The h, as already noticed, is not an original sound, but comes in
nearly all cases from an older gh (for the few instances of its
derivation from dh and bh, see below, 223 g). It is a vastly more
frequent sound than the unchanged gh (namely, as 7 to 1): more frequent,
indeed, than any of the guttural mutes except k. It appears, like j
(219), to include in itself two stages of corruption of gh: one
corresponding with that of k to c, the other with that of k to ç; see
below, 223, for the roots belonging to the two classes respectively.
Like the other sounds of guttural derivation, it sometimes exhibits
“reversion” (43) to its original.

67\. The ः ḥ, or visarga (visarjanīya, as it is uniformly called by the
Prātiçākhyas and by Pāṇini, probably as *belonging to the end of a
syllable*), appears to be merely a surd breathing, a final *h*-sound (in
the European sense of *h*), uttered in the articulating position of the
preceding vowel.

a\. One Prātiçākhya (TPr. ii. 48) gives just this last description of
it. It is by various authorities classed with h, or with h and a: all of
them are alike sounds in whose utterance the mouth-organs have no
definite shaping action.

68\. The visarga is not original, but always only a substitute for final
s or r, neither of which is allowed to maintain itself unchanged (170
ff.). It is a comparatively recent member of the alphabetic system; the
other euphonic changes of final s and r have not passed through visarga
as an intermediate stage. And the Hindu authorities are considerably
discordant with one another as to how far ḥ is a necessary substitute,
and how far a permitted one, alternative with a sibilant, before a
following initial surd.

69\. Before a surd guttural or labial,respectively, some of the native
authorities permit, while others require, conversion of final s or r
into the so-called jihvāmūlīya and upadhmānīya spirants. It may be
fairly questioned, perhaps, whether these two sounds are not pure
grammatical abstractions, devised (like the long ḷ-vowel: 23 a) in order
to round out the alphabet to greater symmetry. At any rate, both
manuscripts and printed texts in general make no account of them.
Whatever individual character they may have must be, it would seem, in
the direction of the (German) *ch*- and *f*-sounds. When written at all,
they are wont to be transliterated by *χ* and *φ*. 

70\. The ं anusvāra, ṅ or ṁ, is a nasal sound lacking that closure of
the organs which is required to make a nasal mute or contact-sound (36);
in its utterance there is nasal resonance along with some degree of
openness of the mouth.

71\. There is discordance of opinion among both the Hindu phonetists and
their modern European successors respecting the real character of this
element; hence a little detail is necessary here with regard to its
occurrence and their views of it.

a\. Certain nasals in Sanskrit are of servile character, always to be
assimilated to a following consonant, of whatever character that may be.
Such are final m in sentence-combination (213), the penultimate nasal of
a root, and a nasal of increment (255) in general. If one of these
nasals stands before a contact-letter or mute, it becomes a nasal mute
corresponding the the latter — that is, a nasal utterance in the same
position of the mouth-organs which gives the succeeding mute. If, on the
other hand, the following consonant does not involve a contact (being a
semivowel or spirant), the nasal element is also without contact: it is
a nasal utterance with unclosed mouth-organs. The question is, now,
whether this nasal utterance becomes merely a nasal infection of the
preceding vowel, turning it into a nasal vowel (as in French *on, en,
un*, etc., by reason of a similar loss of a nasal mute); or whether it
is an element of more individual character, having place between the
vowel and the consonant; or, once more, whether it is sometimes the one
thing and sometimes the other. The opinions of the Prātiçākhyas and
Pāṇini are briefly as follows:

b\. The Atharva-Prātiçākhya holds that the result is everywhere a
nasalized vowel, except when n or m is assimilated to a following l; in
that case, the n or m becomes a nasal l: that is, the nasal utterance is
made in the l-position, and has a perceptible l-character.

c\. The other Prātiçākhyas teach a similar conversion into a nasal
counterpart to the semivowel, or a nasal semivowel, before y and l and v
(not before r also). In most of the other cases where the
Atharva-Prātiçākhya acknowledges a nasal vowel — namely, before r and
the spirants — the others teach the intervention after the vowel of a
distinct nasal element, called the anusvāra *after-tone*.

d\. Of the nature of this nasal afterpiece to the vowel no intelligibly
clear account is given. It is said (RPr.) to be either vowel or
consonant; it is declared (RPr., VPr.) to be made with the nose alone,
or (TPr.) to be nasal like the nasal mutes; it is held by some (RPr.) to
be the sonant tone of the nasal mutes; in its formation, as in that of
the vowel and spirant, there is (RPr.) no contact. As to its quantity,
see further on.

e\. There are, however, certain cases and classes of cases where these
other authorities also acknowledge a nasal vowel. So, especially,
wherever a final n is treated (208–9) as if it were ns (its
historically older form); and also in a small number of specified words.
They also mention the doctrine of nasal vowel instead of anusvāra as
held by some (and TPr. is uncertain and inconsistent in its choice
between the one and the other).

f\. In Pāṇini, finally, the prevailing doctrine is that of anusvāra
everywhere, and it is even allowed in many cases where the Prātiçākhyas
prescribe only a nasal mute. But a nasal semivowel is also allowed
instead before a semivowel, and a nasal vowel is allowed in the cases
(mentioned above) where some of the Prātiçākhyas require it by
exception.

g\. It is evidently a fair question whether this discordance and
uncertainty of the Hindu phonetists is owing to a real difference of
utterance in different classes of cases and in different localities, or
whether to a different scholastic analysis of what is really everywhere
the same utterance. If anusvāra is a nasal element following the vowel,
it cannot well be any thing but either a prolongation of the same
vowel-sound with nasality added, or a nasalized bit of neutral-vowel
sound (in the latter case, however, the altering influence of an i or
u-vowel on a following s ought to be prevented, which is not the case:
see 183).

72\. The assimilated nasal element, whether viewed as nasalized vowel,
nasal semivowel, or independent anusvāra, has the value of something
added, in making a heavy syllable, or length by position (79).

a\. The Prātiçākhyas (VPr., RPr.) give determinations of the quantity of
the anusvāra combining with a short and with a long vowel respectively
to make a long syllable.

73\. a. Two different signs, ं and ँ, are found in the manuscripts,
indicating the nasal sound here treated of. Usually they are written
above the syllable, and there they seem most naturally to imply a nasal
affection of the vowel of the syllable, a nasal (anunāsika) vowel. Hence
some texts (Sāma- and Yajur-Vedas), when they mean a real anusvāra,
bring one of the signs down into the ordinary consonant-place; but the
usage is not general. As between the two signs, some manuscripts employ,
or tend to employ, the ँ where a nasalized (anunāsika) vowel is to be
recognized, and elsewhere the ं; and this distinction is consistently
observed in many European printed texts; and the former is called the
anunāsika sign: but the two are doubtless originally and properly
equivalent.

b\. It is a very common custom of the manuscripts to write an
anusvāra-sign for any nasal following the vowel of a syllable, either
before another consonant or as final (not before a vowel), without any
reference to whether it is to be pronounced as nasal mute, nasal
semivowel, or anusvāra. Some printed texts follow this slovenly and
undesirable habit; but most write a nasal mute whenever it is to be
pronounced — excepting where it is an assimilated m (213). 

c\. It is convenient also in transliteration to distinguish the
assimilated m by a special sign, ṁ, from the anusvāra of more
independent origin, ṅ; and this method will be followed in the present
work.

74\. This is the whole system of sounds recognized by the written
character; for certain other transitional sounds, more or less widely
recognized in the theories of the Hindu phonetists, see below, 230.

75\. The whole spoken alphabet, then, may be arranged in the following
manner, in order to show, so far as is possible in a single scheme, the
relations and important classifications of its various members:

[![Sanskrit-phonology-chart.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ab/Sanskrit-phonology-chart.png/400px-Sanskrit-phonology-chart.png)](/wiki/File:Sanskrit-phonology-chart.png)

a\. The figures set under the characters give the average percentage of
frequency of each sound, found by counting the number of times in which
it occurred in an aggregate of 10,000 sounds of continuous text, in ten
different passages, of 1,000 sounds each, selected from different epochs
of the literature: namely, two from the Rig-Veda, one from the
Atharva-Veda, two from different Brāhmaṇas, and one each from the Manu,
Bhagavad-Gītā, Çakuntalā, Hitopadeça, and Vāsa-vadattā (J.A.O.S., vol.
X. p. c1). 

III\. Quantity of sounds and syllables.

76\. The Hindu grammarians take the pains to define the quantity of a
consonant (without distinction among consonants of different classes) as
half that of a short vowel.

77\. They also define the quantity of a long (dīrgha) vowel or diphthong
as twice that of a short (hrasva) vowel — making no distinction in this
respect between the guṇa- and the vṛddhi-diphthongs.

78\. Besides these two vowel-quantities, the Hindus acknowledge a third,
called *pluta* (literally swimming), or protracted, and having three
*moras* or three times the quantity of a short vowel. A protracted vowel
is marked by a following figure 3: thus, आ३ ā3.

a\. The protracted vowels are practically of rare occurrence (in RV.,
three cases; in AV., fifteen; in the Brāhmaṇa literature, decidedly more
frequent). They are used in cases of questioning, especially of a
balancing between two alternatives, and also of calling to a distance or
urgently. The protraction is of the last syllable in a word, or in a
whole phrase; and the protracted syllable has usually the acute tone, in
addition to any other accent the word may have; sometimes it takes also
anusvāra, or is made nasal.

b\. Examples are: adháḥ svid āsī́3d upári svid āsī3t (RV.) *was it,
forsooth, below? was it, forsooth, above&gt;* idám bhū́yā́3 idā́3m íti
(AV.) *saying, is this more, or is that?* ágnā́3i pátnīvā́3ḥ sómam piba
(TS.) *O Agni! thou with thy spouse! drink the soma*.

c\. A diphthong is protracted by prolongation of its first or a-element:
thus, e to ā3i, o to ā3u.

d\. The sign of protraction is also sometimes written as the result of
accentual combination, when so-called kampa occurs: see below, 87 d.

79\. For metrical purposes, syllables (not vowels) are distinguished by
the grammarians as heavy (guru) or light (laghu). A syllable is heavy if
its vowel is long, or short and followed by more than one consonant
(“long by position”). Anusvāra and visarga count as full consonants in
making heavy syllable. The last syllable of a pāda (primary division of
a verse) is reckoned as either heavy or light.

a\. The distinction in terms between the difference of long and short in
vowel-sound and that of heavy and light in syllable-construction is
valuable and should be observed.

IV\. Accent.

80\. The phenomena of accent are, by the Hindu grammarians of all ages
alike, described and treated as depending on a variation of tone or
pitch; of any difference of stress involved, they make no account.

81\. The primary tones (svara) or accent-pitches are two: a higher
(udātta *raised*), or acute; and a lower (anudātta *not raised*), or
grave. A third (called svarita: a term of doubtful meaning) is always of
secondary origin, being (when not enclitic: see below, 85) the result of
actual combination of an acute vowel and a following grave vowel into
one syllable. It is also uniformly defined as compound in pitch, a union
of higher and lower tone within the limits of a single syllable. It is
thus identical in physical character with the Greek and Latin
circumflex, and fully entitled to be called by the same name.

82\. Strictly, therefore, there is but one distinction of tone in the
Sanskrit accentual system, as described by the native grammarians and
marked in the written texts: the accented syllable is raised in tone
above the unaccented; while then further, in certain cases of the fusion
of an accented and an unaccented element into one syllable, that
syllable retains the compounded tone of both elements.

83\. The svarita or circumflex is only rarely found on a pure long vowel
or diphthong, but almost always on a syllable in which a vowel, short or
long, is preceded by a y or v representing an originally acute i- or
u-vowel.

a\. In transliteration, in this work, the udātta or acute will be marked
with the ordinary sign of the acute, and the svarita or circumflex (as
being a downward slide of the voice forward) with what is usually called
the grave accent: thus, á, acute, yà or và, circumflex. 

84\. The Prātiçākhyas distinguish and name separately the circumflexed
tones arising by different processes of combination: thus, the
circumflex is called

a\. Kṣāipra (*quick*), when an acute i- or u-vowel (short or long) is
converted into y or v before a dissimilar vowel of grave tone: thus,
vyā̀pta from ví-āpta, apsvàntár from apsú antár.

b\. Jātya (*native*) or nitya (*own*), when the same combination lies
further back, in the make-up of a stem or form, and so is constant, or
belongs to the word in all circumstances of its occurrence: thus, kvà
(from kúa), svàr (súar), nyàk (níak), budhnyà (budhnía), kanyā̀ (kaníā),
nadyàs (nadī́-as), tanvā̀ (tanū́-ā).

c\. The words of both the above classes are in the Veda, in the great
majority of cases, to be read with restoration of the acute vowel as a
separate syllable; thus, apsú antár, súar, nadī́as, etc. In some texts,
part of them are written correspondingly, thus, súvar, tanúvā, budhníya.

d\. Praçliṣṭa, when the acute and grave vowels are of such character
that they are fused into a long vowel or diphthong (128 c): thus, divī̀
’va (RV. AV. etc.), from diví iva; sū̀dgātā (TS.), from sú-udgātā; nāì
’vā̀ ’çnīyāt (ÇB.), from ná evá açnīyāt.

e\. Abhinihita, when an initial grave a is absorbed by a final acute é
or ó (135 a): thus, tè ’bruvan, from té abruvan; sò ’bravīt, from só
abravīt.

85\. But further, the Hindu grammarians agree in declaring the
(naturally grave) syllable following an acute, whether in the same or in
another word, to be svarita or circumflex — unless, indeed, it be itself
followed by an acute or circumflex; in which case it retains its grave
tone. This is called by European scholars the enclitic or dependent
circumflex.

a\. Thus, in téna and té ca, the syllable na and word ca are regarded
and marked as circumflex; but in téna té and té ca svàr they are grave.

b\. This seems to mean that the voice, which is borne up at the higher
pitch to the end of the acute syllable, does not ordinarily drop to
grave pitch by an instantaneous movement, but descends by a more or less
perceptible slide in the course of the following syllable. No Hindu
authority suggests the theory of a middle or intermediate tone for the
enclitic, any more than for the independent circumflex. For the most
part, the two are identified with one another, in treatment and
designation. The enclitic circumflex is likewise divided into a number
of sub-varieties, with different names: they are of too little
consequence to be worth reporting. 

86\. The essential difference of the two kinds of circumflex is shown
clearly enough by these facts: 1. the independent circumflex takes the
place of the acute as the proper accent of a word, while the enclitic is
the mere shadow following an acute, and following it in another word
precisely as in the same word; 2. the independent circumflex maintains
its character in all situations, while the enclitic before a following
circumflex or acute loses its circumflex character, and becomes grave;
moreover, 3. in many of the systems of marking accent (below, 88), the
two are quite differently indicated.

87\. The accentuation is marked in manuscripts only of the older
literature: namely, in the primary Vedic texts, or saṁhitās, in two of
the Brāhmaṇas (Tāittirīya and Çatapatha), in the Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka, in
certain passages of the Āitareya-Āraṇyaka, and in the Suparṇādhyāya.
There are a number of methods of writing accent, more or less different
from one another; the one found in manuscripts of the Rig-Veda, which is
most widely known, and of which most of the others are only slight
modifications, is as follows.

a\. The acute syllable is left unmarked; the circumflex, whether
independent or enclitic, has a short perpendicular stroke above; and the
grave next preceding an acute or (independent) circumflex has a short
horizontal stroke below. Thus,

अ॒ग्निम् agním; जु॒होति॑ juhóti; त॒न्वा॑ tanvā̀; क्व॑ kvà.

b\. But the introductory grave stroke below cannot be given if an acute
syllable is initial; hence an unmarked syllable at the beginning of a
word is to be understood as acute; and hence also, if several grave
syllables precede an acute at the beginning of a sentence, they must all
alike have the grave sign. Thus,

इन्द्रः॑ índraḥ; ते té; क॒रि॒ष्यसि॑ kariṣyási; तु॒वि॒जा॒ता tuvijātā́.

c\. All the grave syllables, however, which follow a marked circumflex
are left unmarked, until the occurrence of another accented syllable
causes the one which precedes it to take the preparatory stroke below.
Thus,

सु॒दृशी॑कसँदृक् sudṛ́çīkasaṁdṛk;

but

सु॒दृशी॑कसँदृ॒ग्गवा॑म् sudṛ́çīkasaṁdṛg gávām.

d\. If an independent circumflex be followed by an acute (or by another
independent circumflex), a figure 1 is set after the former circumflexed
vowel if it be short, or a figure 3 if it be long, and signs of accent
are applied as in the following examples:

अ॒प्स्व१॒न्तः apsv à1ntáḥ (from apsú antáḥ); रा॒यो॒३॒वनिः rāyò3 vániḥ
(from rāyó avániḥ).



The rationale of this mode of designation is not well understood; the
Prātiçākhyas give no account of it. In the scholastic utterance of the
syllable so designated is made a peculiar quaver or *roulade* of the
voice, called kampa or vikampana.

e\. The accent-marks are written with red ink in the manuscripts, being
added after the text is written, and perhaps often by another hand.

88\. a. Nearly accordant with this, the Rig-Veda method of designating
accent, are the methods employed in the manuscripts of the Atharva-Veda,
of the Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā, and of the Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā, Brāhmaṇa, and
Āraṇyaka. Their differences from it are of trifling importance,
consisting mainly in peculiar ways of marking the circumflex that
precedes an acute (87 d). In some manuscripts of the Atharva-Veda, the
accent-marks are dots instead of strokes, and that for the circumflex is
made within the syllable instead of above it.

b\. In most manuscripts of the Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā, the acute syllable
itself, besides its surroundings, is marked — namely, by a perpendicular
stroke above the syllable (like that of the ordinary circumflex in the
RV. method). The independent circumflex has a hook beneath the syllable,
and the circumflex before an acute (87 d) is denoted simply by a figure
3, standing before instead of after the circumflexed syllable.

c\. The Çatapatha-Brāhmaṇa uses only a single accent-sign, the
horizontal stroke beneath the syllable (like the mark for grave in RV.).
This is put under an acute, or, if two or more acutes immediately follow
one another, only under the last of them. To mark an independent
circumflex, it is put under the preceding syllable. The method is an
imperfect one, allowing many ambiguities.

d\. The Sāma-Veda method is the most intricate of all. It has a dozen
different signs, consisting of figures, or of figures and letters
combined, all placed above the syllables, and varying according to both
the accentual character of the syllable and to its surroundings. Its
origin is obscure; if anything more is indicated by it then by the other
simpler systems, the fact has not been demonstrated.

89\. In this work, as everything given in the devanāgarī characters is
also given in transliteration, it will generally be unnecessary to mark
the accent except in the transliterated form; where, however, the case
is otherwise, there will be adopted the method of marking only the
really accented syllables, the acute and the independent circumflex: the
latter by the usually svarita-sign, the former by a small u (for udātta)
above the syllable: thus,

[![Indra udatta accent
method.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Indra_udatta_accent_method.png/20px-Indra_udatta_accent_method.png)](/wiki/File:Indra_udatta_accent_method.png)
índra, [![Agne udatta accent
method.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/Agne_udatta_accent_method.png/20px-Agne_udatta_accent_method.png)](/wiki/File:Agne_udatta_accent_method.png)
ágne, स्व॑र् svàr, नद्य॑स् nadyàs.

a\. These being given, everything else which the Hindu theory recognizes
as dependent on and accompanying them can readily be understood as
implied. 

90\. The theory of the Sanskrit accent, as here given (a consistent and
intelligible body of phenomena), has been overlaid by the Hindu
theorists, especially of the Prātiçākhyas, with a number of added
features, of a much more questionable character. Thus:

a\. The unmarked grave syllables following a circumflex (either at the
end of a sentence, or till the near aproach of another acute) are
declared to have the same high tone with the (also unmarked) acute. They
are called pracaya or pracita (*accumulated*: because liable to occur in
an indefinite series of successive syllables).

b\. The circumflex, whether independent or enclitic, is declared to
begin on a higher pitch than acute, and to descend to acute pitch in
ordinary cases: the concluding instant of it being brought down to grave
pitch, however, in the case of an independent circumflex which is
immediately followed by another ascent of the voice to higher pitch, in
acute or independent circumflex (a kampa syllable: 87 d).

c\. Pāṇini gives the ambiguous name of ekaçruti (*monotone*) to the
pracita syllables, and says nothing of the uplifting of the circumflex
to a higher plane; he teaches, however, a depression below the grave
pitch for the marked grave syllable before acute or circumflex, calling
it sannatara (otherwise anudāttatara).

91\. The system of accentuation as marked in the Vedic texts appears to
have assumed in the traditional recitation of the Brahmanic schools a
peculiar and artificial form, in which the designated syllables, grave
and circumflex (equally the enclitic and the independent circumflex),
have acquired a conspicuous value, while the undesignated, the acute,
has sunk into insignificance.

92\. The Sanskrit accent taught in the native grammars and represented
by the accentuated texts is essentially a system of word-accent only. No
general attempt is made (any more than in the Greek system) to define or
mark a sentence-accent, the effect of the emphasis and modulation of the
sentence in modifying the independent accent of individual words. The
only approach to it is seen in the treatment of vocatives and personal
verb-forms.

a\. A vocative is usually without accent except at the beginning of a
sentence: for further details, see 314.

b\. A personal verb-form is usually accentless in an independent-clause,
except when standing at the beginning of the clause: for further
details, see 591 ff.

93\. Certain other words also are, usually or always, without accent.

a\. The particles ca, vā, u, sma, iva, cid, svid, ha, and the Vedic kam
(or kám), gha, bhala, samaha, īm, sīm, are always without accent; also
yathā in RV. (sometimes also elsewhere) in the sense of iva, at the end
of a pāda or verse-division. 

b\. The same is true of certain pronouns and pronominal stems: mā, me,
nāu, nas, tvā, te, vām, vas (491 b), ena (500), tva (503 b), sama (513
c).

c\. The cases of the pronominal stem a are sometimes accented and
sometimes accentless (502).

d\. An accentless word is not allowed to stand at the beginning of a
sentence; also not of a pāda or primary division of a verse; a pāda is,
in all matters relating to accentuation, treated like an independent
sentence.

94\. Some words have more than a single accented syllable. Such are:

a\. Certain dual copulative compounds in the Veda (see 1255), as
mitrā́váruṇā, dyā́vāpṛthivī́. Also, a few other Vedic compounds (see 1267
d), as bṛ́haspáti, tánūnápāt.

b\. In a few cases, the further compounds and derivatives of such
compounds, as dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant, bṛ́haspátipraṇutta.

c\. Infinitive datives in tavāí (see 972 a), as étavāí, ápabhartavāí.

d\. A word naturally barytone, but having its final syllable protracted
(see 78 a).

e\. The particle vā́vá (in the Brāhmaṇas).

95\. On the place of the accented syllable in a Sanskrit word there is
no restriction whatever depending upon either the number or the quantity
of the preceding or following syllables. The accent rests where the
rules of inflection or derivation or composition place it, without
regard to any thing else.

a\. Thus, índre, agnāú, índreṇa, agnínā, agninā́m, bāhúcyuta, ánapacyuta,
parjányajinvita, abhimātiṣāhá, ánabhimlātavarṇa, abhiçasticā́tana,
híraṇyavāçīmattama, cátuçcatvāriṅçadakṣara.

96\. Since the accent is marked only in the older literature, and the
statements of the grammarians, with the deduced rules of accentuation,
are far from being sufficient to settle in all cases, the place of the
stress of voice for a considerable part of the vocabulary is
undetermined. Hence it is a general habit with European scholars to
pronounce Sanskrit words according to the rules of the Latin accent. 

97\. In this work, the accent of each word and form will in general be
marked, so far as there is authority determining its place and
character. Where specific words and forms are quoted, they will only be
so far accentuated as they are found with accent in accentuated texts.

