+++
title = "07 Chapter III EUPHONIC COMBINATION"

+++




## CHAPTER III.

RULES OF EUPHONIC COMBINATION.

Introductory.

98\. The words in Sanskrit, as in the other languages related with it,
are in great part analysable into roots, suffixes of derivation, and
endings of inflection, these last being added mostly to stems containing
suffixes, but also sometimes directly to roots.

a\. There are, of course, a certain number of uninflected
words—indeclinables, particles; and also not a few that are incapable of
analysis.

99\. The Sanskrit, indeed, possesses an exceptionally analysable
character; its formative processes are more regular and transparent than
those of any other Indo-European tongue. Hence the prevailing method of
the Hindu native science of grammar, which sets up a certain body of
roots, and prescribes the processes by which these may be made stems and
words, giving the various added elements, and laying down the rules by
which their combination is effected. And the same general method is, for
like reasons, followed also by European grammarians.

100\. The euphonic-laws, accordingly, which govern the combination of
suffix or of ending with root or stem, possess a high practical
importance, and require to be laid down in preparation for topics of
declension and conjugation.

101\. Moreover, the formation of compounds, by joining two or more
simple stems, is extremely frequent in Sanskrit; and this kind of
combination has its own peculiar euphonic rules. And once more, in the
form of the language as handed down to us by its literature, the words
composing a sentence or paragraph are adapted to and combined with one
another by nearly the same rules which govern the making of compounds;
so that it is impossible to take apart and understand a Sanskrit
sentence without knowing those rules. Hence an increased degree of
practical importance belonging to the subject of euphonic combination.

a\. This euphonic interdependence of the words of a sentence is unknown
to any other language in anything like the same degree; and it cannot
but be suspected of being at least in part artificial, implying an
erection into necessary and invariable rules of what in the living
language were only optional practices. This is strongly indicated,
indeed, by the evidence of the older dialect of the Vedas and of the
derived Prakritic dialects, in both of which some of the rules
(especially that as to the hiatus: see 113) are often violated.

102\. The roots which are authenticated by their occurrence in the
literary monuments of the language, earlier and later, number between
eight and nine hundred. About half of these belong fully to the language
throughout its whole history; some (about a hundred and fifty) are
limited to the earlier or pre-classical period; some, again (over a
hundred and twenty), make their first appearance in the later language.

a\. There are in this number roots of very diverse character. Those
occurring only later are, at least in great part, presumably of
secondary origin; and a certain number are even doubtless artificial,
used once or twice because found in the root-lists of the Hindu
grammarians (103). But also of the rest, some are plainly secondary,
while others are questionable; and not a few are variations or
differentiated forms of one another. Thus, there are roots showing
respectively r and l, as rabh and labh, mruc and mluc, kṣar and kṣal;
roots with and without a strengthening nasal, as vand and vad, mand and
mad; roots in ā and in a nasal, as khā and khan, gā and gam, jā and jan;
roots made by an added ā, as trā from tṛ, mnā from man, psā from bhas,
yā from i; roots the product of reduplication, as jakṣ from ghas, dudh
from dhū; roots with a final sibilant of formative origin, as bhakṣ and
bhikṣ from bhaj, nakṣ from naç, çruṣ from çru, hās from hā; root-forms
held apart by a well-established discordance of inflection and meaning,
which yet are probably different sides of one root, as kṛṣ *drag* and
kṛṣ *plough', vid* know *and vid* find*, vṛ* enclose *and vṛ* choose*;
and so on. In many such cases it is doubtful whether we ought to
acknowledge two roots or only one; and no absolute rule of distinction
can be laid down and maintained.*

103\. The list of roots given by the Hindu grammarians contains about
two thousand roots, without including all those which students of the
language are compelled to recognize. Considerably more than half of this
number, then, are unauthenticated by use; and although some of these may
yet come to light, or may have existed without finding their way into
any of the preserved literary documents, it is certain that most are
fictitious; made in part for the explanation of words falsely described
as their derivatives, but in the main for unknown and perhaps
undiscoverable reasons. 

a\. The roots unauthenticated by traceable use will be made no account
of in this grammar—or, if noticed, will be specified as of that
character.

104\. The forms of the roots as here used will be found to differ in
certain respects from those given by the native grammarians and adopted
by some European works. Thus:

a\. Those roots of which the initial n and s are regularly converted to
ṇ and ṣ after certain prefixes are by the Hindu grammarians given as
beginning with ṇ and ṣ; no western authority follows this example.

b\. The Hindus classify as simple roots a number of derived stems:
reduplicated ones, as dīdhī, jāgṛ, daridrā; present-stems, as ūrṇu; and
denominative stems, as avadhīr, kumār, sabhāg, mantr, sāntv, arth, and
the like. These are in European works generally reduced to their true
value.

c\. A number of roots ending in an ā which is irregularly treated in the
present-system are written in the Hindu lists with diphthongs — e or āi
or o; here they will be regarded as ā-roots (see 251). The o of such
root-forms, especially, is purely arbitrary; no forms or derivatives
made from the roots justify it.

d\. The roots showing interchangeably ṛ and ir and īr or ur and ūr (242)
are written by the Hindus with ṛ or with ṝ, or with both. The ṝ here
also is only formal, intended to mark the roots as liable to certain
modifications, since it nowhere shows itself in any form or derivative.
Such roots will in this work be written with ṛ.

e\. The roots, on the other hand, showing a variation between ṛ and ar
(rarely ra) as weak and strong forms will be here written with ṛ, as by
the native grammarians, although many European authorities prefer the
other or strong form. So long as we write the unstrengthened vowel in
vid and çī, in mud and bhū, and their like, consistency seems to be
require that we write it in sṛj and kṛ also—in all cases alike, without
reference to what may have been the more original Indo-European form.

105\. In many cases of roots showing more than one form, the selection
of a representative form is a matter of comparative indifference. To
deal with such cases according to their historical character is the part
rather of an Indo-European comparative grammar than of a Sanskrit
grammar. We must be content to accept as roots what elements seem to
have on the whole that value in the existing condition of the language.

106\. Stems as well as roots have their variations of form (311). The
Hindu grammarians usually give the weaker form as the normal one, and
derive the other from it by a strengthening change; some European
authorities do the same, while others prefer the contrary method; the
choice is of unessential consequence, and may be determined in any case
by motives of convenience.

107\. We shall accordingly consider first of all, in the present
chapter, the euphonic principles and laws which govern the combination
of the elements of words and of words as elements of the sentence; then
will be taken up the subject of inflection, under the two heads of
declension and conjugation; and an account of the classes of uninflected
words will follow.

a\. The formation of conjugational stems (tense and mode-stems; also
participles and infinitive) will be taught, as is usual, in connection
with the processes of conjugational inflection; that of uninflected
words, in connection with the various classes of those words. But the
general subject of derivation, or the formation of declinable stems,
will be taken up by itself later (chap. XVII.); and it will be followed
by an account of the formation of compound stems (chap. XVIII.).

108\. It is by no means to be expected of beginners in the language that
they will attempt to master the rules of euphonic combination in a body,
before going on to learn the paradigms of inflection. On the contrary,
the leading paradigms of declension may best be learned outright,
without attention, or with only a minimum of attention, to euphonic
rule. In taking up conjugation, however, it is practically, as well as
theoretically, better to learn the forms as combinations of stem and
ending, with attention to such laws of combination as apply in the
particular cases concerned. The rules of external combination, governing
the make-up of the sentence out of words, should be grappled with only
when the student is prepared to begin the reading or the formation of
sentences.

Principles of Euphonic Combination.

109\. The rules of combination (saṁdhi 'putting together*) are in some
respects different, according as they apply—*

a\. to the internal make-up of a word, by the addition of derivative and
inflectional endings to roots and stems;

b\. to the more external putting together of stems to make compound
stems, and the yet looser and more accidental collocation of words in
the sentence;

c\. Hence they are usually divided into rules of internal combination,
and rules of external combination. 

110\. In both classes of cases, however, the general principles of
combination are the same—and likewise, to a great extent, the specific
rules. The differences depend in part on the occurrence or
non-occurrence of certain combinations in the one class or the other; in
part, on the difference of treatment of the same sound as final of a
root or of an ending, the former being more persistent than the latter;
in part, on the occurrence in external combination of certain changes
which are apparently phonetic but really historical; and, most frequent
and conspicuous of all, on the fact that (157) vowels and semivowels and
nasals exercise a sonantizing influence in external combination, but not
in internal. Hence, to avoid unnecessary repetition as well as the
separation of what really belongs together, the rules for both kinds of
combination are given below in connection with one another.

111\. a. Moreover, before case-endings beginning with bh and s (namely
bhyām, bhis, bhyas, su), the treatment of the finals of stems is in
general the same as in the combinations of words (pada) with one
another—whence those endings are sometimes called pada-endings, and the
cases they form are known as pada-cases.

b\. The importance of this distinction in somewhat exaggerated by the
ordinary statement of it. In fact, dh is the only sonant mute initial of
an ending occurring in conjugation, as bh in declension; and the
difference of their treatment is in part owing to the one coming into
collision usually with the final of a root and the other of an ending,
and in part to the fact that dh, as a dental, is more assimilable to
palatals and linguals than bh. A more marked and problematic distinction
is made between su and the verbal endings si, sva, etc., especially
after palatal sounds and ṣ.

c\. Further, before certain of the suffixes of derivation the final of a
stem is sometimes treated in the same manner as that of a word in
composition.

d\. This is especially the case before secondary suffixes having a
markedly distinct office, like the possessive mant and vant, the
abstract-making tva, the suffix of material maya, and so on; and it is
much more frequent in the later language than in the earlier. The
examples are sporadic in character, and no rule can be given to cover
them: for details, see the various suffixes, in chap. XVII. In the RV.
(as may be mentioned here) the only examples are vidyúnmant (beside
garútmant, kakúdmant, etc.), pṛ́ṣadvant (beside datvánt, marútvant,
etc.), dhṛṣadvín (beside namasvín etc.), and ahaṁyú, kiṁyú, çaṁyú, and
aṅhoyú, duvoyú, áskṛdhoyu (beside namasyú, vacasyú, etc.); and the AV.
adds only sáhovan (RV. savā́van).

112\. The leading rules of internal combination (as already stated: 108)
are those which are of most immediate importance to a beginner in the
language, since his first task is to master the principle paradigms of
inflection; the rules of external combination may better be left
untouched until he comes to dealing with words in sentences, or to
translating. Then, however, they are indispensable, since the proper
form of the words that compose the sentence is not to be determined
without them.

a\. The general principles of combination underlying the euphonic rules,
and determining their classification, may be stated as follows:

113\. Hiatus. In general, hiatus is forbidden; every syllable except the
initial one of a sentence, or of a word or phrase not forming part of a
sentence, must begin with a consonant (or with more than one).

a\. For details, and for exceptions, see 125 ff.

b\. In the earlier language, however, hiatus in every position was
abundantly admitted. This appears plainly from the *mantras*, or
metrical parts of the Veda, where in innumerable instances y and v are
to be read as i and u, and, less often, a long vowel is to be resolved
into two vowels, in order to make good the metre; e.g. vāryāṇām has to
be read as vā-ri-ā-ṇa-ām, svaçvyam as su-aç-vi-am, and so on. In the
Brāhmaṇas, also, we find tvac, svar, dyāus described as dissyllables,
vyāna and satyam as trisyllables, rājanya as of four syllables, and the
like. See further 129 e.

114\. Deaspiration. An aspirate mute is liable to lose its aspiration,
being allowed to stand unchanged only before a vowel or semivowel or
nasal.

115\. Assimilation. The great body of euphonic changes in Sanskrit, as
elsewhere, falls under the general head of assimilation—which takes
place both between sounds which are so nearly alike that the difference
between them is too insignificant to be worth preserving, and between
those which are so diverse as to be practically incompatible.

116\. In part, assimilation involves the conversion of one sound to
another of the same series, without change of articulating position; in
part, it involves a change of position, or transfer to another series.

117\. Of changes within the series, the most frequent and important
occur in the adaptation of surd and sonant sounds to one another; but
the nasals and l have also in certain cases their special assimilative
influence. Thus:

a\. In the two classes of non-nasal mutes and spirants, surd and sonant
are wholly incompatible; no surd of either class can either precede or
follow a sonant of either.

b\. A mute, surd or sonant, is assimilated by being changed to its
correspondent of the other kind; of the spirants, the surd s is the only
one having a sonant correspondent, namely r, to which it is convertible
in external combination (164 ff.).

c\. The nasals are more freely combinable: a nasal may either precede or
follow a mute of either kind, or the sonant spirant h; it may also
follow a surd aspirant (sibilant); no nasal, however, ever precedes a
sibilant in the interior of a word (it is changed instead to anusvāra);
and in external combination their concurrence is usually avoided by
insertion of a surd mute.

d\. A semivowel has still less sonantizing influence; and a vowel least
of all: both are freely preceded and followed by sounds of every other
class, in the interior of a word.

e\. Before a sibilant, however, is found, of the semivowels, only r and
very rarely l. Moreover, in external combination, r is often changed to
its surd correspondent s.

But

f\. In composition and sentence-collocation, initial vowels and
semivowels and nasals also require the preceding final to be sonant. And

g\. Before a nasal and l, the assimilative process is sometimes carried
further, by the conversion of a final mute to a nasal or l respectively.

118\. Of conversions involving a change of articulate position, the most
important are those of dental sounds to lingual, and, less often, to
palatal. Thus:

a\. The dental s and n are very frequently converted to ṣ and ṇ by the
assimilating influence of contiguous or neighboring lingual sounds: the
s, even by sounds—namely, i- and u-vowels and k—which have themselves no
lingual character.

b\. A non-nasal dental mute is (with a few exceptions in external
combination) made lingual when it comes into collision with a lingual
sound.

c\. The dental mutes and sibilant are made palatal by a contiguous
palatal.

But also:

d\. A m (not radical) is assimilated to a following consonant, of
whatever kind.

e\. For certain anomalous cases, see 151.

119\. The euphonic combinations of the palatal mutes, the palatal
sibilant, and the aspiration, as being sounds derived by phonetic
alteration from more original gutturals (42 ff.), are made peculiar and
complicated by two circumstances: their reversion to a guttural form (or
the appearance of the unaltered guttural instead of them: 43); and the
different treatment of j and h according as they represent one or
another degree of alteration—the one tending, like c, more to the
guttural reversion, the other showing, like ç, a more sibilant and
lingual character.

120\. The lingual sibilant ṣ, also of derivative character (from dental
s), shows as radical final peculiar and problematic phenomena of
combination.

121\. Extension and abbreviation of consonant-groups. The native
grammarians allow or require certain extensions, by duplication or
insertion, of groups of consonants. And, on the other hand, abbreviation
of certain other groups is allowed, and found often practised in the
manuscripts.

122\. Permitted Finals. The permitted occurrence of consonants at the
end of a word is quite narrowly restricted. In general, only one
consonant is allowed after the last vowel; and that must be neither the
aspiration, nor a sibilant, nor a semivowel (save rarely ल् l), nor an
aspirate mute, nor a sonant mute if not nasal, nor a palatal.

123\. Increment and Decrement. Besides these more or less regular
changes accompanying the combination of the parts that make up words,
there is another class of a different character, not consisting in the
mutual adaptations of the parts, but in strengthening or weakening
changes of the parts themselves.

124\. It is impossible to carry through a perfectly systematic
arrangement of the detailed rules of euphonic combination, because the
different varieties of euphonic change more or less overlap and
intersect one another. The order observed below will be as follows:

1\. Rules of vowel combination, for the avoidance of hiatus.

2\. Rules as to permitted finals (since these underlie the further
treatment of final consonants in external combination).

3\. Rules for loss of aspiration of an aspirate mute.

4\. Rules of surd and sonant assimilation, including those for final s
and r. 

5\. Rules for the conversion of dental sounds to lingual and palatal.

6\. Rules for the changes of final nasals, including those in which a
former final following the nasal re-appears in combination.

7\. Rules regarding the special changes of the derivation sounds—the
palatal mutes and sibilant, the aspiration, and the lingual sibilant.

8\. Rules as to extension and abbreviation of consonant groups.

9\. Rules for strengthening and weakening processes.

Everywhere, rules for more sporadic and less classifiable cases will be
given in the most practically convenient connection; and the Index will
render what help is needed toward finding them.

Rules of Vowel Combination.

125\. The concurrence of two vowels, or of vowel and diphthong, without
intervening consonant, is forbidden by the euphony of the later or
classical language. It is avoided, according to the circumstances of the
case, either by fusion of the two concurrent sounds into one, by the
reduction of one of them to a semivowel, or by development of a
semivowel between them.

a\. For the not infrequent cases of composition and sentence-combination
in which the recent loss of a s or y or v between vowels leave a
permanent hiatus, see below, 132 ff., 175–7; for certain final vowels
which are maintained unchanged in sentence-combination before an initial
vowel, see 138.

b\. A very few words in their admitted written form show interior
hiatus; such are títaü *sieve* (perhaps for titasu, BR.), práüga
*wagon-pole* (for prayuga); and, in RV., suūtí.

c\. The texts of the older dialect are written according to the euphonic
rules of the later language, although in them (see 113 b) the hiatus is
really of frequent occurrence. Hence they are not to be read as written,
but with constantly recurring reversal of the processes of
vowel-combination which they have been made artificially to undergo. See
further 129 e.

d\. Also in the later language, hiatus between the two pādas or primary
divisions of a metrical line is tolerably frequent, and it is not
unknown in sporadic cases even in the interior of a pāda.

e\. The rules of vowel combination, as regards both the resulting sound
and its accent, are nearly the same in internal and in extreme saṁdhi. 

126\. Two similar simple vowels, short or long, coalesce and form the
corresponding long vowel: thus, two a-vowels (either or both of them
short or long) form आ ā; two i-vowels, ई ī; two u-vowels, ऊ ū; and
theoretically, two ṛ-vowels form ॠ ṝ, but it is questionable whether the
case ever practically occurs. Examples are:

स चाप्रजः sa cā ’prajaḥ (ca + aprajaḥ);

अतीव atī ’va (ati + iva);

सूक्तम् sūktam (su-uktam);

राजासीत् rājā ”sīt (rājā + āsīt);

अधीश्वरः adhīçvaraḥ (adhi-īçvaraḥ);

जुहूपभृत् juhūpabhṛt (juhū—upabhṛt).

a\. As the above examples indicate, it will be the practice everywhere
in this work, in transliteration (not in the devanāgarī text), to
separate independent words; and if an initial vowel of a following word
has coalesced with a final of the preceding, this will be indicated by
an apostrophe—single if the initial vowel be the shorter, double if it
be the longer, of the two different initials which in every case of
combination yield the same result.

127\. An a-vowel combines with a following i-vowel to ए e; with an
u-vowel, to ओ o; with ऋ ṛ, to अर् ar; with ऌ ḷ (theoretically), to अल्
al; with ए e or ऐ āi, to ऐ āi; with ओ o or औ āu, to औ āu. Examples are:

राजेन्द्र rājendra (rāja-indra);

हितोपदेशः hitopadeçaḥ (hita-upadeçaḥ);

महर्षिः maharṣiḥ (mahā-ṛṣiḥ);

सैव sāi ’va (sā + eva);

राजैश्वर्यम् rājāiçvaryam (rājā-āiçvaryam);

दिवौकसः divāukasaḥ (divā-okasaḥ);

ज्वरौषधम् jvarāuṣadham (jvara-āuṣadham).

a\. In the Vedic texts, the vowel ṛ is ordinarily written unchanged
after the a-vowel, which, if long, is shortened: thus, mahaṛṣiḥ instead
of maharṣiḥ. The two vowels, however, are usually pronounced as one
syllable.

b\. When successive words like indra ā ihi are to be combined, the first
combination, to indrā, is made first, and the result is indre” ’hi (not
indrāi” ’hi, from indra e ’hi). 

128\. As regards the accent of these vowel combinations, it is to be
noticed that, 1. as a matter of course, the union of acute with acute
yields acute, and that of grave with grave yields grave; that of
circumflex with circumflex cannot occur; 2. a circumflex with following
acute yields acute, the final grave element of the former being raised
to acute pitch; a grave with following acute does the same, as no upward
slide of the voice on a syllable is acknowledged in the language; but,
3. when the former of the fused elements is acute and the latter grave,
we might expect the resulting syllable to be in general circumflex, to
represent both the original tones. Pāṇini in fact allows this accent in
every such case; and in a single accented Brāhmaṇa text (ÇB.), the
circumflex is regularly written. But the language shows, on the whole,
an indisposition to allow the circumflex to rest on either long vowel or
diphthong as its sole basis, and the acute element is suffered to raise
the other to its own level of pitch, making the whole syllable acute.
The only exception to this, in most of the texts, is the combination of
í and i, which becomes ī̀: thus, divī̀ ’va, from diví iva; in the
Tāittirīya texts alone such a case follows the general rule, while ú and
u, instead, make ū̀: thus, sū̀dgātā from sú-udgātā.

129\. The i-vowels, the u-vowels, and ऋ ṛ, before a dissimilar vowel or
diphthong, are regularly converted each into its own corresponding
semivowel, य् y or व् v or र् r. Examples are:

इत्याह ity āha (iti + āha);

मध्विव madhv iva (madhu + iva);

दुहित्रर्थे duhitrarthe (duhitṛ-arthe);

स्त्र्यस्य stry asya (strī + asya);

वध्वै vadhvāi (vadhū-āi).

a\. But in internal combination the i and u-vowels are not seldom
changed instead to iy and uv—and this especially in monosyllables, or
after two constants, where otherwise a group of consonants difficult of
pronunciation would be the result. The cases will be noticed below, in
explaining inflected forms.

b\. A radical i-vowel is converted into y even before i in perfect
tense-inflection, so ninyima (ninī + ima).

c\. In a few sporadic cases, i and u become iy and uv even in
word-composition: e.g., triyavi (tri + avi), viyan̄ga (vi + an̄ga), suvita
(su + ita): compare 1204 b, c.

d\. Not very seldom, the same word (especially as found in different
texts of the older language) has more than one form, showing various
treatment of an i or u-vowel: e.g. svàr or súvar, tanvè or tanúve,
budhnyà or budhníya, rā́tryāi or rā́triyāi. For the most part, doubtless,
these are only two ways of writing the same pronunciation, sú-ar,
budhnía, and so on; and the discordance has no other importance,
historical or phonetic. There is more or less of this difference of
treatment of an i- or u-element after a consonant in all periods of the
language.

e\. In the elder language, there is a marked difference, in respect to
the frequency of vowel-combination for avoiding hiatus as compared with
that of non-combination and consequent hiatus, between the class of
cases where two vowel-sounds, similar or dissimilar, would coalesce into
one (126, 127) and that where an i- or u-vowel would be converted into a
semivowel. Thus, in word-composition, the ratio of the cases of
coalesced vowels to those of hiatus are in RV. as five to one, in AV. as
nineteen to one, while in the cases of semivowel-conversion are in RV.
only one in twelve, in AV. only one in five; in sentence-combination,
the cases of coalescence are in both RV. and AV. about as seven to one,
while those of semivowel-conversion are in RV. only one in fifty, in AV.
one in five.

f\. For certain cases of the loss or assimilation of i and u before y
and v respectively, see 233 a.

130\. As regards the accent—here, as in the preceding case (128), the
only combination requiring notice is that of an acute i- or u- vowel
with a following grave: the result is circumflex; and such cases of
circumflex are many times more frequent than any and all others.
Examples are:

व्यु॑ष्ति vyùṣṭi (ví-uṣṭi); अभ्य॑र्चति abhyàrcati;

नद्यौ॑ nadyāù (nadí-āu);

स्वि॑ष्ट svìṣṭa (sú-iṣṭa); तन्व॑स् tanvàs (tanū́-as).

a\. Of a similar combination of acute ṛ́ with following grave, only a
single case has been noted in accented texts: namely, vijñātr ètát (i.e.
vijñātṛ́ etát: ÇB. xiv. 6. 8¹¹); the accentuation is in accordance with
the rules for i and u.

131\. Of a diphthong, the final i- or u-element is changed to its
corresponding semivowel, य् y and व् v, before any vowel or diphthong:
thus, ए e (really ai: 28 a) becomes अय् ay, and ओ o (that is, au: 28 a)
becomes अव् av; ऐ āi becomes आय् āy, and औ āu becomes आव् āv.

a\. No change of accent, of course, occurs here; each original syllable
retains its syllabic identity, and hence also its own tone.

b\. Examples can be given only for internal combination, since in
external combination there are further changes: see the next paragraph.
Thus,

नय naya (ne-a); नाय nāya (nāi-a);

भब bhava (bho-a); भाब bhāva (bhāu-a). 

132\. In external combination, we have the important additional rule
that the semivowel resulting from the conversion of the final element of
a diphthong is in general dropped; and the resulting hiatus is left
without further change.

133\. That is to say, a final ए e (the most frequent case) becomes
simply अ a before an initial vowel (except अ a: see 135, below), and
both then remain unchanged; and a final ऐ āi, in like manner, becomes
(everywhere) आ ā. Thus,

त आगताः ta āgatāḥ (te + āgatāḥ);

नगर इह nagara iha (nagare + iha);

तस्मा अददात् tasmā adadāt (tasmāi + adadāt);

स्त्रिया उक्तम् striyā uktam (striyāi + uktam).

a\. The latter grammarians allow the y in such combinations to be either
retained or dropped; but the uniform practice of the manuscripts, of
every age, in accordance with the strict requirement of the Vedic
grammars (Prātiçākhyas), is to omit the semivowel and leave the hiatus.

b\. The persistence of the hiatus caused by this omission is a plain
indication of the comparatively recent loss of the intervening
consonantal sound.

c\. Instances, however, of the avoidance of hiatus by combination of the
remaining final vowel with the following initial according to the usual
rules are met with in every period of the language, from the RV. down;
but they are rare and of sporadic character. Compare the similar
treatments of the hiatus after a lost final s, 176–7.

d\. For the peculiar treatment of this combination in certain cases
caused by the MS., see below, 176d.

134\. a. The diphthong o (except as phonetic alteration of final as: see
175 a) is an unusual final, appearing only in the stem go (361 c), in
the voc. sing. of u-stems (341), in words of which the final a is
combined with the particle u, as atho, and in a few interjections. In
the last two classes it is uncombinable (below, 138 c,f); the vocatives
sometimes retain the v and sometimes lose it (the practices of different
texts are too different to be briefly stated); go (in composition only)
does not ordinarily lose its final element, but remains gav or go. A
final as becomes a, with following hiatus, before any vowel save a (for
which, see the next paragraph). 

b\. The ब् v of आब् āv from औ āu is usually retained: thus,

तावेव tāv eva (tāu + eva);

उभाविन्द्राग्नी ubhāv indrāgnī (ubhāu + indrāgnī).

c\. In the older language, however, it is in some texts dropped before
an u-vowel: thus, tā́ ubhāú; in other texts it is treated like āi, or
loses its u-element before every initial vowel: thus, tā́ evá, ubhā́
indrāgnī́.

135\. After final ए e or ओ o, an initial अ a disappears.

a\. The resulting accent is as if the a were not dropped, but rather
absorbed into the preceding diphthong, having its tone duly represented
in the combination. If, namely, the e or o is grave or circumflex and
the a acute, the former becomes acute; if the e or o is acute and the a
grave, the former becomes circumflex, as usually in the fusion of an
acute a and a grave element. If both are acute or both grave, no change,
of course, is seen in the result. Examples are:

ते ऽब्रुवन् tè ‘bruvan (té abruvan);

सो ऽब्रवीत् sò ‘bravīt (sáḥ abravīt);

हिंसितव्यो ऽग्निः hiṅsitavyò ‘gníḥ (hiṅsitavyàḥ agníḥ);

यदिन्द्रो ऽब्रवीत् yád índró ‘bravīt (yád índraḥ ábravīt);

यद्रान्यो ऽब्रवीत् yád rājanyó ‘bravīt (yád rājanàḥ ábravīt).

b\. As to the use of the avagraha sign in the case of such an elision,
see above, 16. In transliteration, the reversed apostrophe, or rough
breathing, will be used in this work to represent it.

c\. This elision or absorption of initial a after final e or o, which in
the later language is the invariable rule, is in the Veda only an
occasional occurrence. Thus, in the RV., out of nearly 4500 instances of
such an initial a, it is, as the metre shows, to be really omitted only
about seventy times; in the AV., less than 300 times out of about 1600.
In neither work is there any accordance in respect to the combination in
question between the written and the spoken form of the text: in RV.,
the a is (as written) elided in more than three quarters of the cases;
in the AV., in about two thirds; and in both it is written in a number
of instances where the metre requires its omission.

d\. In a few cases, an initial ā is thus elided, especially that of
ātman.

e\. To the rules of vowel combination, as above stated, there are
certain exceptions. Some of the more isolated of these will be noticed
where they come up in the processes of inflection etc.; a few require
mention here.

13\. In internal combination:

a\. The augment a makes with the initial vowel of a root the
combinations āi, āu, ār (vṛddhi-vowels: 235), instead of e, o, ar
(guṇa-vowels), as required by 127; thus, āita (a + ita), āubhnāt (a +
ubhnāt), ārdhnot (a + ṛdhnot).

b\. The final o of a stem (1203a) becomes av before the suffix ya
(original ia: 1210a).

c\. The final vowel of a stem is often dropped when a secondary suffix
is added (1203a).

d\. For the weakening and loss of radical vowels, and for certain
insertions, see below, 249 ff., 257–8.

137\. In external combination:

a\. The final a or ā of a preposition, with initial ṛ of a root, makes
ār instead of ar: Thus, ārchati (ā + ṛchati), avārchati (ava + ṛchati),
upārṣati (ÇB.: upa + ṛṣati; but A.V. uparṣanti).

b\. Instances are occasionally met with a final a or ā being lost
entirely before initial e or o: thus, in verb-forms, av’ eṣyāmas AB.,
up’ eṣatu etc. AV.; in derivatives, as upetavya, upetṛ; in compounds, as
daçoni, yathetam, and (permissibly) compounds with oṣṭha (not rare), otu
(not quotable), odana, as adharoṣṭha or adharāuṣṭha, tilodana or
tilāudana; and even in sentence-combination, as iv’ etayas, açvin’ eva,
yath’ ociṣe (all RV.), tv’ odman B.; and always with the exclamation om
or oṁkára.

c\. The form ūh from √vah sometimes makes the heavier or vṛddhi (235)
diphthongal combination with a preceding a-vowel; thus, prāuḍhi,
akṣāuhiṇī (from pra + ūḍhi, etc.).

138\. Certain final vowels, moreover, are uncombinable (pragṛhya), or
maintain themselves unchanged before any following vowel. Thus,

a\. The vowels ī, ū, and e as dual endings, both of declensional and of
conjugational forms. Thus, bandhū āsāte imāu; girī ārohatam.

b\. The pronoun amī (nom. pl.: 501); and the Vedic pronominal forms
asmé, yuṣmé, tvé (492 a).

c\. A final o made by combination of a final a-vowel with the particle u
(1122b); thus, atho, mo, no.

d\. A final ī of a Vedic locative case from an i-stem (336f).

e\. A protracted final vowel (78).

f\. The final, or only, vowel of an interjection, as aho, he, ā, i, u.

g\. The older language shows occasional exceptions to these rules: thus,
a dual ī combined with a following i, as nṛpátī ’va; an a elided after
o, as átho ‘si; a locative ī turned into a semivowel, as védy asyā́m. 

Permitted Finals.

139\. The sounds allowed to occur as finals in Sanskrit words standing
by themselves (not in euphonic combination with something following) are
closely limited, and those which would etymologically come to occupy
such a position are often variously altered, in general accordance with
their treatment in other circumstances, or are sometimes omitted
altogether.

a\. The variety of consonants that would ever come at the end of either
an inflected form or a derivation stem in the language is very small:
namely, in forms, only t (or d), n, m, s; in derivative stems, only t,
d, n, r, s (and, in a few rare words, j). But almost all consonants
occur as finals of roots; and every root is liable to be found, alone or
as last member of a compound, in the character of a declined stem.

140\. All the vowel sounds, both simple and diphthongal, may be sounded
at the end of a word.

a\. But neither ṝ nor ḷ ever actually occurs; and ṛ is rare (only as
neuter sing. of a stem in ṛ or ar, or as final of such a stem in
composition).

Thus, índra, çiváyā, ákāri, nadī́, dā́tu, camū́, janayitṛ́, ágne, çivā́yāi,
vā́yo, agnāú.

141\. Of the non-nasal mutes, only the first in each series, the
non-aspirate surd, is allowed; the others — surd aspirate, and both
sonants — whenever they would etymologically occur, are converted into
this.

Thus, agnimát for agnimáth, suhṛ́t for suhṛ́d, vīrút for vīrúdh, triṣṭúp
for triṣṭúbh.

a\. In a few roots, when their final (sonant aspirate) thus loses its
aspiration, the original sonant aspiration of the initial reappears;
compare ह् h, below, 147.

Thus, dagh becomes dhak, budh becomes bhut, and so on.

The roots exhibiting this change are stated below, 155.

b\. There was some question among the Hindu grammarians as whether the
final mute is to be estimated as of surd or of sonant quality; but the
great weight of authority, and the invariable practice of the
manuscripts, favor the surd. 

142\. The palatals, however, form here (as often elsewhere) an exception
to the rules for the other mutes. No palatal is allowed as final. The च्
c reverts (43) to its original क् k: thus, वाक् vā́k, अंहोमुक् aṅhomúk.
The छ् ch (only quotable in the root प्रछ् prach) becomes ट् ṭ: thus
प्राट् prāṭ. The ज् j either reverts to its original guttural or becomes
ट् ṭ, in accordance with its treatment in other combinations (219):
thus, भिषक् bhiṣák, विराट् virā́ṭ. The झ् jh does not occur, but it is by
the native grammarians declared convertible to ट् ṭ.

143\. Of the nasals, the म् m and न् n are extremely common, especially
the former (म् m and स् s are of all final consonants the most
frequent); the ण् ṇ is allowed, but is quite rare; ङ् n̄ is found
(remaining after the loss of a following क् k) in a very small number of
words (386 b, c, 407 a); ञ् ñ never occurs.

a\. But the final m of a root is changed to n (compare 212 a, below):
thus, akran from kram, ágan, ajagan, aganīgan from gam, ánān from nam,
ayān from yam, praçān from çam; no other cases are quotable.

144\. Of the semivowels, the ल् l alone is an admitted final, and it is
very rare. र् r is (like its nearest surd correspondent, स् s: 145)
changed as final to visarga. Of य् y and व् v there is no occurrence.

145\. Of the sibilants, none may stand unaltered at the end of a word.
The स् s (which of all final consonants would otherwise be the
commonest) is, like र् r, changed to a breathing, the visarga. The श् ç
either reverts (43) to its original क् k, or, in some roots, is changed
to ट् ṭ (in accordance with its changes in inflection and derivation:
see below, 218): thus, दिक् dik, but विट् viṭ. The ष् ṣ is likewise
changed to ट् ṭ: thus, प्रावृट् prāvṛṭ.

a\. The change of ṣ to ṭ is of rare occurrence: see below, 226 d. 

b\. Final radical s is said by the grammarians to be changed to t; but
no sure example of this conversion is quotable; see 168; and compare 555
a.

146\. The compound क्ष् kṣ is prescribed to be treated as simple ष् ṣ
(not becoming क् k by 150, below). But the case is a rare one, and its
actual treatment in the older language irregular.

a\. In the only RV. cases where the kṣ has a quasi-radical
character—namely anák from anákṣ, and ámyak from √myakṣ—the conversion
is to k. Also, of forms of the s-aorist (see 890), we have adhāk, asrāk,
arāik, etc. (for adhākṣ-t etc.); but also aprāṭ, ayāṭ, avāṭ, asrāṭ (for
aprākṣ-t etc.). And RV. has twice ayās from √yaj, and AV. twice srās
from √sṛj (wrongly referred by BR. to √sraṅs), both 2d sing., where the
personal ending has perhaps crowded out the root-final and tense-sign.

b\. The numeral ṣaṣ six is perhaps better to be regarded as ṣakṣ, with
its kṣ treated as ṣ, according to the accepted rule.

147\. The aspiration ह् h is not allowed to maintain itself, but (like
ज् j and श् ç) either reverts to its original guttural form, appearing
as क् k, or is changed to ट् ṭ—both in accordance with its treatment in
inflection: see below, 222. And, also as in inflection, the original
sonant aspiration of a few roots (given at 155b) reappears when their
final thus becomes deaspirated. Where the ह् h is from original ध् dh
(223e), it becomes त् t.

148\. The visarga and anusvāra are nowhere etymologically finals; the
former is only the substitue for an original final स् s or र् r; the
later occurs as final only so far as it is a substitute for म् m (213h).

149\. Apart from the vowels, then, the usual finals, nearly in the order
of their frequency, are: ः ḥ, म् m, न् n, त् t, क् k, प् p, ट् ṭ; those
of only sporadic occurrence are ङ् n̄, ल् l, ण् ṇ; and, by substitution,
ं ṁ.

150\. In general, only one consonant, of whatever kind, is allowed to
stand at the end of a word; if two or more would etymologically occur
there, the last is dropped, and again the last, and so on, till only one
remains. 

a\. Thus, tudants becomes tudant, and this tudan; udañc-s becomes udan̄k
(142), and this udan̄; and achāntst (s-aor., 3d sing., of √chand
\[890b\]) is in like manner reduced to achān.

b\. But a non-nasal mute, if radical and not suffixal, is retained after
r: thus, ū́rk from ūrj, várk from √vṛj, avart from √vṛt, ámārṭ from √mṛj,
suhā́rt from suhārd. The case is not a common one.

c\. For relics of former double finals, preserved by the later language
under the disguise of apparent euphonic combinations, see below, 207 ff.

151\. Anomalous conversions of a final mute to one of another class are
occasionally met with. Examples are:

a\. Of final t to k; thus, 1. in a few words that have assumed a special
value as particles, as jyók, tāják (beside tāját), ṛ́dhak (beside ṛ́dhat),
pṛ́thak, drāk; and of kindred character is khādagdánt (TA.); 2. in here
and there a verbal form, as sāviṣak (AV. and VS. Kāṇ.), dambhiṣak
(Āpast.), aviṣak (Pārask.), āhalak (VS. MS.; = āharat); 3. in
root-finals or the t added to root-stems (383 e), as -dhṛk for -dhṛt
(Sūtras and later) at the end of compounds, suçrúk (TB.), pṛkṣú (SV.);
and 4. we may further note here the anomalous en̄kṣva (AB.; for intsva,
√idh) and avāksam (AB.), and the feminines in knī from masculines in ta
(1176 d).

b\. Of final d or t to a lingual: thus, pad in Vedic paḍbhís, páḍgṛbhi,
páḍbīça; upānáḍbhyām (ÇB.); vy avāṭ (MS. iii. 4. 9; √vas *shine*), and
perhaps ápā ’rāṭ (MS.; or √raj?).

c\. Of k or j to t, in an isolated example or two, as samyát, ásṛt,
viçvasṛ́t (TS. K.), and prayátsu (VS. TS.; AV. -kṣu).

d\. In Tāittirīya texts, of the final of anuṣṭúbh and triṣṭúbh to a
guttural: as, anuṣṭúk ca, triṣṭúgbhis, anuṣṭúgbhyas.

e\. Of a labial to a dental: in kakúd for and beside kakúbh; in
saṁsṛ́dbhis (TS.) from √sṛp; and in adbhís, adbhyás, from ap or āp (393).
Excepting the first, these look like cases of dissimilation; yet
examples of the combination bbh are not very rare in the older language:
thus, kakúbbhyām, triṣṭúbbhis, kakúbbhaṇḍá, anuṣṭúb bhí.

f\. The forms pratidhúṣas, -ṣā (Tāittirīya texts) from pratidúh are
isolated anomalies.

152\. For all the processes of external combination—that is to say, in
composition and sentence-collocation—a stem-final or word-final is in
general to be regarded as having, not its etymological form, but that
given by the rules as to permitted finals. From this, however, are to be
excepted the s and r: the various transformations of these sounds have
nothing to do with the visarga to which as finals before a pause they
have—doubtless at a comparatively recent period of phonetic history—come
to be reduced. Words will everywhere in this work be written with final
s or r instead of ḥ; and the rules of combination will be stated as for
the two more original sounds, and not for the visarga.

Deaspiration.

153\. An aspirate mute is changed to a non-aspirate before another
non-nasal mute or before a sibilant; it stands unaltered only before a
vowel or semivowel or nasal.

a\. Such a case can only arise in internal combination, since the
processes of external combination presuppose the reduction of the
aspirate to a non-aspirate surd (152).

b\. Practically, also, the rules as to changes of aspirates concern
almost only the sonant aspirates, since the surd, being of later
development and rarer occurrence, are hardly ever found in situations
that call for their application.

154\. Hence, if such a mute is to be doubled, it is doubled by prefixing
its own corresponding non-aspirate.

a\. But in the manuscripts, both Vedic and later, an aspirate mute is
not seldom found written double—especially, if it be one of rare
occurrence: for example (RV.), akhkhalī, jájhjhatī.

155\. In a few roots, when a final sonant aspirate (घ् gh, ध् dh, भ् bh;
also ह् h, as representing an original घ् gh) thus loses its aspiration,
the initial sonant consonant (ग् g or द् d or ब् b) becomes aspirate.

a\. That is to say, the original initial aspirate of such roots is
restored, when its presence does not interfere with the euphonic law, of
comparatively recent origin, which (in Sanskrit and Greek) forbids a
root to both begin and end with an aspirate.

b\. The roots which allow this peculiar change are:

in gh—dagh;

in h (for original gh)—dah, dih, duh, druh, dṛṅh, guh; and also grah (in
the later desiderative jighṛkṣa);

in dh—bandh, bādh, budh;

in bh—dabh (but only in the later desiderative dhipsa, for which the
older language has dipsa). 

c\. The same change appears when the law as to finals causes the loss of
the aspiration at the end of the root: see above, 141.

d\. But from dah, duh, druh, and guh are found in the Veda also forms
without the restored initial aspirate: thus, dakṣat; adukṣat; dudukṣa
etc.; jugukṣa; mitradrúk.

e\. The same analogy is followed by dadh, the abbreviated substitute of
the present-stems dadhā, from √dhā (667), in some of the forms of
conjugation: thus, dhatthas from dadh + thas, adhatta from adadh + ta,
adhaddhvam from adadh + dhvam, etc.

f\. No case is met with of the throwing back of an aspiration upon
combination with the 2d sing. impv. act. ending dhi: thus, dugdhi,
daddhi (RV.), but dhugdhvam, dhaddhvam.

Surd and Sonant Assimilation.

156\. Under this head, there is especially one very marked and important
difference between the internal combinations of a root or stem with
suffixes and endings, and the external combinations of stem with stem in
composition and of word with word in sentence-making: namely—

157\. a. In internal combination, the initial vowel or semivowel or
nasal of an ending of inflection or derivation exercises no altering
influence upon a final consonant of the root or stem to which it is
added.

b\. To this rule there are some exceptions: thus, some of the
derivatives noted at 111 d; final d of a root before the participial
suffix na (957 d); and the forms noted below, 161 b.

c\. In external combination, on the other hand, an initial sonant of
whatever class, even a vowel or semivowel or nasal, requires the
conversion of a final surd to sonant.

d\. It has been pointed out above (152) that in the rules of external
combination only admitted finals, along with s and r, need to be taken
account of, all others being regarded as reduced to these before
combining with initials.

158\. Final vowels, nasals, and ल् l are nowhere liable to change in the
processes of surd and sonant assimilation.

a\. The r, however, has a corresponding surd in s, to which it is
sometimes changed in external combination, under circumstances that
favor a surd utterance (178). 

159\. With the exceptions above stated, the collision of surd and sonant
sounds is avoided in combinations—and, regularly and usually, by
assimilating the final to the following initial, or by regressive
assimilation.

Thus, in internal combination: átsi, átti, atthás, attá (√ad + si etc.);
çagdhí, çagdhvám (√çak + dhi etc.);—in external combination, ábhūd ayám,
jyóg jīva, ṣáḍ açītáyaḥ, triṣṭúb ápi, dig-gaja, ṣaḍ-ahá, arcád-dhūma,
bṛhád-bhānu, ab-já.

160\. If, however, a final sonant aspirate of a root is followed by त् t
or थ् th of an ending, the assimilation is in the other direction, or
progressive: the combination is made sonant, and the aspiration of the
final (lost according to 153, above) is transferred to the initial of
the ending.

Thus, gh with t or th becomes gdh; dh with the same becomes ddh, as
buddhá (√budh + ta), runddhás (√rundh + thas or tas); bh with the same
becomes bdh, as labdhá (√labh + ta), labdhvā́ (√labh + tvā).

a\. Moreover, h, as representing original gh, is treated in the same
manner: thus, dugdhá, dógdhum from duh—and compare rūḍhá and līḍhá from
ruh and lih, etc., 222 b.

b\. In this combination, as the sonant aspiration is not lost but
transferred, the restoration of the initial aspiration (155) does not
take place.

c\. In dadh from √dhā (155 e), the more normal method is followed; the
dh is made surd, and the initial aspirated: thus, dhatthas, dhattas. And
RV. has dhaktam instead of dagdham from √dagh; and TA. has inttām
instead of inddhām from √idh.

161\. Before a nasal in external combination, a final mute may be simply
made sonant, or it may be still further assimilated, being changed to
the nasal of its own class.

Thus, either tád námas or tán námas, vā́g me or vā́n̄ me, báḍ mahā́n or báṇ
mahā́n, triṣṭúb nūnám or triṣṭúm nūnám.

a\. In practice, the conversion into a nasal is almost invariably made
in the manuscripts, as, indeed, it is by the Prātiçākhyas required and
not permitted merely. Even by the general grammarians it is required in
the compound ṣáṇṇavati, and before mātrā, and the suffix maya (1225):
thus, vān̄máya, mṛnmáya.

b\. Even in internal combination, the same assimilation is made in some
of the derivatives noted in 111 d, and in the na-participles (957 d).
And a few sporadic instances are met with even in verb-inflection: thus,
stin̄noti, stin̄nuyāt (MS.; for stighn-), mṛnnīta (LÇS.; for mṛdn-),
jān̄mayana (KS.; for jāgm-); these, however (like the double aspirates,
154a), are doubtless to be rejected as false readings.

162\. Before l, a final t is not merely made sonant, but fully
assimilated, becoming l: thus, tál labhate, úlluptam.

163\. Before ह् h (the case occurs only in external combination), a
final mute is made sonant; and then the ह् h may either remain unchanged
or be converted into the sonant aspirate corresponding with the former:
thus, either तद्हि tád hí or तद्धि tád dhí.

a\. In practice, the latter method is almost invariably followed; and
the grammarians of the Prātiçākhya period are nearly unanimous in
requiring it. The phonetic difference between the two is very slight.

Examples are: vā́g ghutáḥ, ṣáḍḍhotā (ṣaṭ + hotā), taddhita (tat + hita),
anuṣṭúb bhí.

Combinations of final स् s and र् r.

164\. The euphonic changes of स् s and र् r are best considered
together, because of the practical relation of the two sounds, in
composition and sentence-collocation, as corresponding surd and sonant:
in a host of cases स् s becomes र् r in situations requiring or favoring
the occurrence of a sonant; and, much less often, र् r becomes स् s
where a surd is required.

a\. In internal combination, the two are far less exchangeable with one
another: and this class of cases may best be taken up first.

165\. Final r radical or quasi-radical (that is, not belonging to an
ending of derivation) remains unchanged before both surd and sonant
sounds, and even before su in declension: thus, píparṣi, caturthá,
catúrṣu, pūrṣú.

166\. Final radical s remains before a surd in general, and usually
before s, as in çā́ssi, çāssva, āsse, āçī́ṣṣu (the last is also written
āçī́ḥṣu: 172): but it is lost in ási (√as + si: 636). Before a sonant
(that is, bh) in declension, it is treated as in external combination:
thus, āçī́rbhis. Before a sonant (that is, dh) in conjugation, it appears
to be dropped, at least after long ā: thus, çādhi, çaçādhi, cakādhi (the
only quotable cases); in edhí (√as + dhi: 636) the root syllable is
irregularly altered; but in 2d perss. pl., made with dhvam, as ādhvam,
çādhvam, arādhvam (881 a), vadhvam (√vas 

*clothe*), it is, on account of the equivalence and interchangeability
of dhv and ddvh (232), impossible to say whether the s in omitted or
converted into d.

a\. Final radical s is very rare; RV. (twice, both 2d pers. sing.)
treats ághas from √ghas in the same manner as any ordinary word ending
in as.

b\. For certain cases of irregular loss of the s of a root or
tense-stem, see 233 b–e.

167\. In a few very rare cases, final radical s before s is changed to t
(perhaps by dissimilation): they are, from √vas *dwell* (also
sporadically from vas *shine*, ÇB., and vas *clothe*, Har.), the future
vatsyā́mi and aorist ávātsam; from √ghas, the desiderative stem jíghatsa.

a\. For t as apparent ending of the 3d sing. in s-verbs, see 555 a.

168\. According to the grammarians, the final s of certain other roots,
used as noun-stems, becomes t at the end of the word, and before bh and
su: thus, dhvat, dhvadbhis, sradbhyas, sratsu. But genuine examples of
such change are not quotable.

a\. Sporadic cases of a like convention are found in the Veda: namely,
mādbhís and mādbhyás from mā́s: uṣádbhis from uṣás; svátavadbhyas from
svátavas; svávadbhis etc. (not quotable) from svávas. But the actuality
of the conversion here is open to grave doubt; it rather seems the
substitution of a t-stem for an s-stem. The same is true of the change
of vāṅs to vat in the declension of perfect participles (458). The stem
anaḍvah (404), from anas-vah, is anomalous and isolated.

b\. In the compound ducchúnā (dus-çunā) and párucchepa (parus-çepa), the
final s of the first member is treated as if a t (203).

169\. As the final consonant of derivative stems and of inflected forms,
both of declension and of conjugation, s is extremely frequent; and its
changes form a subject of first-rate importance in Sanskrit euphony. The
r, on the other hand, is quite rare.

a\. The r is found as original final in certain case-forms of stems in ṛ
or ar (369 ff.); in root-stems in ir and ur from roots in ṛ (383 b); in
a small number of other stems, as svàr, áhar and ū́dhar (beside áhan and
ū́dhan: 430), dvā́r or dur, and the Vedic vádhar, uṣarvasar-, vanar-,
çrutar-, sapar-, sabar-, athar- (cf. 176 c); in a few particles, as
antár, prātár, púnar; and in the numeral catúr (482 g).

b\. The euphonic treatment of s and r yielding precisely the same result
after all vowels except a and ā, there are certain forms with regard to
which it is uncertain whether they end in s or r, and opinions differ
respecting them. Such are ur (or us) of the gen.-abl. sing. of ṛ-stems
(371 c), and us (or ur) of the 3d plur. of verbs (550 c). 

170\. a. The स् s, as already noticed (145), becomes visarga before a
pause.

b\. It is retained unchanged only when followed by त् t or थ् th, the
surd mutes of its own class.

c\. Before the palatal and lingual surd mutes—च् c and छ् ch, ट् ṭ and
ठ् ṭh—it is assimilated, becoming the sibilant of either class
respectively, namely श् ç or ष् ṣ.

d\. Before the guttural and labial surd mutes—क् k and ख् kh, प् p and
फ् ph—it is also theoretically assimilated, becoming respectively the
jihvāmūlīya and upadhmānīya spirants (69); but in practice these
breathings are unknown and the conversion is to visarga.

Examples are: to b. tatas te, cakṣus te; to c. tataç ca, tasyāç chāyā;
pādaṣ ṭalati; to d. nalaḥ kāmam, puruṣaḥ khanati; yaçaḥ prāpa, vṛkṣaḥ
phalavān.

171\. The first three of these rules are almost universal; to the last
one there are numerous exceptions, the sibilant being retained (or, by
180, converted into ṣ), especially in compounds; but also, in the Veda,
even in sentence combination.

a\. In the Veda, the retention of the sibilant in compounds is the
general rule, the exceptions to which are detailed in the Vedic
grammars.

b\. In the later language, the retention is mainly determined by the
intimacy or the antiquity and frequency of the combination. Thus, the
final sibilant of a preposition or a word fitting the office of a
preposition before a verbal root is wont to be preserved; and that of a
stem before a derivative of √kṛ, before pati, before kalpa and kāma, and
so on. Examples are namaskāra, vācaspati, āyuṣkāma, payaskalpa.

c\. The Vedic retention of the sibilant in sentence-collocation is
detailed in full in the Prātiçākhyas. The chief classes of cases are: 1.
the final of a preposition or its like before a verbal form; 2. of a
genitive before a governing noun: as divás putráḥ, iḍás padé; 3. of an
ablative before pári: as himávatas pári; 4. of other less classifiable
cases: as dyāúṣ pitā́, tríṣ pūtvā́, yás pátiḥ, paridhíṣ pátāti, etc.

172\. Before an initial sibilant—श् ç, ष् ṣ, स् s—स् s is either
assimilated, becoming the same sibilant, or it is changed into visarga.

a\. The native grammarians are in some measure at variance (see APr. ii.
40, note) as to which of these changes should be made, and in part they
allow either at pleasure. The usage of the manuscripts is also
discordant; the conversion to visarga is the prevalent practice, though
the sibilant is also not infrequently found written, especially in
South-Indian manuscripts. European editors generally write visarga; but
the later dictionaries and glossaries generally make the alphabetic
place of a word the same as if the sibilant were read instead.

Examples are: manuḥ svayam or manus svayam; indraḥ çūraḥ or indraç
çūraḥ; tā́ḥ ṣaṭ or tāṣ ṣaṭ.

173\. There are one or two exceptions to these rules:

a\. If the initial sibilant has a surd mute after it, the final s may be
dropped altogether—and by some authorities is required to be so dropped.
Thus, vāyava stha or vāyavaḥ stha; catustanām or catuḥstanām. With
regard to this point the usage of the different manuscripts and editions
is greatly at variance.

b\. Before ts, the s is allowed to become visarga, instead of being
retained.

174\. Before a sonant, either vowel or consonant (except र् r: see 179),
स् s is changed to the sonant र् r—unless, indeed, it be preceded by अ a
or आ ā.

Examples are: devapatir iva, çrīr iva; manur gacchati, tanūr apsu;
svasṝr ajanayat; tayor adṛṣṭakāmaḥ; sarvāir guṇāiḥ; agner manve.

a\. For a few cases like dūḍāça, dūṇāça, see below, 199d.

b\. The exclamation bhos (456) loses its s before vowels and sonant
consonants: thus, bho nāiṣadha (and the s is sometimes found omitted
also before surds).

c\. The endings अस् as and आस् ās (both of which are extremely common)
follow rules of their own, namely:

175\. a. Final अस् as, before any sonant consonant and before short अ a,
is changed to ओ o—and the अ a after it is lost.

b\. The resulting accentuation, and the fact that the loss of a is only
occasional in the older language of the Veda, have been pointed out
above, 135a, c.

Examples are: nalo nāma, brahmaṇyo vedavit; manobhava; hantavyo ‘smi;
anyonya (anyas + anya), yaçortham (yaças + artham).

c\. Final अस् as before any other vowel than अ a loses its स् s,
becoming simple अ a; and the hiatus thus occasioned remains. 

d\. That is to say, the o from as is treated as an original e is treated
in same situation: see 132–3.

Examples are: bṛhadaçva uvāca, āditya iva, námaükti, vásyaïṣṭi.

176\. Exceptions to the rules as to final as are:

a\. The nominative masculine pronouns sás and eṣás and (Vedic) syás (495
a, 499 a, b) lose their s before any consonant: thus, sa dadarça *he
saw*, eṣa puruṣaḥ *this man*; but so ‘bravīt *he said*, puruṣaḥ eṣaḥ.

b\. Instances are met with, both in the earlier and in the later
language, of effacement of the hiatus after alteration of as, by
combination of the remaining final a with the following initial vowel:
thus, tato ’vāca (tatas + uvāca), payoṣṇī (payas + uṣṇī), adhāsana
(adhas + āsana): compare 133 c, 177 b. In the Veda, such a combination
is sometimes shown by the metre to be required, though the written text
has the hiatus. But sa in RV. is in the great majority of cases combined
with the following vowel: e.g. sé ’d for sá íd, sā́ ’smāi for sá asmāi,
sāú ’ṣadhīḥ for sá óṣadhīḥ; and similar examples are found also in the
other Vedic texts.

c\. Other sporadic irregularities in the treatment of final as occur.
Thus, it is changed to ar instead of o once in RV. in avás, once in SV.
in ávas (RV. ávo), once in MS. in dambhiṣas; in bhuvas (second of the
trio of sacred utterances bhūs, bhuvas, svar), except in its earliest
occurrences; in a series of words in a Brāhmaṇa passage (TS. K.), viz.
jinvár, ugrár, bhīmár, tveṣár, çrutár, bhūtár, and (K. only) pūtár; in
janar and mahar; and some of the ar-stems noted at 169 a are perhaps of
kindred character. On the other hand, as is several times changed to o
in RV. before a surd consonant; and sás twice, and yás once, retains its
final sibilant in a like position.

d\. In MS., the final a left before hiatus by alteration of either as
(o) or e (133) is made long if itself unaccented and if the following
initial vowel is accented: thus, sū́rā éti (from sū́ras + éti), nirupyátā
índrāya (from -yáte + índ-), and also kāryā̀ éka- (from kāryàs, because
virtually kārías); but ādityá índraḥ (from ādityás + índraḥ), etá ítare
(from eté + ítare).

177\. Final आस् ās before any sonant, whether vowel or consonant, loses
its स् s, becoming simple आ ā; and a hiatus thus occasioned remains.

a\. The maintenance of the hiatus in these cases, as in that of o and e
and āi (above, 133–4), seems to indicate a recent loss of the
intermediate sound. Opinions are divided as to what this should have
been. Some of the native grammarians assimilate the case of ās to that
of āi, assuming the conversion of āy in both alike—but probably only as
a matter of formal convenience in rule-making.

b\. Here, too (as in the similar cases of e and āi and o: 133 c, 176b),
there are examples to be found, both earlier and later, of effacement of
the hiatus.

178\. Final र् r, in general, shows the same form which स् s would show
under the same conditions.

a\. Thus, it becomes visarga when final, and a sibilant or visarga
before an initial surd mute or sibilant (170): thus, rudatī punaḥ, dvās
tat, svàç ca, catúçcatvāriṅçat; and (111c, d) prātastána, antastya,
catuṣṭaya, dhūstva; prātaḥ karoti, antaḥpāta.

b\. But original final r preceded by a or ā maintains itself unchanged
before a sonant: thus, punar eti, prātarjit, ákar jyótiḥ, áhār dā́mnā,
vārdhi.

c\. The r is preserved unchanged even before a surd in a number of Vedic
compounds: thus, aharpáti; svàrcanas, svàrcakṣas, svàrpati, svarṣā́,
svàrṣāti; dhūrṣád, dhūrṣah; pū́rpati, vārkāryá, āçī́rpada, punartta; and
in some of these the r is optionally retained in the later language. The
RV. also has āvar támaḥ once in sentence-combination.

d\. On the other hand, final ar of the verb-form āvar is changed to o
before a sonant in several cases in RV. And r is lost, like s, in one or
two cases in the same text: thus, akṣā índuḥ, áha evá.

179\. A double r is nowhere admitted: if such would occur, either by
retention of an original r or by conversion of s to r, one r is omitted,
and the preceding vowel, if short, is made long by compensation.

Thus, punā ramate, nṛpatī rājati, mātū́ rihán, jyotīratha, dūrohaṇá.

a\. In some Vedic texts, however, there are instances of ar changed to o
before initial r: thus, svò rohāva.

Conversion of स् s to ष् ṣ.

180\. The dental sibilant स् s is changed to the lingual ष् ṣ, if
immediately preceded by any vowel save अ a and आ ā, or by क् k or र्
r—unless the स् s be final, or followed by र् r.

a\. The assimilating influence of the preceding lingual vowels and
semivowel is obvious enough; that of k and the other vowels appears to
be due to a somewhat retracted position of the tongue in the mouth
during their utterance, causing its tip to reach the roof of the mouth
more easily at a point further back than the dental one.

b\. The general Hindu grammar prescribes the same change after a l also;
but the Prātiçākhyas give no such rule, and phonetic considerations, the
l being a dental sound, are absolutely against it. Actual cases of the
combination do not occur in the older language, nor have any been
pointed out in the later.

c\. The vowels that cause the alteration of s to ṣ may be called for
brevity’s sake “alterant” vowels.

181\. Hence, in the interior of a Sanskrit word, the dental s is not
usually found after any vowel save a and ā, but, instead of it the
lingual ṣ. But—

a\. A following r prevents the conversion: thus, usra, tiaras, tamisra.
And it is but seldom made in the forms and derivatives of a root
containing an *r*-element (whether r or ṛ), whatever the position of
that element: thus, sisarti, sisṛtam, sarīsṛpá, tistire, parisrút. To
this rule there are a few exceptions, as viṣṭír, viṣṭārá, níṣṭṛta,
víṣpardhas, gáviṣṭhira, etc. In ajuṣran the final ṣ of a root is
preserved even immediately before r.

b\. This dissimilating influence of a following r, as compared with the
invariable assimilating influence of a preceding r, is peculiar and
problematic.

c\. The recurrence of ṣ in successive syllables is sometimes avoided by
leaving the former s unchanged: thus, sisakṣi, but siṣakti; yāsisīṣṭās,
but yāsiṣīmahi. Similarly, in certain desiderative formations: see
below, 184e.

d\. Other cases are sporadic: RV. has the forms sisice and sisicus (but
siṣicatus), and the stems ṛbī́sa, kīstá, bísa, busá, bṛ́saya; a single
root pis, with its derivative pesuka, is found once in ÇB.; MS. has
mṛsmṛṣā́; músala begins to be found in AV.; and such cases grow more
numerous; for puṁs and the roots niṅs and hiṅs, see below, 183a.

182\. On the other hand (as was pointed out above, 62), the occurrence
of ṣ in Sanskrit words is nearly limited to cases falling under this
rule: others are rather sporadic anomalies—except where ṣ is the product
of ç or kṣ before a dental, as in draṣṭum, caṣṭe, tvaṣṭar: see 218, 221.
Thus, we find—

a\. Four roots, kaṣ, laṣ, bhaṣ, bhāṣ, of which the last is common and is
found as early as the Brāhmaṇas.

b\. Further, in RV., áṣa, kaváṣa, caṣā́la, cā́ṣa, jálāṣa, pāṣyà, baṣkáya,
váṣaṭ (for vakṣat?), kā́ṣṭhā; and, by anomalous alteration of original s,
-ṣāh (turāṣā́h etc.), áṣāḍha, upaṣṭút, and probably apāṣṭhá and
aṣṭhīvánt. Such cases grow more common later.

c\. The numeral ṣaṣ, as already noted (149 b), is more probably ṣakṣ. 

183\. The nasalization of the alterant vowel—or, in other words, its
being followed by anusvāra—does not prevent its altering effect upon the
sibilant: thus, havīṅṣi, parūṅṣi. And the alteration takes place in the
initial s of an ending after the final s of a stem, whether the latter
be regarded as also changed to ṣ or as converted into visarga: thus,
haviṣṣu or haviḥṣu, paruṣṣu or paruḥṣu.

a\. But the s of puṁs (394) remains unchanged, apparently on account of
the retained sense of its value as pums; also that of √hiṅs, because of
its value as hins (hinasti etc.); √niṅs (RV. only) is more questionable.

184\. The principle cases of alteration of s in internal combination are
these:

a\. In endings, inflectional or derivative, beginning with s—thus, su;
si, se, sva; s of sibilant-aorist, future, and desiderative; suffixes
sna, snu, sya, etc.—after a final alterant vowel or consonant of root or
stem, or a union-vowel: thus, juhoṣi, çeṣe, anāiṣam, bhaviṣyāmi,
çuçrūṣe, deṣṇa, jiṣṇu, vikṣu, akārṣam.

b\. The final s of a stem before an ending or suffix: thus: haviṣā,
haviṣas, etc., from havis; çakṣuṣmant, çociṣka, mānuṣa, manuṣya,
jyotiṣṭva.

c\. Roots having a final sibilant (except ç) after an alterant vowel
are—with the exception of fictitious ones and pis, niṅs, hiṅs—regarded
as ending in ṣ, not s; and concerning the treatment of this ṣ in
combination, see below, 225–6.

d\. The initial s of a root after a reduplication: thus, siṣyade,
suṣvāpa, sīṣāsati, coṣkūyate, saniṣvaṇat.

e\. Excepted is in general an initial radical s in a desiderative stem,
when the desiderative-sign becomes ṣ: thus, sisīrṣati from √sṛ,
sisan̄kṣati from √sañj. And there are other scattering cases, as tresus
(perf. from √tras), etc.

185\. But the same change occurs also, on a considerable scale, in
external combination, especially in composition. Thus:

a\. Both in verbal forms and in derivatives, the final i or u of a
preposition or other like prefix ordinarily lingualizes the initial s of
the root to which it is prefixed; since such combinations are both of
great frequency and of peculiar intimacy, analogous with those of root
or stem and affix: thus, abhiṣā́c, pratiṣṭhā́, níṣikta, víṣita;
anuṣvadhám, suṣéka; the cases are numberless.

b\. The principle exceptions are in accordance with the principles
already laid down: namely, when the root contains an *r*-element, and
when a recurrence of the sibilant would take place. But there are also
others, of a more irregular character; and the complete account of the
treatment of initial radical s after a prefix would be matter of great
detail, and not worth giving here. 

c\. Not infrequently, the initial s, usually altered after a certain
prefix, retains the altered sibilant even after an interposed a of
augment or reduplication: thus, aty aṣṭhāt, abhy aṣṭhām, pary aṣasvajat,
vy aṣahanta, ny aṣadāma, nir aṣṭhāpayan, abhy aṣiñcan, vy aṣṭabhnāt; vi
taṣṭhe, vi taṣṭhire.

d\. Much more anomalous is the occasional alteration of initial radical
s after an a-element of a prefix. Such cases are ava ṣṭambh (against ni
stambh and prati stambh) and (according to the grammarians) ava ṣvan.

186\. In other compounds, the final alterant vowel of the first member
not infrequently (especially in the Veda) lingualizes the initial s of
the second: for example, yudhiṣṭhira, pitṛṣvasṛ, goṣṭhá, agniṣṭomá,
anuṣṭúbh, tríṣaṁdhi, diviṣád, parameṣṭhín, abhiṣená, pitṛṣád, puruṣṭutá.

a\. A very few cases occur of the same alteration after an a-element:
thus, saṣtúbh, avaṣṭambha, savyaṣṭhā́, apāṣṭhā́, upaṣṭút; also √sah, when
its final, by 147, becomes ṭ: thus, satrāṣā́ṭ (but satrāsā́ham).

187\. The final s of the first member of a compound often becomes ṣ
after an alterant vowel: thus, the s of a prepositional prefix, as
niṣṣídhvan, duṣṭára (for duṣṣtára), āvíṣkṛta; and, regularly, a s
retained instead of being converted to visarga before a labial or
guttural mute (171 a), as haviṣpā́, jyotiṣkṛ́t; tapuṣpā́.

188\. Once more, in the Veda, the same alteration, both of an initial
and of a final s, is not infrequent even between the words composing a
sentence. The cases are detailed in the Prātiçākhya belonging to each
text, and are of very various character. Thus:

a\. The initial s, especially of particles; as ū ṣú, hí ṣma, kám u
ṣvít;—also of pronouns: as hí ṣáḥ;—of verb-forms, especially from √as:
as hí ṣṭhá, diví ṣṭha;—and in other scattering cases: as u ṣṭuhi, nū́
ṣṭhirám, trī́ ṣadhásthā, ádhi ṣṇóḥ, nákiḥ ṣáḥ, yájuḥ ṣkannám, agníḥ
ṣṭave.

b\. A final s, oftenest before pronouns (especially toneless ones): as
agníṣ ṭvā, níṣ ṭe, īyúṣ ṭé, çúciṣ ṭvám, sádhiṣ ṭáva;—but also in other
cases, and wherever a final s is preserved, instead of being turned into
visarga, before a guttural or labial (171): as tríṣ pūtvā́, ā́yuṣ kṛṇotu,
vā́stoṣ pátiḥ, dyāúṣ pitā́, víbhiṣ pátāt.

Conversion of न् n to ण् ṇ.

189\. The dental nasal न् n, when immediately followed by a vowel or by
न् n or म् m or य् y or व् v, is turned into the lingual ण् ṇ if
preceded in the same word by the lingual sibilant or semivowels or
vowels—that is to say, by ष् ṣ, र् r, or ऋ ṛ or ॠ ṝ—: and this, not only
if the altering letter stands immediately before the nasal, but at
whatever distance from the latter it may be found: unless, indeed, there
intervene (a consonant moving the front of the tongue: namely) a palatal
(except य् y), a lingual, or a dental.

a\. We may thus figure to ourselves the *rationale* of the process: in
the marked proclivity of the language toward lingual utterance,
especially of the nasal, the tip of the tongue, when once reverted into
the loose lingual position by the utterance of a non-contact lingual
element, tends to hang there and make its next nasal contact in that
position; and does so, unless the proclivity is satisfied by the
utterance of a lingual mute, or the organ is thrown out of adjustment by
the utterance of an element which causes it to assume a different
posture. This is not the case with the gutturals or labials, which do
not move the front part of the tongue (and, as the influence of k on
following s shows, the guttural position favors the succession of a
lingual): and the y is too weakly palatal to interfere with the
alteration (as its next relative, the i-vowel, itself lingualizes a s).

b\. This is a rule of constant application; and (as was pointed out
above, 46) the great majority of occurrences of ṇ in the language are a
result of it.

190\. The rule has force especially—

a\. When suffixes, of influence or derivation, are added to roots or
stems containing one of the altering sounds; thus, rudréṇa, rudrā́ṇām,
vā́riṇe, vā́riṇī, vā́rīṇi, dātṝ́ṇi, hárāṇi, dvéṣāṇi, krīṇā́mi, çṛṇóti,
kṣubhāṇá, ghṛṇá, kárṇa, vṛkṇá, rugṇá, dráviṇa, iṣáṇi, purāṇá, rékṇas,
cákṣaṇa, cíkīrṣamāṇa, kṛ́pamāṇa.

b\. When the final n of a root or stem comes to be followed, in
inflection or derivation, by such sounds as allow it to feel the effect
of a preceding altering cause: thus, from √ran, ráṇanti, ráṇyati,
rāraṇa, arāṇiṣus; from brahman, bráhmaṇā, bráhmāṇi, brāhmaṇá, brahmaṇyà,
bráhmaṇvant.

c\. The form piṇak (RV.: 2d and 3d sing. impf.), from √piṣ, is wholly
anomalous.

191\. This rule (like that for the change of s to ṣ) applies strictly
and especially when the nasal and the cause of its alteration both lie
within the limits of the same integral word; but (also like the other)
it is extended, within certain limits, to compound words—and even, in
the Veda, to contiguous words in the sentence. 

192\. Especially, a preposition or similar prefix to a root, if it
contain r or end in euphonic r for s (174), very often lingualizes the n
of a root or of its derived stems and forms. Thus:

a\. The initial n of a root is usually and regularly so altered, in all
forms and derivatives, after parā, pari, pra, nir (for nis), antar, dur
(for dus): thus, párā ṇaya, pári ṇīyate, prá ṇudasva; parāṇutti,
pariṇāma, praṇavá, nirṇíj, durṇáça. Roots suffering this change are
written with initial ṇ in the native root-lists. The only exceptions of
importance are nṛt, nabh, nand, and naç when its ç becomes ṣ (as in
pránaṣṭa).

b\. The final n of a root is lingualized in some of the forms of an and
han: thus, prā́ ’ṇiti, prāṇá, prá haṇyate, praháṇana.

c\. The class-signs nu and nā are altered after the roots hi and mī́:
thus, pári hiṇomi, prá miṇanti (but the latter not in the Veda).

d\. The 1st sing. impv. ending āni is sometimes altered: thus, prá
bhavāṇi.

e\. Derivatives by suffixes containing n sometimes have ṇ by influence
of a preposition: thus, prayā́ṇa.

f\. The n of the preposition ni is sometimes altered, like the initial
of a root, after another preposition: thus, praṇipāta, praṇidhi.

193\. In compound words, an altering cause in one member sometimes
lingualizes a n of the next following member—either its initial or final
n, or n in its inflectional or derivative ending. The exercise of the
altering influence can be seen to depend in part upon the closeness or
frequency of the compound, or its integration by being made the base of
a derivative. Examples are: grāmaṇī́, triṇāman, urūṇasá; vṛtraháṇam etc.
(but vṛtraghnā́ etc.: 195 a), nṛmáṇas, drughaṇá; pravā́haṇa, nṛpā́ṇa,
pūryā́ṇa, pitṛyā́ṇa; svargéṇa, durgā́ṇi, usráyāmṇe, tryan̄gā́ṇām.

194\. Finally, in the Veda, a n (usually initial) is occasionally
lingualized even by an altering sound in another word. The toneless
pronouns nas and ena- are oftenest thus affected: thus, pári ṇas, prāí
’ṇān, índra eṇam; but also of the particle ná *like*: thus, vā́r ṇá; and
a few other cases, as vár ṇā́ma, púnar ṇayāmasi, agnér áveṇa. More
anomalous, and perhaps to be rejected as false readings, are such as
trī́ṇ imā́n and akṣā́ṇ áva and suhā́rṇ ṇaḥ (MS.), and vyṛṣaṇ vā (Āpast.).

195\. a. The immediate combination of a n with a preceding guttural or
labial seems in some cases to hinder the conversion to ṇ: thus,
vṛtraghnā́ etc., kṣubhnāti, tṛpnoti (but in Veda tṛpṇu), kṣepnú, suṣumná.

b\. The RV. has the exceptions úṣṭrānām and rāṣṭrā́nām.

Conversion of dental mutes to linguals and palatals.

196\. When a dental mute comes in contact with a lingual or palatal mute
or sibilant, the dental is usually assimilated, becoming lingual or
palatal respectively. 

The cases are the following:

197\. A dental surd mute or nasal, or the dental sibilant, when
immediately preceded by a ṣ, is everywhere converted into the
corresponding lingual.

a\. Under this rule, the combinations ṣṭ, ṣṭh, and ṣṇ are very common;
ṣṣ is rarely so written, the visarga being put instead of the former
sibilant (172): thus, jyótiḥṣu instead of jyótiṣṣu.

b\. Much less often, dh is changed to ḍh after final ṣ of a root or
tense-stem, with loss of the ṣ or its conversion to ḍ: see 226 c.

c\. Those cases in which the final ṣ becomes ṭ before su (e.g. dviṭsú:
226 b) do not, of course, fall under this rule.

198\. In the other (comparatively infrequent) cases where a dental is
preceded by a lingual in internal combination, the dental (except of su
loc. pl.) becomes lingual. Thus:

a\. A n following immediately a ṇ made such by the rule given at 189,
above—or, as it may be expressed, a double as well as a single n—is
subject to the lingualization: thus, the participles arṇṇá, kṣuṇṇa,
kṣviṇṇa, chṛṇṇá, tṛṇṇá; and, after prefixes (185 a), niṣaṇṇa, pariviṇṇa,
viṣaṇṇa, váṣyaṇṇa. But TS. has ádhiṣkanna, and RV. yájuḥ ṣkannám.

b\. Only a very few other instances occur: ī́ṭṭe and ā́iṭṭa from √īḍ;
ṣaḍḍhā́ (also ṣaḍdhā́ and ṣoḍhā́), and ṣaṇṇā́m (ṣaṣ + nām: anomalous gen.
pl. of ṣaṣ: 483). A small number of words follow the same rule in
external combination: see below, 199.

c\. But tāḍhi (Vedic: √taḍ + dhi) shows loss of the final lingual after
assimilation of the dental, and compensatory lengthening.

d\. Some of the cases of abnormal occurrence of ḍ are explained in a
similar way, as results of a lingualized and afterwards omitted sibilant
before d: thus nīḍá from nisda, √pīḍ from pisd, √mṛḍ from mṛsd. For
words exhibiting a like change in composition, see below, 199 c.

199\. In external combination—

a\. A final t is directed to be assimilated to an initial lingual mute:
thus, taṭ-ṭīkā, taḍ ḍayate, taṭ-ṭhālinī, taḍ ḍhāukate: but the case
never occurs in the older language, and very rarely in the later. For
final n before a lingual, see 205 b.

b\. An initial dental after a final lingual usually remains unchanged;
and su of the loc. pl. follows the same rule: thus, ṣáṭtriṅçat, ā́naḍ
diváḥ, ekarā́ṭ tvám; ṣaṭsú, rāṭsú.

c\. Exceptions are: a few compounds with ṣaṣ *six* showing double ṇ (198
b): namely, ṣáṇṇavati, ṣaṇṇābhi (and one or two others not quotable):
IB. has ṣaṇ ṇiramimīta.

d\. In a few compounds, moreover, there appears a lingualized dental,
with compensatory lengthening, after a lost lingual sibilant or its
representative: namely, in certain Vedic compounds with dus: dūḍábha,
dūḍā́ç, dūḍhī́, dūṇáça, dūṇā́ça (compare the anomalous puroḍā́ç and -ḍā́ça:
puras + √dāç); and, in the language of every period, certain compounds
of ṣaṣ, with change of its vowel to an alterant quality (as in voḍhum
and soḍhum: 224 b): ṣóḍaça, ṣoḍhā́ (also ṣaḍḍhā́ and ṣaḍdhā́), ṣoḍant.

e\. Between final ṭ and initial s, the insertion of a t is permitted—or,
according to some authorities, required: thus, ṣáṭ sahásrāḥ or ṣáṭt
sahásrāḥ.

200\. The cases of assimilation of a dental to a contiguous palatal
occur almost only in external combination, and before an initial
palatal. There is but one case of internal combination, namely:

201\. A न् n coming to follow a palatal mute in internal combination is
itself made palatal.

Thus, yācñā́ (the only instance after c), yajñá, jajñé, ajñata, rā́jñā,
rā́jñī.

202\. a. A final त् t before an initial palatal mute is assimilated to
it, becoming च् c before च् c or छ् ch, and ज् j before ज् j (झ् jh does
not occur).

Thus, uc carati, etac chattram, vidyuj jāyate; yātayájjana, vidyujjihva,
bṛhácchandas, saccarita.

b\. A final न् n is assimilated before ज् j, becoming ञ् ñ.

c\. All the grammarians, of every period, require this assimilation of n
ot j; but it is more often neglected, or only occasionally made, in the
manuscripts.

d\. For n before a surd palatal, see below, 208.

203\. Before the palatal sibilant श् ç, both त् t and न् n are
assimilated, becoming respectively च् c and ञ् ñ; and then the following
श् ç may be, and in practice almost always is, converted to छ् ch.

Thus, vedavic chūraḥ (-vit çū-), tac chrutvā, hṛcchaya (hṛt + çaya);
bṛhañ cheṣaḥ or çeṣaḥ, svapañ chete or çete.

a\. Some authorities regard the conversion of ç to ch after t or n as
everywhere obligatory, others as only optional; some except,
peremptorily or optionally, a ç followed by a mute. And some require the
same conversion after every mute save m, reading also vípāṭ chutudrī́,
ā́naṭ chúci, anuṣṭup chāradī, çuk chuci. The manuscripts generally write
ch, instead of cch, as result of the combination of t and ç.

b\. In the MS., t and ç are anomalously combined into ñ ç: e.g. táñ
çatám, etāvañçás. 

Combinations of final न् n.

204\. Final radical n is assimilated in internal combination to a
following sibilant, becoming anusvāra.

Thus, váṅsi, váṅsva, váṅsat, maṅsyáte, jíghāṅsati.

a\. According to the grammarians, it is treated before bh and su in
declension as in external combination. But the cases are, at best,
excessively rare, and RV. has ráṅsu and váṅsu (the only Vedic examples).

b\. Final n of a derivative suffix is regularly and usually dropped
before a consonant in inflection and composition—in composition, even
before a vowel; and a radical n occasionally follows the same rule: see
421 a, 439, 1203 c, 637.

c\. For assimilation of n to a preceding palatal, see 201.

The remaining cases are those of external combination.

205\. a. The assimilation of n in external combination to a following
sonant palatal and the palatal sibilant ç have been already treated (202
b, 203).

b\. The n is also declared to be assimilated (becoming ṇ) before a
sonant lingual (ḍ, ḍh, ṇ), but the case rarely if ever occurs.

206\. A n is also assimilated to a following initial l, becoming (like
m: 213 d) a nasal l.

a\. The manuscripts to a great extent disregard this rule, leaving n
unchanged; but also they in part attempt to follow it—and that, either
by writing the assimilated n (as the assimilated m, 213 f, and just as
reasonably) with the anusvāra-sign, or else by doubling the l and
putting a sign of nasality above; the latter, however, is inexact, and a
better way would be to represent the two l's, writing the first with
virāma and a nasal sign above. Thus (from trīn lokān):

manuscripts त्रींलोकान् or त्रीँल्लोकान्; better त्रील्ँ लोकान्.

The second of these methods is the one oftenest followed in printed
texts.

207\. Before the lingual and dental sibilants, ṣ and s, final n remains
unchanged; but a t may also be inserted between the nasal and the
sibilant: thus, tā́n ṣáṭ or tā́nt ṣáṭ; mahā́n sán or mahā́nt sán.

a\. According to most of the grammarians of the Prātiçākhyas (not RPr.),
the insertion of the t in such cases is a necessary one. In the
manuscripts it is very frequently made, but not uniformly. It is
probably a purely phonetic phenomenon, a transition-sound to ease the
double change of sonant to surd and nasal to non-nasal
utterance—although the not infrequent cases in which final n stands for
original nt (as bharan, abharan, agnimān) may have aided to establish it
as a rule. Its analogy with the conversion of n ç into ñch (203) is
palpable. 

208\. Before the surd palatal, lingual, and dental mutes, there is
inserted after final n a sibilant of each of those classes respectively,
before which the n becomes anusvāra: thus, devāṅç ca, bhavāṅç chidyate,
kumārāṅs trīn, abharaṅs tataḥ, dadhaṅç (425 c) carum.

a\. This rule, which in the classical language has established itself in
the form here given, as a phonetic rule of unvarying application, really
involves a historic survival. The large majority of cases of final n in
the language (not far from three quarters) are for original ns; and the
retention of the sibilant in such cases, when once its historic ground
had been forgotten, was extended by analogy to all others.

b\. Practically, the rule applies only to n before c and t, since cases
involving the other initials occur either not at all, or only with
extreme rarity (the Veda does not present an example of any of them). In
the Veda, the insertion is not always made, and the different texts have
with regard to its different usages, which are fully explained in the
Prātiçākhyas; in general, it is less frequent in the older texts. When
the ç does not appear between n and c, the n is of course assimilated,
becoming ñ (203).

209\. The same retention of original final s after a nasal, and
consequent treatment of (apparent) final ān, īn, ūn, ṝn as if they were
āṅs, īṅs, ūṅs, ṝṅs (long nasalized vowel with final s), shows itself
also in other Vedic forms of combination, which, for the sake of unity,
may be briefly stated here together:

a\. Final ān becomes āṅ (nasalized ā) before a following vowel: that is
to say, āṅs, with a nasal vowel, is treated like ās, with pure vowel
(177): thus, devā́ṅ é ’há, úpabaddhāṅ ihá, mahā́ṅ asi. This is an
extremely common case, especially in RV. Once or twice, the s appears as
ḥ before p; thus, svátavāṅḥ pāyúḥ.

b\. In like manner, s is treated after nasal ī, ū, ṝ as it would be
after those vowels when pure, becoming r before a sonant sound (174),
and (much more rarely) ḥ before a surd (170): thus, raçmī́ṅr iva, sūnū́ṅr
yuvanyū́ṅr út, nṝ́ṅr abhí; nṝ́ṅḥ pā́tram (and nṝ́ṅṣ p-, MS.).

c\. RV. has once -īṅ before y. MS. usually has aṅ instead of āṅ.

210\. The nasals n, ṇ, n̄, occurring as finals after a short vowel, are
doubled before any initial vowel: thus, pratyán̄n̄ úd eṣi, udyánn ādityáḥ,
āsánn-iṣu.

a\. This is also to be regarded as a historical survival, the second
nasal being an assimilation of an original consonant following the
first. It is always written in the manuscripts, although the Vedic metre
seems to show a duplication was sometimes omitted. The RV. has the
compound vṛṣaṇaçva.

211\. The nasals ñ and ṇ before a sibilant are allowed to insert
respectively k and ṭ—as n (207) inserts t: thus, pratyán̄k sómaḥ. 

Combinations of final म् m.

212\. Final radical म् m, in internal combination, is assimilated to a
following mute or spirant—in the later case, becoming anusvāra; in the
former, becoming the nasal of the same class with the mute.

a\. Before m or v (as when final: 143 a), it is changed to n: thus, from
√gam come áganma, aganmahi, ganvahi, jaganvā́ṅs (which appear to be the
only quotable cases). According to the grammarians, the same change is
made in the inflection of root-stems before bh and su: thus, praçānbhis,
praçānsu (from praçām: pra + √çam). No derived noun-stem ends in m.

b\. The ÇB. and KÇS. have kámvant and çāmvant, and CbU. has kamvara.

213\. Final म् m in external combination is a servile sound, being
assimilated to any following consonant. Thus:

a\. It remains unchanged only before a vowel or labial mute.

b\. But also, by an anomalous exception, before r of the root rāj in
samrā́j and its derivatives samrā́jñī and sāmrājya.

c\. Before a mute of any other class than labial, it becomes a nasal of
that class.

d\. Before the semivowels y, l, v it becomes, according to the Hindu
grammarians, a nasal semivowel, the nasal counterpart of each
respectively (see 71).

e\. Before r, a sibilant, or h, it becomes anusvāra (see 71).

f\. The manuscripts and the editions in general make no attempt to
distinguish the nasal tones produced by the assimilation of m before a
following semivowel from that before a spirant.

g\. But if h be immediately followed by another consonant (which can
only be a nasal or semivowel), the m is allowed to be assimilated to
that following consonant. This is because the h has no position of the
mouth-organs peculiar to itself, but is uttered in the position of the
next sound. The Prātiçākhyas do not take any notice of the case.

h\. Cases are met with in the Veda where a final m appears to be dropped
before a vowel, the final and initial vowels being then combined into
one. The pada-text then generally gives a wrong interpretation. Thus,
saṁvánano ’bhayaṁkarám (RV. viii. 1. 2; pada-text: -nanā ubh-; SV.
-nanam).

i\. It has been pointed out above (73) that the assimilated m is
generally represented in texts by the anusvāra-sign, and that in this
work it is transliterated by ṁ (instead of a nasal mute or ṅ). 

The palatal mutes and sibilant, and ह् h.

214\. These sounds show in some situations a reversion (43) to the
original gutturals from which they are derived. The treatment of j and
h, also, is different, according as they represent the one or the other
of two different degrees of alteration from their originals.

215\. The palatals and h are the least stable of alphabetic sounds,
undergoing, in virtue of their derivative character, alteration in many
cases where other similar sounds are retained.

216\. Thus, in derivation, even before vowels, semivowels; and nasals,
reversion to guttural form is by no means rare. The cases are the
following:

a\. Before a of suffix a, final c becomes k in an̄ká, çvan̄ka, arká, pāká,
vāká, çúka, parka, marká, vṛ́ka, prátīka etc., reka, séka, moka, roká,
çóka, toká, mroká, vraská;—final j becomes g in tyāgá, bhága, bhāgá,
yāga, an̄ga, bhan̄gá, san̄ga, svan̄ga, ṛñga, tun̄ga, yun̄ga, varga, mārga,
mṛgá, varga, sarga, nega, vega, bhóga, yugá, yóga, loga, róga;—final h
becomes gh in aghá, maghá, arghá, dīrghá (and drā́ghīyas, drā́ghiṣṭa),
degha, meghá, ogha, dógha, drógha, mógha; and in dúghāna and méghamāna.
In neka (√nij) we have further an anomalous substitution of a surd for
the final sonant of the root.

b\. In another series of derivatives with a, the altered sound appears:
examples are ajá, yāja, çucá, çoca, vrajá, vevijá, yuja, ūrjā́, dóha.

c\. Before the suffixes as and ana, the guttural only rarely appears:
namely, in án̄kas, ókas, rókas, çókas, bhárgas, and in rogana; also in
ābhogáya.

d\. Before an i-vowel, the altered sound appears (except in ābhogí,
ógīyaṅs, tigitá, mokī́, sphigī́): thus, ājí, tují, rúci, çácī, vívici,
rociṣṇú.

e\. Before u, the guttural reappears, as a rule (the cases are few):
thus, án̄ku, van̄kú, rekú, bhṛ́gu, mā́rguka, raghú (and rághīyaṅs).

f\. Before n, the examples of reversion are few, except of j (becoming
g) before the participial ending na (957 c): thus, rékṇas, vagnú (with
the final also made sonant); and participles bhagná, rugṇá, etc.; and
apparently pṛgṇa from √pṛc.

g\. Before m (of ma, man, mant, min), the guttural generally appears:
thus, rukmá, tigmá, yugma, ṛ́gma (with sonant change); takmán, vákman,
sákman, yugmán; rúkmant; ṛgmín and vāgmín (with sonant change):—but
ájman, ojmán, bhujmán.

h\. Before y, the altered sound is used: thus, pacya, yajya, yajyu,
yujya, bhujyu. Such cases as bhogya, yogya, negya, okya are doubtless
secondary derivatives from bhoga etc. 

i\. Before r, the cases are few, and the usage apparently divided: thus,
takra, sakra, vakrá, çukrá, vigrá, ugrá, túgra, mṛgra, ván̄kri; but vájra
and pajrá (?).

j\. Before v (of the suffixes va, van, vin, etc., and participial vāṅs)
the guttural is regularly preserved: thus, ṛkvá, pakvá, vákva; vákvan,
ṛ́kvan, rikvan, çukvan, mṛgvan, túgvan, yugvan; ṛ́kvant, pṛ́kvant; vāgvín,
vagvaná, vagvanú (with further sonant change); vivakvā́ṅs, ririkvā́ṅs,
vivikvā́ṅs, rurukvā́ṅs, çuçukvā́ṅs; çuçukvaná, çuçukváni: also before the
union-vowel i in okivā́ṅs (RV., once). An exception is yájvan.

k\. The reversion of h in derivation is comparatively rare. The final j
which is analogous with ç (219) shows much less proclivity to reversion
than that which corresponds with c.

l\. A like reversion shows itself also to some extent in conjugational
stem-formation and inflection. Thus, the initial radical becomes
guttural after the reduplication in the present or perfect or
desiderative or intensive stems, or in derivatives, of the roots ci,
cit, ji, hi, han, and in jáguri (√jṛ); and han becomes ghn on the
elision of a (402, 637). The RV. has vivakmi from √vac and vāvakre from
√vañc; and SV. has sasṛgmahe (RV. -sṛj-). And before ran etc. of 3d pl.
mid. we have g for radical j in asṛgran, asṛgram, asasṛgram (all in
RV.).

217\. Final च् c of a root or stem, if followed in internal combination
by any other sound than a vowel or semivowel or nasal, reverts (43) to
its original guttural value, and shows everywhere the same form which a
क् k would show in the same situation.

Thus, vákti, uváktha, vákṣi, vakṣyā́mi, vaghdi; vhāgbhís, vākṣú; uktá,
ukthá, vaktár.

a\. And, as final c becomes k (above 142), the same rule applies also to
c in external combination: thus, vā́k ca, vā́g ápi, vā́n̄ me.

Examples of c remaining unchanged in inflection are: ucyáte, riricré,
vācí, mumucmáhe.

217\. Final श् ç reverts to its original क् k, in internal combination,
only before the स् s of a verbal stem or ending (whence, by 180, क्ष्
kṣ); before त् t and थ् th, it everywhere becomes ष् ṣ (whence, by 197,
ष्ट् ṣṭ and ष्ठ् ṣṭh); before ध् dh, भ् bh, and सु su of the loc. pl.,
as when final (145), it regularly becomes the lingual mute (ट् ṭ or ड्
ḍ).

Thus, ávikṣata, vekṣyā́mi; váṣṭi, viṣṭá, dídeṣḍu; didiḍḍhi, viḍbhís. 

a\. But a few roots exhibit the reversions of final ç to k before bh and
su, and also when final (145): they are diç, dṛç, spṛç, and optionally
naç; and viç has in V. always vikṣú, loc. pl., but víṭ, viḍbhís, etc.
Examples are díksaṁçita, dṛgbhís, hṛdispṛ́k, nák (or naṭ).

Examples of ç remaining unchanged before vowels etc. are: viçí,
viviçyās, aviçran, açnomi, vacmi, uçmási.

b\. A ç remains irregularly unchanged before p in the compound viçpáti.

219\. Final ज् j is in one set of words treated like च् c, and in
another set like श् ç.

Thus, from yuj: áyukthās, áyukta, yun̄kté, yukti, yóktra, yokṣyā́mi,
yukṣú; yun̄gdhí, áyugdhvam, yugbhís.

Again, from mṛj etc.: ámṛkṣat, srakṣyā́mi; mā́rṣṭhi, mṛṣṭá, sṛ́ṣṭi, rāṣṭrá;
mṛḍḍhí, mṛḍḍhavám, rāḍbhís, rāṭsú, rā́ṭ.

a\. To the former or yuj-class belong (as shown by their quotable forms)
about twenty roots and radical stems: namely, bhaj, saj, tyaj (not V.),
raj 'color*, svaj, majj, nij, tij, vij, 1 and 2 bhuj, yuj, ruj, vṛj,
añj, bhañj, çiñj; ū́rj, sráj, bhiṣáj, ásṛj;—also, stems formed with the
suffixes aj and ij (383. IV), as tṛṣṇáj, vaṇíj; and ṛtvíj, though
containing the root yaj.*

b\. To the latter or mṛj-class belong only about one third as many:
namely, yaj, bhrajj, vraj, rāj, bhrāj, mṛj, sṛj.

c\. A considerable number of j-roots are not placed in circumstances to
exhibit the distinction; but such roots are in part assignable to one or
the class on the evidence of the related languages. The distinction
appears, namely, only when the j occurs as final, or is followed, either
in inflection or derivation, by a dental mute (t, th, dh), or, in
noun-inflection, by bh or su. In derivation (above, 216) we find a g
sometimes from the mṛj-class: thus mārga, sárga, etc.; and (2161) before
Vedic mid. endings, sasṛgmahe, asṛgran, etc. (beside sasṛjrire)—while
from the yuj-class occur only yuyujre, ayujran, bubhujrire, with j. And
MS. has viçvasṛ́k from (√sṛj).

220\. Final ch falls under the rules of combination almost only in the
root prach, in which it is treated as if it were ç (praç being, indeed,
its more original form): thus, prakṣyā́mi, pṛṣṭá, and also the derivative
praçná. As final and in noun-inflection (before bh and su), it is
changed to the lingual mute: thus, prāḍvivāka.

a\. Mūrtá is called the participle of mūrch, and a gerund mūrtvā́ is
given to the same root. They (with mū́rti) must doubtless come from a
simpler form of the root.

b\. Of jh there is no occurrence: the grammarians require it to be
treated like c. 

221\. The compound kṣ is not infrequent as final of a root (generally of
demonstrably secondary origin), or of a tense-stem (s-aorist: see below,
878 ff.); and, in the not very frequent cases of its internal
combination, it is treated as if a single sound, following the rules for
ç: thus çákṣe (cakṣ + se), cákṣva; cáṣṭe, ácaṣṭa, ásrāṣṭam, ásṛṣṭa,
tváṣṭar. As to its treatment when final, see 146.

a\. Thus, we are taught by the grammarians to make such forms as goráṭ,
goráḍbhis, goráṭṣu (from gorákṣ); and we actually have ṣáṭ, ṣaḍbhís,
ṣaṭsú from ṣakṣ or ṣaṣ (146 b). For jagdha etc. from √jakṣ, see 233 f.

b\. In the single anomalous root vraçc, the compound çc is said to
follow the rules for simple ç. From it are quotable the future
vrakṣyáti, the gerunds vṛṣṭvā́ (AV.) and vṛktvī́ (RV.), and the participle
(957 c) vṛkṇá. Its c reverts to k in the derivative vraska.

222\. The roots in final ह् h, like those in ज् j, fall into two
classes, exhibiting a similar diversity of treatment, appearing in the
same kinds of combination.

a\. In the one class, as duh, we have a reversion of h (as of c) to a
guttural form, and its treatment as if it were still its original gh:
thus, ádhukṣam, dhokṣyā́mi; dugdhā́m, dugdhá; ádhok, dhúk, dhugbhís,
dhukṣú.

b\. In the other cases, as ruh and sah, we have a guttural reversion (as
of ç) only before s in verb-formations and derivation: thus, árukṣat,
rokṣyā́mi, sākṣiyá, sakṣáṇi. As final, in external combination, and in
noun-inflection before bh and su, the h (like ç) becomes a lingual mute:
thus, turāṣā́ṭ, pṛtanāṣā́ḍ ayodhyáḥ, turāsā́ḍbhis, turāsā́ṭsu. But before a
dental mute (t, th, dh) in verb-inflection and in derivation, its
euphonic effect is peculiarly complicated: in turns the dental into a
lingual (as would ç); but it also makes it sonant and aspirate (as would
ḍh: see 160); and further, it disappears itself, and the preceding
vowel, if short, is lengthened: thus, from ruh with ta comes rūḍhá, from
leh with ti comes léḍhi, from guh with tar comes gūḍhár, from meh with
tum comes méḍhum, from lih with tas or thas comes līḍhás, from lih with
dhvam comes līḍhvám, etc.

c\. This is as if we had to assume as transition sound a sonant aspirate
lingual sibilant ṣh, with the euphonic effects of a lingual and of a
sonant aspirate (160), itself disappearing under the law of the existing
language which admits no sonant sibilant.

223\. The roots of the two classes, as shown in their forms found in
use, are:

a\. of the first or duh-class: dah, dih, duh, druh, snuh, snih (and the
final of uṣṇíh is similarly treated); 

b\. of the second or ruh-class: vah, sah, mih, rih or lih, guh, ruh,
dṛṅh, tṛṅh, bṛh, baṅh, spṛh (?).

c\. But muh forms also (not in RV.) the participle mūḍha and agent-noun
mūḍhár, as well as mugdhá and mugdhár; and druh and snih are allowed by
the grammarians to do likewise: such forms as drūḍha and snīḍha,
however, have not been met with in use.

d\. From roots of the ruh-class we find also in the Veda the forms
gartārúk, nom. sing., and prāṇadhṛ́k and dadhṛ́k; and hence puruspṛ́k (the
only occurrence) does not certainly prove √spṛh to be of the duh-class.

e\. A number of other h-roots are not proved by their occurring forms to
belong to either class; they, too, are with more or less confidence
assigned to the one or the other by comparison with the related
languages.

f\. In derivation, before certain suffixes (216), we have gh instead of
h from verbs of either class.

g\. The root nah comes from original dh instead of gh, and its reversion
is accordingly to a dental mute: thus, natsyā́mi, naddhá, upānádbhis,
upānadyuga, anupānatka. So also the root grah comes from (early Vedic)
grabh, and shows labials in many forms and derivatives (though it is
assimilated to other h-roots in the desiderative stem jighṛkṣa). In like
manner, h is used for dh in some of the forms and derivatives of √dvā
*put*; and further analogous facts are the stem kakuhá beside kakubhá,
the double imperative ending dhi and hi, and the dative máhyam beside
túbhyam (491).

224\. Irregularities of combination are:

a\. The vowel ṛ is not lengthened after the loss of the h-element: thus,
dṛḍhá, tṛḍhá, bṛḍhá (the only cases; and in the Veda their first
syllable has metrical value as heavy or long).

b\. The roots vah and sah change their vowel to o instead of lengthening
it: thus, voḍhám, voḍhā́m, voḍhár, sóḍhum. But from sah in the older
language forms with ā are more frequent: thus, sāḍhá, áṣāḍha (also
later), sā́ḍhar. The root tṛṅh changes the vowel of its class-sign na
into e instead of lengthening it: thus, tṛṇeḍhi, tṛṇéḍhu, atṛṇet (the
grammarians teach also tṛṇehmi and tṛṇekṣi: but no such forms are
quotable, and, if ever actually in use, they must have been made by
false analogy with others).

c\. These anomalous vowel-changes seem to stand in connection with the
fact that the cases showing them are the only ones where other than an
alterant vowel (180) comes before the lingualized sibilant
representative of the h. Compare ṣóḍaça etc.

d\. Apparently by dissimilation, the final of vah in anomalous compound
anaḍvah is changed to d instead of ḍ: see 404. 

The lingual sibilant ष् ṣ.

225\. Since the lingual sibilant, in its usual and normal occurrences,
is (182) the product of lingualization of s after certain alterant
sounds, we might expect final radical ṣ, when (in rare cases) it comes
to stand where a ṣ cannot maintain itself, to revert to its original,
and be treated as a s would be treated under the same circumstances.
That, however, is true only in a very few instances.

a\. Namely, in the prefix dus (evidently identical with √duṣ); in sajū́s
(adverbially used case-form from √juṣ); in (RV.) vivés and ávives, from
√viṣ; in āíyes (RV.), from √īṣ; and in āçís, from çiṣ as secondary form
of √çās. All these, except the first two, are more or less open in
question.

226\. In general, final lingual ष् ṣ, in internal combination, is
treated in the same manner as palatal श् ç. Thus:

a\. Before t and th it remains unchanged, and the latter are
assimilated: e.g. dviṣṭas, dviṣṭhas, dvéṣṭum.

This is a common and perfectly natural combination.

b\. Before dh, bh, and su, as also in external combination (145), it
becomes a lingual mute: and dh is made lingual after it: e.g. piṇḍḍhi,
viḍḍhi, viviḍḍhi, dviḍḍhvam, dviḍbhís, dviṭsú; bhinnaviṭka.

c\. So also the dh of dhvam as ending of 2d pl. mid. becomes ḍh after
final ṣ of a tense-stem, whether the ṣ be regarded as lost or as
converted to ḍ before it (the manuscripts write simply ḍhv, not ḍḍhv;
but this is ambiguous: see 232). Thus, after ṣ of s-aorist stems (881
a), astoḍhvam, avṛḍhvam, cyoḍhvam (the only quotable cases), from astoṣ
+ dhvam etc.; but arādhvam from arās + dhvam. Further, after the ṣ of
iṣ-aorist stems (901 a), āindhiḍhvam, artiḍhvam, ajaniḍhvam, vepiḍhvam
(the only quotable cases), from ajaniṣ + dhvam etc. Yet again, in the
precative (924), as bhaviṣīḍhvam, if, as is probable (unfortunately, no
example of this person is quotable from any part of the literature), the
precative-sign s (ṣ) is to be regarded as present in the form.
According, however, to the Hindu grammarians, the use of ḍh or of dh in
the iṣ-aorist and precative depends on whether the i of iṣ or of iṣī is
or is not “preceded by a semivowel or h”—which both in itself appears
senseless and is opposed to the evidence of all the quotable forms.
Moreover, the same authorities prescribed the change of dh to ḍh under
the same restriction as to circumstances, in the perf. mid. ending dhve
also: in this case, too, without any conceivable reason; and no example
of ḍhve in the 2d pl. perf. has been pointed out in the literature.

d\. The conversion of ṣ to ṭ (or ḍ) as final and before bh and su is
parallel with the like conversion of ç, and of j and h in the mṛj and
ruh classes of roots, and perhaps with the occasional change of s to t
(167–8). It is a very infrequent case, occurring (save as it may be
assumed in the case of ṣaṣ) only once in the RV. and once in the AV.
(-dviṭ and -pruṭ), although those texts have more than 40 roots with
final ṣ; in the Brāhmaṇas, moreover, have been noticed further only
-pruṭ and víṭ (ÇB.), and -çliṭ (K.). From piṅṣ, RV. has the anomalous
form piṇak (2d and 3d sing., for pinaṣ-s and pinaṣ-t).

e\. Before s in internal combination (except su of loc. pl.) it becomes
k: thus, dvékṣi, dvekṣyā́mi, ádvikṣam.

f\. This change is of anomalous phonetic character, and difficult of
explanation. It is also practically of very rare occurrence. The only
RV. examples (apart from piṇak, above) are vivekṣi, from √viṣ, and the
desid. stem ririkṣa from √riṣ; AV. has only dvikṣat and dvikṣata, and
the desid. stem çiçlikṣa from √çliṣ. Other examples are quotable from
√√kṛṣ and piṣ and viṣ (ÇB. etc.), and çiṣ (ÇB.); and they are by the
Hindu grammarians prescribed to be formed from about half-a-dozen other
roots.

Extension and Abbreviation.

227\. As a general rule, ch is not allowed by the grammarians to stand
in that form after a vowel, but is to be doubled, becoming cch (which
the manuscripts sometimes write chch).

a\. The various authorities disagree with one another in detail as to
this duplication. According to Pāṇini, ch is doubled within a word after
either a long or a short vowel; and, as initial, necessarily after a
short and after the particles ā́ and mā́, and optionally everywhere after
a long. In RV., initial ch is doubled after a long vowel of ā́ only, and
certain special cases after a short vowel are excepted. For the required
usage in the other Vedic texts, see their several Prātiçākhyas. The
Kāṭhaka writes for original ch (not ch from combination of t or n with
ç: 203) after a vowel everywhere çch. The manuscripts in general write
simple ch.

b\. Opinions are still at variance as to how far this duplication has an
etymological ground, and how far it is only an acknowledgment of the
fact that ch makes a heavy syllable even after a short vowel (makes
“position”: 79). As the duplication is accepted and followed by most
European scholars, it will be also adopted in this work in words and
sentences (not in roots and stems).

228\. After r, any consonant (save a spirant before a vowel) is by the
grammarians either allowed or required to be doubled (an aspirate, by
prefixing the corresponding non-aspirate: 154).

Thus:

अर्क arka, or अर्क्क arkka; कार्य kārya, or कार्य्य kāryya;

अर्थ artha, or अर्त्थ arttha; दीर्घ dīrgha, or दीर्ग्घ dīrggha. 

a\. Some of the authorities include, along with r, also h or l or v, or
more than one of them, in this rule.

b\. A doubled consonant after r is very common in manuscripts and
inscriptions, as also in native text-editions and in the earlier
editions prepared by European scholars—in later ones, the duplication is
universally omitted.

c\. On the other hand, the manuscripts often write a single consonant
after r where a double one is etymologically required: thus, kārtikeya,
vārtika, for kaārttikeya, vārttika.

229\. The first consonant of a group—whether interior, or initial after
a vowel of a preceding word—is by the grammarians either allowed or
required to be doubled.

a\. This duplication is allowed by Pāṇini and required by the
Prātiçākhyas—in both, with mention of authorities who deny it
altogether. For certain exceptions, see the Prātiçākhyas; the meaning of
the whole matter is too obscure to justify the giving of details here.

230\. Other cases of extension of consonant-groups, required by some of
the grammatical authorities, are the following:

a\. Between a non-nasal and a nasal mute, the insertion of so-called
yamas (*twins*), or nasal counterparts, is taught by the Prātiçākhyas
(and assumed in Pāṇini’s commentary): see APr. i. 99, note.

b\. Between h and a following nasal mute the Prātiçākhyas teach the
insertion of a nasal sound called a nāsikya: see APr. i. 100, note.

c\. Between r and a following nasal consonant the Prātiçākhyas teach the
insertion of a svarabhakti or *vowel-fragment*: see APr. i. 101–2, note.

d\. Some authorities assume this insertion only before a spirant; the
others regard it as twice as long before a spirant as before any other
consonant—namely, a half or a quarter *mora* before the former, a
quarter or an eight before the latter. One (VPr.) admits it after l as
well as r. It is variously described as a fragment of the vowel a or of
ṛ (or ḷ).

e\. The RPr. puts a svarabhakti also between a sonant consonant and a
following mute or spirant; and APr. introduces an element called
sphoṭana (*distinguisher*) between a guttural and a preceding mute of
another class.

f\. For one or two other cases of yet more doubtful value, see the
Prātiçākhyas.

231\. After a nasal, the former of two non-nasal mutes may be dropped,
whether homogeneous only with the nasal, or with both: thus, yun̄dhí for
yun̄gdhí, yun̄dhvám for yun̄gdhvám, ān̄tám for ān̄ktám, pan̄tí for pan̄ktí,
chintā́m for chinttā́m, bhinthá for bhintthá, indhé for inddhé.

a\. The abbreviation, allowed by Pāṇini, is required by APr. (the other
Prātiçākhyas take no notice of it). It is the more usual practice of the
manuscripts, though the full group is also often written. 

232\. In general, a double mute (including an aspirate which is doubled
by the prefixion of a non-aspirate) in combination with any other
consonant is by the manuscripts written as simple.

a\. That is to say, the ordinary usage of the manuscripts makes no
difference between those groups in which a phonetic duplication is
allowed by the rules given above (228, 229) and those in which the
duplication is etymological. As every tv after a vowel may also be
properly written ttv, so dattvā́ and tattvá may be, and almost invariably
are, written as datvā́ and tatvá. As kártana is also properly kárttana,
so kārttika (from kṛtti) is written as kārtika. So in inflection, we
have always, for example, majñā́ etc., not majjñā́, from majján. Even in
composition and sentence-collocation the same abbreviations are made:
thus, hṛdyotá for hṛddyotá; chináty asya for chinátty asya. Hence it is
impossible to determine by the evidence of written usage whether we
should regard ādhvam or āddhvam (from √ās), ádviḍhvam or ádviḍḍhvam
(from √dviṣ), as the true form of a second person plural.

233\. a. Instances are sometimes met with of apparent loss (perhaps
after conversion to a semivowel) of i or u before y or v respectively.
Thus, in the Brāhmaṇas, tú and nú with following vāí etc. often made
tvāí, nvāí (also tvā́vá, ánvāí); and other examples from the older
language are anvart- (anu + √vart); paryan, paryanti, paryāyāt, paryāṇa
(pari + yan, etc.); abhyàrti (abhi + iyarti); antaryāt (antar + iyāt);
cārvāc, cārvāka, cārvadana (cāru + vāc, etc.); kyànt for kíyant; dvyoga
(dvi + yoga); anvā, anvāsana (anu + vā, etc.); probably vyùnoti for ví
yunoti (RV.), urváçī (uru-vaçī), çíçvarī for çíçu-varī (RV.); vyāmá (vi
+ yāma); and the late svarṇa for suvarṇa. More anomalous abbreviations
are the common tṛcá (tri + ṛca); and dvṛca (dvi + ṛca: S.) and treṇī
(tri + eṇī: Āpast.).

Further, certain cases of the loss of a sibilant require notice. Thus:

b\. According to the Hindu grammarians, the s of s-aorist stems is lost
after a short vowel in the 2d and 3d sing. middle: thus, adithās and
adita (1st sing. adiṣi), akṛthās and akṛta (1st sing. akṛṣi). It is,
however, probably that such cases are to be explained in a different
manner: see 834 a.

c\. The s between two mutes is lost in all combinations of the roots
sthā and stambh with the prefix ud: thus, út thus, útthita, út thāpaya,
úttabdha, etc.

d\. The same omission is now and then made in other similar cases: thus
cit kámbhanena (for skámbh-: RV.); tasmāt tute (for stute) and puroruk
tuta (for stuta: K.); the compounds ṛkthā (ṛk + sthā: PB.) and
utphulin̄ga; the derivative utphāla (√sphal). On the other hand, we may
have vidyút stanáyantī (RV.), utsthala, kakutstha, etc.

e\. So also the tense-sign of the s-aorist is lost after a final
consonant of a root before the initial consonant of an ending: thus,
achāntta (and for this, by 231, achānta) for achāntsta, çāpta for
çāpsta, tāptam for tāpstam, abhākta for abhāksta, amāuktam for
amāukstam. These are the only quotable cases: compare 883.

f\. A final s of root or tense-stem is in a few instances lost after a
sonant aspirate, and the combination of mutes is then made as if no
sibilant had ever intervened. Thus, from the root ghas, with omission of
the vowel and then of the final sibilant, we have the form gdha (for
ghs-ta: 3d sing. mid.), the participle gdha (in agdhā́d), and the
derivative ghdi (for ghs-ti; in sá-gdhi); and further, from the
reduplicated form of the same root, or √jakṣ, we have jagdha, jagdhum,
jagdhvā, jagdhi (from jaghs-ta etc.); also, in like manner, from baps,
reduplication of bhas, the form babdhām (for babhs-tām). According to
the Hindu grammarians, the same utter loss of the aorist-sign s takes
place after a final sonant aspirate of a root before an ending beginning
with t or th: thus, from √rudh, s-aorist stem arāuts act. and aruts
mid., come the active dual and plural persons arāuddham and arāuddhām
and arāuddha, and the middle singular persons aruddhās and aruddha. None
of the active forms, however, have been found quotable from the
literature, ancient or modern; and the middle forms admit also of a
different explanation: see 834, 883.

Strengthening and Weakening Processes.

234\. Under this head, we take up first the changes that affect vowels,
and then those that affect consonants—adding for convenience’s sake, in
each case, a brief notice of the vowel and consonant elements that have
come to bear the apparent office of connectives.

Guṇa and Vṛddhi.

255\. The so-called guṇa and vṛddhi-changes are the most regular and
frequent of vowel-changes, being of constant occurrence both in
inflection and in derivation.

a\. A guṇa-vowel (guṇa *secondary quality*) differs from the
corresponding simple vowel by a prefixed a-element which is combined
with the other according to the usual rules; a vṛddhi-vowel (vṛddhi
*growth, increment*), by the further prefixion of a to the guṇa-vowel.
Thus, of इ i or ई ī the corresponding guṇa is (a+i=) ए e; the
corresponding vṛddhi is (a+e=) ऐ āi. But in all gunating processes अ a
remains unchanged—or, as it is sometimes expressed, अ a is its own
guṇa; आ ā, of course, remains unchanged for both guṇa and vṛddhi.

236\. The series of corresponding degrees is then as follows:

simple vowel

a ā

i ī

u ū

ṛ

ḷ

guṇa

a ā

e

o

ar

al

vṛddhi

ā

āi

āu

ār

a\. There is nowhere any occurrence of ṝ in a situation to undergo
either guṇa or vṛddhi-change; nor does ḷ (26) ever suffer change to
vṛddhi. Theoretically, ṝ would have the same changes as ṛ; and the
vṛddhi of ḷ would be āl.

b\. In secondary derivatives requiring vṛddhi of the first syllable
(1204), the o of go (361 c) is strengthened to gāu: thus, gāumata,
gāuṣṭhika.

237\. The historical relations of the members of each vowel-series are
still matters of some difference of opinion. From the special point of
view of the Sanskrit, the simple vowels wear the aspect of being in
general the original or fundamental ones, and the others of being
products of their increment or strengthening, in two several degrees—so
that the rules of formation direct a, i, u, ṛ, ḷ to be raised to guṇa or
vṛddhi respectively, under specified conditions. But ṛ has long been so
clearly seen to come by abbreviation or weakening from an earlier ar (or
ra) that many European grammarians have preferred to treat the
guṇa-forms as the original and the other as the derivative. Thus, for
example: instead of assuming certain roots to be bhṛ and vṛdh, and
making from them bharati and vardhati, and bhṛta and vṛddha, by the same
rules from which bhū and nī and from budh and cit form bhavati and
nayati, bodhati, and cetati, bhūta and nīta, buddha and citta—they
assume bhar and vardh to be the roots, and give the rules of formation
for them in reverse. In this work, as already stated (104 e), the ṛ-form
is preferred.

238\. The guṇa-increment is an Indo-European phenomenon, and is in many
cases seen to occur in connection with an accent on the increased
syllable. It is found—

a\. In root-syllables: either in inflection, as dvéṣṭi from √dviṣ, dóhmi
from √duh; or in derivation, as dvéṣa, dóhas, dvéṣṭum, dógdhum.

b\. In formative elements: either conjugational class-signs, as tanómi
from tanu; or suffixes of derivation, in inflection or in further
derivation, as matáye from matí, bhānávas from bhānú, pitáram from pitṛ́
(or pitár), hantavyà from hántu.

239\. The vṛddhi-increment is specifically Indian, and its occurrence is
less frequent and regular. It is found— 

a\. In root and suffix-syllables, instead of guṇa: thus, stāúti from
√stu, sákhāyam from sákhi, ánāiṣam from √nī, ákārṣam and kāráyati and
kāryà from √kṛ (or kar), dātā́ram from dātṛ́ (or dātár).

b\. Especially often, in initial syllables in secondary derivation:
thus, mānasá from mánas, vāidyutá from vidyút, bhāumá from bhū́mi,
pā́rthiva from pṛthivī́ (1204).

But—

240\. The guṇa-increment does not usually take place in a heavy syllable
ending with a consonant: that is to say, the rules prescribing guṇa in
processes of derivation and inflection do not apply to a short vowel
which is “long by position”, nor to a long vowel unless it be final:
thus, cétati from √cit, but níndati from √nind; náyati from √nī, but
jī́vati from √jīv.

a\. The vṛddhi-increment is not liable to this restriction.

b\. Exceptions to the rule are occasionally met with: thus, ehá, ehas
from √īh; heḍáyāmi, héḍas, etc., from √hīḍ; coṣa etc. from √cūṣ; óhate
etc. from √uh *consider*; and especially, from roots in īv: didéva
deviṣyati, dévana, etc., from √dīv; tiṣṭheva from √ṣṭhīv; sreváyāmi,
srévuka, from √srīv—on account of which it is, doubtless, that these
roots are written with iv (div etc.) by the Hindu grammarians, although
they nowhere show a short i, in either verb-forms or derivatives.

c\. A few cases occur of prolongation instead of increment; thus,
dūṣáyati from √duṣ, gū́hati from √guh.

The changes of ṛ (more original ar or ra) are so various as to call for
further description.

241\. The increments of ṛ are sometimes ra and rā, instead of ar and ār:
namely, especially, where by such reversal a difficult combination of
consonants is avoided: thus, from √dṛç, drakṣyā́mi and ádrākṣam; but also
pṛthú and prath, pṛch and prach, kṛpā́ and ákrapiṣṭa.

242\. In a number of roots (about a dozen quotable ones) ending in ṛ
(for more original ar), the ṛ changes both with ar, and more
irregularly, in a part of the forms, with ir—or also with ur (especially
after a labial, in pṛ, mṛ, vṛ, sporadically in others): which ir and ur,
again, are liable to prolongation into īr and ūr. Thus, for example,
from tṛ (or tar), we have tarati, titarti, tatāra, atāriṣam, by regular
processes; but also tirati, tīryati, tīrtvā, -tīrya, tīrṇa, and even
(V.) turyāma, tuturyāt, tarturāṇa. The treatment of such roots has to be
described in speaking of each formation.

a\. For the purpose of artificially indicating this peculiarity of
treatment, such roots are by the Hindu grammarians written with long ṝ,
or with both ṛ and ṝ: no ṝ actually appears anywhere among their forms.


b\. The (quotable) ṝ-roots are 2 kṛ *strew*, 1 gṛ *sing*, 2 gṛ
*swallow*, 1 jṛ *wear out*, tṛ, 1 çṛ *crush*.

c\. The (quotable) ṛ and ṝ-roots are ṛ, 1 dṛ *pierce*, 1 pṛ *fill*, 1 mṛ
*die*, 2 vṛ *choose*, stṛ , hvṛ.

d\. Forms analogous with these are sometimes made also from other roots:
thus, cīrṇa, cīrtvā, carcūryá, from √car; spūrdhán and spūrdháse from
√spṛdh.

243\. In a few cases ṛ comes from the contraction of other syllables
than ar and ra: thus, in tṛta and tṛtīva, from ri; in çṛṇu, from ru; in
bhṛkūṭi, from rū.

Vowel-lengthening.

244\. Vowel-lengthening concerns especially i and u, since lengthening
of a is in part (except where in evident analogy with that of i and u)
indistinguishable from its increment, and ṛ is made long only in certain
plural cases of stems in ṛ (or ar: 369 ff.). Lengthening is a much more
irregular and sporadic change than increment, and its cases will in
general be left to be pointed out in connection with the processes of
inflection and derivation: a few only will be mentioned here.

245\. a. Final radical i and u are especially liable to prolongation
before y: as in passive and gerund and so on.

b\. Final radical ir and ur (from variable ṛ-roots: 242) are liable to
prolongation before all consonants except those of personal endings:
namely, before y and tvā and na: and in declensions before bh and s
(392). Radical is has the same prolongation in declension (392).

246\. Compensatory lengthening, or absorption by a vowel of the time of
a lost following consonant, is by no means common. Certain instances of
it have been pointed out above (179, 198 c, d, 199 d, 222 b). Perhaps
such cases as pitā for pitars (371 a) and dhanī for dhanins (439) are to
be classed here.

247\. The final vowel of a former member of a compound is often made
long, especially in the Veda. Prolongations of final a, and before v,
are most frequent; but cases are found of every variety. Examples are:
devāvī́, vayunāvíd, prāvṛ́ṣ, ṛtāvasu, índrāvant, sadanāsád, çatā́magha,
viçvā́nara, ékādaça; apījū́, parīṇáh, vīrúdh, tuvīmaghá, tvíṣīmant,
çáktīvant; vasūjū́, anūrúdh, sūmáya, purūvásu.

248\. In the Veda, the final vowel of a word—generally a, much less
often i and u—is in a large number of cases prolonged. Usually the
prolongation takes place where it is favored by the metre, but sometimes
even where the metre opposes the change (for details, see the various
Prātiçākhyas).

Words of which the finals are thus treated are: 

a\. Particles: namely, áthā, ádhā, evā́, utā́, ghā́, hā, ihā́, ivā, cā, smā,
nā́, an̄gā́, kílā, átrā, yátrā, tátrā, kútrā, anyátrā, ubhayátrā, adyā́,
ácchā, ápā, prā́; átī, nī́, yádī, nahī́, abhī́, vī́; ū, tū́, nū́, sū́, makṣū́.

b\. Case-forms: especially instr. sing., as enā́, ténā, yénā, svénā, and
others; rarely gen. sing., as asyā, hariṇásyā. Cases besides these are
few: so símā, vṛṣabhā, hariyojanā (voc.); tanvī̀ (loc.); and urū́ and (not
rarely) purū́.

c\. Verb-forms ending in a, in great number and variety: thus (nearly in
the order of their comparative frequency), 2d sing. impv. act., as pibā,
syā, gamayā, dhāráyā;—2d pl. act. in ta and tha, as sthā, attā, bibhṛtā,
jayatā, çṛṇutā, anadatā, nayathā, jīvayathā (and one or two in tana:
aviṣṭanā, hantanā);—1st pl. act. in ma, as vidmā, riṣāmā, ṛdhyāmā,
ruhemā, vanuyāmā, cakṛmā, marmṛjmā;—2d sing. impv. mid. in sva, as
yukṣvā, iḍiṣvā, dadhiṣvā, vahasvā;—1st and 3d sing. perf. act., as vedā,
viveçā, jagrabhā; 2d sing. perf. act., vetthā;——2d pl. perf. act.,
anajā, cakrā. Of verb-forms ending in i, only the 2d sing. impv. act.:
thus, kṛdhī, kṛṇuhī́, kṣidhī́, çrudhī, çṛṇudhī, çṛṇuhī, dīdihī, jahī.

d\. To these may be added the gerund in ya (993 a), as abhigū́ryā, ā́cyā.

Vowel-lightening.

249\. The alteration of short a to an i- or u-vowel in the formative
processes of the language, except in ṛ or ar roots (as explained above),
is a sporadic phenomenon only.

250\. But the lightening of a long ā especially to an i-vowel (as also
its loss), is a frequent process; no other vowel is so unstable.

a\. Of the class-sign nā (of the krī-class of verbs: 717 ff.), the ā is
in weak forms changed to ī, and before vowel-endings dropped altogether.
The final ā of certain roots is treated in the same manner: thus, mā,
hā, etc. (662–6). And from some roots, ā- and ī- or i-forms so
interchange that it is difficult to classify them or to determine the
true character of the root.

b\. Radical ā is weakened to the semblance of the union-vowel i in
certain verbal forms: as perfect dadima from √dā etc. (794 k); aorist
adhithās from √dhā etc. (834 a); present jahimas from √hā etc. (665).

c\. Radical ā is shortened to the semblance of stem-a in a number
reduplicated forms, as tiṣṭa, piba, dada, etc.: see 671–4; also in a few
aorists, as áhvam, ákhyam, etc.: see 847.

d\. Radical ā sometimes becomes e, especially before y: as stheyāsam,
deya. 

251\. Certain ā-roots, because of their peculiar exchanges with ī and
i-forms, especially in forming the present stem, are given by the Hindu
grammarians as roots ending in e or āi or o. Thus, from 2 dhā *suck*
(dhe) come the present dháyati and participle and gerund dhītá, dhītvā́;
the other forms are made from dhā, as dadhus, adhāt, dhāsyati, dhā́tave,
dhāpayati. From 2 gā *sing* (gāi) come the present gā́yati, the
participle and gerund gītá and gītvā́, and passive gīyáte, and the other
forms from gā. From 3 dā *cut* (do) come the present dyáti and
participle ditá or diná, and the other forms from dā. The irregularities
of these roots will be treated below, under the various formations (see
especially 761 d ff.).

252\. By a process of abbreviation essentially akin with that of ar or
ra to ṛ, the va (usually initial) of a number of roots becomes u, and
the ya of a much smaller number becomes i, in certain verbal forms and
derivatives. Thus, from vac comes uvā́ca, ucyā́sam, uktvā́, uktá, uktí,
ukthá, etc.; from yaj come iyā́ja, ijyā́sam, iṣṭvā́, iṣṭá, íṣṭi, etc. See
below, under the various formations.

a\. To this change is given by European grammarians the name of
samprasāraṇa, by adaptation of a term used in the native grammar.

253\. A short a, of root or ending, is not infrequently lost between
consonants in a weakened syllable: thus, in verb-forms, ghnánti,
ápaptam, jagmús, jajñús, ájñata; in noun-forms, rā́jñe, rā́jñī.

254\. Union-vowels. All the simple vowels come to assume in certain
cases the aspect of union-vowels, or insertions between root or stem and
ending of inflection or of derivation.

a\. That character belongs oftenest to i, which is very widely used: 1.
before the s of aorist and future and desiderative stems, as in
ájīviṣam, jīviṣyā́mi, jíjīviṣāmi; 2. in tense-inflection, especially
perfect, as jijīvimá; occasionally also present, as ániti, róditi; 3. in
derivation, as jīvitá, khánitum, janitṛ́, rociṣṇú, etc. etc.

b\. Long ī is used sometimes instead of short: thus, ágrahīṣam,
grahīṣyā́mi; bravīti, vāvadīti; tarītṛ́, savītṛ́; it is also often
introduced before s and t of the 2d and 3d sing. of verbs: thus, ā́sīs,
ā́sīt.

c\. For details respecting these, and the more irregular and sporadic
occurrences of u- and a-vowels in the same character, see below.

Nasal Increment.

255\. Both in roots and in endings, a distinction of stronger and weaker
forms is very often made by the presence or absence of a nasal element,
a nasal mute or anusvāra, before a following consonant. In general, the
stronger form is doubtless the more original; but, in the present
condition of the language, the nasal has come in great measure to seem,
and to some extent also to be used, as an actually strengthening
element, introduced under certain conditions in formative and inflective
processes. 

a\. Examples are, of roots: `ac` and `añc, grath` and `granth, vid` and
`vind, daç` and `daṅç, sras` and `sraṅs, dṛh` and `dṛṅh`: of endings,
`bhárantam` and `bháratā, mánasī` and `mánāṅsi`.

256\. A final `n`, whether of stem or of root, is less stable than any
other consonant, where a weaker form is called for: thus, from `rā́jan`
we have `rā́jā` and `rā́jabhis`, and in composition `rāja`; from `dhanín`,
`dhanī́` and `dhaníbhis` and `dháni`; from √`han` we have `hathá` and
`hatá`, etc. A final radical `m` is sometimes treated in the same way;
thus, from √`gam`, `gahí, gatám, gatá, gáti`.

257\. Inserted `n`. On the other hand, the nasal `n` has come to be used
with great — and, in the later history of the language, with increasing
— frequency as a union-consonant, inserted between vowels: thus, from
`agní, agnínā` and `agnīnā́m`; from `mádhu, mádhunas, mádhunī, mádhūni`;
from `çivá, çivéna, çīvā́ni, çīvā́nām`.

258\. Inserted `y`. a. After final `ā` of a root, a `y` is often found
as apparently a mere union-consonant before another vowel: thus, in
inflection, `ádhāyi` etc. (844), `çāyáyati` etc. (1042), `çivā́yās` etc.
(363 c), `gā́yati` etc. (761 e); further, in derivation,
`-gāya, -yāyam, dāyaka` etc.;
`-sthāyika; pāyána, -gāyana; dhā́yas, -hāyas; sthāyin` etc. (many cases);
`-hitāyin, -tatāyin; sthāyuka`.

b\. Other more sporadic cases of inserted `y` — such as that in the
pronoun-forms `ayam, iyam, vayam, yūyam, svayam`; and in optative
inflection before an ending beginning with a vowel (565) — will be
pointed out below in their connection.

Reduplication.

259\. Reduplication of a root (originating doubtless in its complete
repetition) has come to be a method of radical increment or
strengthening in various formative processes: namely,

a\. in present-stem formation (642 ff.): as `dádāmi, bibhármi`;

b\. in perfect-stem formation, almost universally (782 ff.): as
`tatā́na, dadhāú, cakā́ra, riréca, lulópa`;

c\. in aorist-stem formation (856 ff.): as `ádīdharam, ácucyavam`;

d\. in intensive and desiderative-stem formation, throughout (1000 ff.,
1026 ff.): as `ján̄ghanti, jóhavīti, marmṛjyáte; pípāsati, jíghāṅsati`;

e\. in the formation of derivative noun-stems (1143 e): as
`pápri, cárcara, sāsahí, cikitú, malimlucá`.

f\. Rules for the treatment of reduplication in these several cases will
be given in the proper connection below.

260\. As, by reason of the strengthening and weakening changes indicated
above, the same root or stem not seldom exhibits, in the processes of
inflection and derivation, varieties of stronger and weaker form, the
distinction and description of these varieties forms an important part
of the subjects hereafter to be treated.
