+++
title = "09 Chapter V NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES"

+++




## CHAPTER V.

  

NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES.

321\. a. The accordance in inflection of substantive and adjective stems
is so complete that the two cannot be separated in treatment from one
another.

b\. They may be classified, for convenience of description, as follows:

I. Stems in अ `a`;

II\. Stems in इ `i` and उ `u`;

III\. Stems in आ `ā`, ई `ī`, and `ऊ ū`: namely, A. radical-stems (and a
few others inflected like them); B. derivative stems;

IV\. Stems in ऋ `ṛ` (or अर् `ar`);

V. Stems in consonants.

c\. There is nothing absolute in this classification and arrangement; it
is merely believed to be open to as few objections as any other. No
general agreement has been reached among scholars as to the number and
order of Sanskrit declensions. The stems in `a` are here treated first
because of the great predominance of the class.

322\. The division-line between substantive and adjective, always an
uncertain one in early Indo-European language, is even more wavering in
Sanskrit than elsewhere. There are, however, in all the declensions as
divided above—unless we except the stems in `ṛ` or `ar`—words which are
distinctly adjectives; and, in general, they are inflected precisely
like noun-stems of the same final: only, among consonant-stems, there
are certain sub-classes of adjective stems with peculiarities of
inflection to which there is among nouns nothing corresponding. But
there are also two considerable classes of adjective-compounds,
requiring special notice: namely—

323\. Compound adjectives having as final member a bare verbal root,
with the value of a present participle (383 a ff.): thus, `su-dṛ́ç`
*well-looking*; `pra-búdh` *foreknowing*; `a-drúh` *not hating*;
`veda-víd` *Veda-knowing*; `vṛtra-hán` *Vritra-slaying*; `upastha-sád`
*sitting in the lap*. Every root is liable to be used in this way, and
such compounds are not infrequent in all ages of the language: see
chapter on Compounds, below (1269). 

a\. This class is essentially only a special class of compound
adjectives, since in the earliest Veda the simple as well as the
compounded root was sometimes used adjectively. But the compounded root
was from the beginning much more often so used, and the later the more
exclusively, so that practically the class is a separate and important
one.

324\. Compound adjectives having a noun as final member, but obtaining
an adjective sense secondarily, by having the idea of *possession*
added, and being inflected as adjectives in the three genders (1293
ff.). Thus, `prajā́kāmá` *desire of progeny*, whence the adjective
`prajā́kāma`, meaning *desirous* (i.e. *having desire*) *of progeny*;
`sabhārya` (`sa`+`bhāryā`) *having one's wife along*; and so on.

a\. In a few cases, also, the final noun is syntactically object of the
preceding member (1309–10): thus, `atimātra` *immoderate* (`ati mātram`
*beyond measure*); `yāvayáddveṣas` *driving away enemies*.

325\. Hence, under each declension, we have to notice how a root or a
noun-stem of that declension is inflected when final member of an
adjective compound.

a\. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked here that a root-word
ending a compound has the accent, but (320) loses the peculiarity of
monosyllabic accentuation, and does not throw the tone forward upon the
ending (except `añc` in certain old forms: 410).

Declension I.  
Stems (masculine and neuter) in अ `a`.

326\. a. This declension contains the majority of all the declined stems
of the language.

b\. Its endings deviate more widely than any others from the normal.

327\. Endings: Singular. a. The nom. masc. has the normal ending `s`.

b\. The acc. (masc. and neut.) adds `m` (not `am`); and this form has
the office also of nom. neuter.

c\. The instr. changes `a` to `ena` uniformly in the later language; and
even in the oldest Vedic this is the predominant ending (in RV., eight
ninths of all cases). Its final is in Vedic verse frequently made long
(`enā`). But the normal ending `ā` — thus, `yajñā́` , `suhávā`, `mahitvā́`
(for `yajñéna` etc.) — is also not rare in the Veda.

d\. The dat. has `āya` (as if by adding `aya` to `a`), alike in all ages
of the language.

e\. The abl. has `t` (or doubtless `d`: it is impossible from the
evidence of the Sanskrit to tell which is the original form of the
ending), before which `ā` is made long: this ending is found in no
other noun-declension, and elsewhere only in the personal pronouns (of
all numbers).

f\. The gen. has `sya` added to the final `a`; and this ending is also
limited to `a`-stems (with the single exception of the pronoun `amúṣya`:
501). Its final `a` is in only three cases made long in the Veda; and
its `y` is vocalized (`asia`) almost as rarely.

g\. The loc. ends in `e` (as if by combining the normal ending `i` with
the final of the stem), without exception.

h\. The voc. is the bare stem.

328\. Dual. a. The dual endings in general are the normal ones.

b\. The nom., acc., and voc. masc. end in the later language always in
`āu`. In the Veda, however, the usual ending is simple `ā` (in RV., in
seven eights of the occurrences). The same cases in the neut. end in
`e`, which appears to be the result of fusion of the stem-final with the
normal ending `ī`.

c\. The instr., dat., and abl. have `bhyām` (in only one or two Vedic
instances resolved into `bhiām`), with the stem-final lengthened to `ā`
before it.

d\. The gen. and loc. have a `y` inserted after the stem-final before
`os` (or as if the `a` had been changed to `e`). In one or two
(doubtful) Vedic instances (as also in the pronominal forms `enos` and
`yos`), `os` is substituted for the final `a`.

329\. Plural. a. The nom. masc. has in the later language the normal
ending `as` combined with the final `a` to `ās`. But in the Veda the
ending `āsas` instead is frequent (one third of the occurrences in RV.,
but only one twenty-fifth in the peculiar parts of AV.).

b\. The acc. masc. ends in `ān` (for earlier `āns`, of which abundant
traces are left in the Veda, and, under the disguise of apparent
euphonic combination, even in the later language: see above, 208 ff.).

c\. The nom. and acc. neut. have in the later language always the ending
`āni` (like the `an`-stems: see 421; or else with `n`, as in the gen.
pl., before normal `i`). But in the Veda this ending alternates with
simple `ā` (which in RV. is to `āni` as three to two, in point of
frequency; in AV., as three to four).

d\. The instr. ends later always in `āis`; but in the Veda is found
abundantly the more normal form `ebhis` (in RV., nearly as frequently as
`āis`; in AV., only one fifth as frequent).

e\. The dat. and abl. have `bhyas` as ending, with `e` instead of the
final `a` before it (as in the Vedic instr. `ebhis`, the loc. pl., the
gen. loc. du. \[?\], and the instr. sing.). The resolution into `ebhias`
is not infrequent in the Veda.

f\. The gen. ends in `ānām`, the final `a` being lengthened and having
`n` inserted before the normal ending. The `ā` of the ending is not
seldom (in less than half the instances) to be read as two syllables,
`aam`: opinions are divided as to whether the resolution is historical
or metric only. A very small number (half-a-dozen) of examples of
simple `ām` as ending instead of `ānām` occur in RV.

g\. The loc. ends in `eṣu`—that is to say, with the normal ending,
before which the stem-final is changed to `e` (with consequent change of
`s` to `ṣ`: 180).

h\. Of accent, in this declension, nothing requires to be said; the
syllable accented in the stem retains its own accent throughout.

330\. Examples of declension. As examples of the inflection of `a`-stems
may be taken काम `kā́ma` m. *love*; देव `devá` m. *god*; आस्य `āsyà` n.
*mouth*.

Singular:

N.

कामस्  
`kā́mas`

देवस्  
`devás`

आस्यम्  
`āsyàm`

A.

कामम्  
`kā́mam`

देवम्  
`devám`

आस्यम्  
`āsyàm`

I.

कामेन  
`kā́mena`

देवेन  
`devéna`

आस्येन  
`āsyèna`

D.

कामाय  
`kā́māya`

देवाय  
`devā́ya`

आस्याय  
`āsyā̀ya`

Ab.

कामात्  
`kā́māt`

देवात्  
`devā́t`

आस्यात्  
`āsyā̀t`

G.

कामस्य  
`kā́masya`

देवस्य  
`devásya`

आस्यस्य  
`āsyàsya`

L.

कामे  
`kā́me`

देवे  
`devé`

आस्ये  
`āsyè`

V.

काम  
`kā́ma`

देव  
`déva`

आस्य  
`ā́sya`

Dual:

N. A. V.

कामौ  
`kā́māu`

देवौ  
`devāú`

आस्ये  
`āsyè`

I. D. Ab.

कामाभ्याम्  
`kā́mābhyām`

देवाभ्याम्  
`devā́bhyām`

आस्याभ्याम्  
`āsyā̀bhyām`

G. L.

कामयोस्  
`kā́mayos`

देवयोस्  
`deváyos`

आस्ययोस्  
`āsyàyos`

Plural:

N. V.

कामास्  
`kā́mās`

देवास्  
`devā́s`

आस्यानि  
`āsyā̀ni` 

A.

कामान्  
`kā́mān`

देवान्  
`devā́n`

आस्यानि  
`āsyā̀ni`

I.

कामैस्  
`kā́māis`

देवैस्  
`devāís`

आस्यैस्  
`āsyāìs`

D. Ab.

कामेभ्यस्  
`kā́mebhyas`

देवेभ्यस्  
`devébhyas`

आस्येभ्यस्  
`āsyèbhyas`

G.

कामानाम्  
`kā́mānām`

देवानाम्  
`devā́nām`

आस्यानाम्  
`āsyā̀nām`

L.

कामेषु  
`kā́meṣu`

देवेषु  
`devéṣu`

आस्येषु  
`āsyèṣu`

Examples of the peculiar Vedic forms are:

a\. Sing.: instr. `raváthenā`, `yajñā́` (such genitive forms as `áçvasiā`
are purely sporadic).

b\. Du.: nom. etc. masc. `devā́`; gen.-loc. `pastyòs` (stem `pastyà`).

c\. Pl.: nom.-voc. masc. `devā́sas`; neut. `yugā́`; instr. `devébhis`;
gen. `caráthām`, `devā́naam`.

331\. Among nouns, there are no irregularities in this declension. For
irregular numeral bases in `a` (or `an`), see 483-4. For the
irregularities of pronominal stems in `a`, which are more or less fully
shared also by a few adjectives of pronominal kindred, see the chapter
on Pronouns (495 ff.).

Adjectives.

332\. Original adjectives in `a` are an exceedingly large class, the
great majority of all adjectives. There is, however, no such thing as a
feminine stem in `a`; for the feminine, the `a` is changed to `ā`—or
often, though far less often, to `ī`; and its declension is then like
that of `senā` or `devī` (364). An example of the complete declension of
an adjective `a`-stem in the three genders will be given below (368).

a\. Whether a masc.-neut. stem in `a` shall form its feminine in `ā` or
in `ī` is a question to be determined in great part only by actual
usage, and not by grammatical rule. Certain important classes of words,
however, can be pointed out which take the less common ending `ī` of the
feminine: thus, 1. the (very numerous) secondary derivatives in `a` with
`vṛddhi` of the first syllable (1204): e.g. `āmitrá -trī́`, `mā́nuṣa -ṣī`,
`pāvamāná -nī́`, `pāurṇamāsá -sī́`; 2. primary derivatives in `ana` with
accent on the radical syllable (1150): e.g. `códana -nī`,
`saṁgráhaṇa -ṇī`, `subhāgaṁkáraṇa -nī`; 3. primary derivatives in `a`,
with strengthening of the radical syllable, having a quasi-participial
meaning: e.g. `divākará -rī`, `avakrāmá -mī́`, `rathavāhá -hī́` (but
there are many exceptions); 4. secondary derivatives in `maya` (1225)
and `tana` (1245 e): e.g. `ayasmáya -yī`; `adyatana -nī`; 5. most
ordinal numbers (487 h): e.g. `pañcamá -mī́`, `navadaçá -çī́`,
`triṅçattamá -mī́`. Not a few words make the feminine in either `ā` or
`ī`: e.g. `kévalā` or -`lī`, `ugrā́` or -`rī́`, `pāpā` or -`pī́`, `rāmā́` or
-`mī́`; but ordinarily only one of these is accepted as regular.

333\. There are no verbal roots ending in `a`. But `a` is sometimes
substituted for the final `ā` of a root (and, rarely, for a final `an`),
and it is then inflected like an ordinary adjective in `a` (see below,
354).

334\. a. A noun ending in `a`, when occurring as final member of an
adjective compound, is inflected like an original adjective in `a`,
making its feminine likewise in `ā` or `ī` (367).

b\. For the most part, an adjective compound having a noun in `a` as
final member makes its feminine in `ā`. But there are numerous
exceptions, certain nouns taking, usually or always, `ī` instead. Some
of the commonest of these are as follows: `akṣa` *eye* (e.g.
`lohitākṣī`, `dvyakṣī`, `gavākṣī`), `parṇa` *leaf* (e.g. `tilaparṇī`,
`saptaparṇī`; but `ekaparṇā`), `mukha` *face* (e.g. `kṛṣṇamukhī`,
`durmukhī`; but `trimukhā` etc.), `an̄ga` *limb, body* (e.g.
`anavadyān̄gī`, `sarvān̄gī`; but `caturan̄gā` etc.), `keça` *hair* (e.g.
`sukeçī`, `muktakeçī` or -`çā`, etc.), `karṇa` *ear* (e.g. `mahākarṇī`;
but `gokarṇā` etc.), `udara` *belly* (e.g. `lambodarī`), `mūla` *root*
(e.g. `pañcamūlī`; but oftener `çatámūlā` etc.). The very great majority
of such nouns (as the examples indicate) signify parts of the body.

c\. On the other hand, a feminine noun ending in derivative `ā` shortens
its final to `a` to form a masculine and neuter base: see 367 c.

d\. In frequent cases, nouns of consonant ending are, as finals of
compounds, transferred to the `a`-declension by adding suffix `a` (1209
a) or `ka` (1222).

Declension II.  
Stems (of all genders) in इ `i` and उ `u`.

335\. The stems in इ `i` and उ `u` are inflected in so close accordance
with one another that they cannot be divided into two separate
declensions. They are of all the three genders, and tolerably
numerous—those in इ `i` more numerous than those in उ `u`, especially in
the feminine (there are more neuters in उ `u` than in इ `i`).

a\. The endings of this declension also differ frequently and widely
from the normal, and the irregularities in the older language are
numerous. 

336\. Endings: Singular. a. The nom. masc. and fem. adds to the stem the
normal ending `s`. The nom. and acc. neut. is the bare stem, without
ending. In the Veda, the final `u` of a few neuters is lengthened (248
b): thus, `urū́`, `purū́`.

b\. The acc. masc. and fem. adds `m` to the stem. Vedic forms in `iam`
and `uam`, and, with `n`, `inam` and `unam`, are excessively rare, and
doubtful.

c\. The instr. fem. in the later language takes the normal ending `ā`
simply, while the masc. and neut. insert `n` before it, making `inā` and
`unā`. But in the Veda, forms in `yā` and `vā` (or `iā` and `uā`) are
not infrequent in masc. and neut. also; while `inā` is found, very
rarely, as a fem. ending. Moreover, fem. `yā` is often (in two thirds of
the occurrences) contracted to `ī`; and this is even sometimes shortened
to `i`. An adverbial instr. in `uyā́` from half-a-dozen stems in `u`
occurs.

d\. The dat. masc. and fem. gunates the final of the stem before the
ending `e`, making `aye` and `ave`. These are the prevailing endings in
the Veda likewise; but the more normal `ye` and `ve` (or `ue`) also
occur; and the fem. has in this case, as in the instr., sometimes the
form `ī` for `ie`. In the later language, the neuter is required in
this, as in all the other weakest cases, to insert `n` before the normal
ending: but in the Veda such forms are only sporadic; and the neut. dat.
has also the forms `aye`, `ve`, `ave`, like the other genders.

e\. The abl. and gen. masc. and fem. have regularly, both earlier and
later, the ending `s` with gunated vowel before it: thus, `es`, `os`;
and in the Veda, the neut. forms the cases in the same way; although
`unas`, required later, is also not infrequent (`inas` does not occur).
But the normal forms `yas` (or `ias`) and `vas` (or `uas`) are also
frequent in both masc. and neut. As masc. ending, `unas` occurs twice in
RV. The anomalous `didyót` (so TS.; in the corresponding passages,
`vidyót` VS., `didyāut` K., `didivás` MS.) is of doubtful character.

f\. The loc. masc. and fem. has for regular ending in the later language
`āu`, replacing both finals, `i` and `u`. And this is in the Veda also
the most frequent ending; but, beside it, the `i`-stems form (about half
as often in RV.) their loc. in `ā`: thus, `agnā́`; and this is found once
even in the neuter. The RV. has a number of examples of masc. and neut.
locatives in `avi` (the normal ending and the `u` gunated before it)
from `u`-stems; and certain doubtful traces of a corresponding `ayi`
from `i`-stems. Half-a-dozen locatives in `ī` (regarded by the Vedic
grammarians as `pragṛhya` or uncombinable: 138 d) are made from
`i`-stems. The later language makes the neuter locative in `ini` and
`uni`; but the former never occurs in the oldest texts, and the latter
only very rarely.

g\. The later grammar allows the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. fem. to be
formed at will with the fuller fem. terminations of long-vowel stems,
namely `āi`, `ās` (for which, in Brāhmaṇa etc., `āi` is substituted: 307
h), `ām`. Such forms are quite rare in the oldest language even from
`i`-stems (less than 40 occurrences altogether in RV.; three times as
many in AV.); and from `u`-stems they are almost unknown (five in RV.
and AV.). 

h\. The voc. gunates the final of the stem, in masc. and fem., alike in
the earlier and in the later language. In the neut., it is later allowed
to be either of the same form or the unaltered stem; and this was
probably the usage in the older time also; not instances enough quotable
to determine the question (AV. has `u` once, and VS. `o` once).

337\. Dual. a. The later and earlier language agree in making the
nom.-acc.-voc. masc. and fem. by lengthening the final of the stem. The
same cases in the neuter (according to the rules given above) end later
in `inī` and `unī`; but these endings are nearly unknown in the Veda
(as, indeed, the cases are of only rare occurrence): AV. has `inī` twice
(RV. perhaps once); VS. has `unī` once; RV. has `uī` from one `u`-stem,
and `ī`, once shortened to `i`, from one or two `i`-stems.

b\. The unvarying ending of instr.-dat.-abl., in all genders, is `bhyām`
added to the unchanged stem.

c\. The gen.-loc. of all ages add `os` to the stem in masc. and fem.; in
the neut., the later language interposes, as elsewhere in the weakest
cases, a `n`; probably in the earlier Vedic the form would be like that
of the other genders; but the only occurrence noted is one `unos` in AV.

338\. Plural. a. The nom.-voc. masc. and fem. adds the normal ending
`as` to the gunated stem-final, making `ayas` and `avas`. The exceptions
in the Veda are very few: one word (`ari`) has `ias` in both genders,
and a few feminines have `īs` (like `ī`-stems); a very few `u`-stems
have `uas`. The neut. nom.-acc. ends later in `īni` and `ūni` (like
`āni` from `a`: 329 c); but the Veda has `ī` and `i` (about equally
frequent) much oftener than `īni`; and `ū` and (more usually) `u`, more
than half as often as `ūni`.

b\. The accus. masc. ends in `īn` and `ūn`, for older `īns` and `ūns`,
of which plain traces remain in the Veda in nearly half the instances of
occurrence, and even not infrequently in the later language, in the
guise of phonetic combination (208 ff.). The accus. fem. ends in `īs`
and `ūs`. But both masc. and fem. forms in `ias` and `uas` are found
sparingly in the Veda.

c\. The instr. of all genders adds `bhis` to the stem.

d\. The dat.-abl. of all genders adds `bhyas` (in V., almost never
`bhias`) to the stem.

e\. The gen. of all genders is made alike in `īnām` and `ūnām` (of which
the `ā` is not seldom, in the Veda, to be resolved into `aam`). Stems
with accented final in the later language may, and in the earlier always
do, throw forward the accent upon the ending.

f\. The loc. of all genders adds `su` (as `ṣu`: 180) to the stem-final.

g\. The accent is in accordance with the general rules already laid
down, and there are no irregularities calling for special notice.

399\. Examples of declension. As models of i-stems may be taken अग्नि
`agní` m. *fire*; गति `gáti` f. *gait*; वारि `vā́ri` n. *water*. 

Singular:

N.

अग्निस्  
agnís

गतिस्  
gátis

वारि  
vā́ri

A.

अग्निम्  
agním

गतिम्  
gátim

वारि  
vā́ri

I.

अग्निना  
agnínā

गत्या  
gátyā

वारिणा  
vā́riṇā

D.

अग्नये  
agnáye

गतये, गत्यै  
gátaye, gátyāi

वारिणे  
vā́riṇe

Ab. G.

अग्नेस्  
agnés

गतेस्, गत्यास्  
gátes, gátyās

वारिणस्  
vā́riṇas

L.

अग्नौ  
agnāú

गतौ, गत्याम्  
gátāu, gátyām

वारिणि  
vā́riṇi

V.

अग्ने  
ágne

गते  
gáte

वारि, वारे  
vā́ri, vā́re

Dual:

N. A. V.

अग्नी  
agnī́

गती  
gátī

वारिणी  
vā́rīṇī

I. D. Ab.

अग्निभ्याम्  
agníbhyām

गतिभ्याम्  
gátibhyām

वारिभ्याम्  
vā́ribhyām

G. L.

अग्न्योस्  
agnyós

गत्योस्  
gátyos

वारिणोस्  
vā́riṇos

Plural:

N. V.

अग्नयस्  
agnáyas

गतयस्  
gátayas

वारीणि  
vā́riṇi

A.

अग्नीन्  
agnī́n

गतीस्  
gátīs

वारीणी  
vā́rīṇī

I.

अग्निभिस्  
agníbhis

गतिभिस्  
gátibhis

वारिभिस्  
vā́ribhis

D. Ab.

अग्निभ्यस्  
agníbhyas

गतिभ्यस्  
gátibhyas

वारिभ्यस्  
vā́ribhyas

G.

अग्नीनाम्  
agnīnā́m

गतीनाम्  
gátīnām

वारीणाम्  
vā́rīṇām

L.

अग्निषु  
agníṣu

गतिषु  
gátiṣu

वारिषु  
vā́riṣu



340\. In order to mark more plainly the absence in Vedic language of
some of the forms which are common later, all the forms of Vedic
occurrence are added below, and in the order of their frequency.

a\. Singular. Nom. `agnís` etc., as above.

b\. Acc.: masc. `agním`, `yayíam`, `ūrmíṇam` (?); fem. and neut. as
above.

c\. Instr.: masc. `agnínā`, `rayyā́` and `ūrmiā́`; fem. `ácittī`, `ūtiā́`,
`matyā́`, `suvṛktí`, `dhāsínā`; neut. wanting.

d\. Dat.: masc. `agnáye`; fem. `tujáye`, `ūtī́`, `turyāí`; neut.
`çúcaye`.

e\. Gen.-abl.: masc. `agnés`, `ávyas`, `ariás`; fem. `ádites`, `hetyā́s`
and `bhū́miās`; neut. `bhū́res`.

f\. Loc.: masc. `agnāú`, `agnā́`, `ājáyi` (?); fem. `ā́gatāu`, `úditā`,
`dhánasātayi` (?), `védī`, `bhū́myām`; neut. `apratā́`, `saptáraçmāu`.

g\. Voc.: as above (neut wanting).

h\. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc.: masc. `hárī`; fem. `yuvatī́`; neut. `çúcī`,
`máhi`, `háriṇī` (?).

i\. Instr.-dat.-abl.: as above.

j\. Gen.-loc.: masc. `hários`; fem. `yuvatyós` and `jāmiós`; neut.
wanting.

k\. Plural. Nom.: masc. `agnáyas`; fem. `matáyas`, `bhū́mīs`; neut.
`çúcī`, `bhū́ri`, `bhū́rīṇi`.

l\. Accus.: masc. `agnī́n`; fem. `kṣitī́s`, `çúcayas` (?).

m\. Instr., dat.-abl, and loc., as above.

n\. Gen.: masc. fem. `kavīnā́m`, `ṛ́ṣīṇaam` etc. (neut. wanting).

341\. As models of `u`-stems may be taken शत्रु `çátru` m. *enemy*; धेनु
`dhenú` f. *cow*; मधु `mádhu` n. *honey*.

Singular:

N.

शत्रुस्  
`çátrus`

धेनुस्  
`dhenús`

मधु  
`mádhu`

A.

शत्रुम्  
`çátrum`

धेनुम्  
`dhenúm`

मधु  
`mádhu`

I.

शत्रुणा  
`çátruṇā`

धेन्वा  
`dhenvā́`

मधुना  
`mádhunā`

D.

शत्रवे  
`çátrave`

धेनवे, धेन्वै  
`dhenáve`, `dhenvāí`

मधुने  
`mádhune`

Ab. G.

शत्रोस्  
`çátros`

धेनोस्, धेन्वास्  
`dhenós`, `dhenvā́s`

मधुनस्  
`mádhunas`

L.

शत्रौ  
`çátrāu`

धेनौ, धेन्वाम्  
`dhenāú`, `dhenvā́m`

मधुनि  
`mádhuni`

V.

शत्रो  
`çátro`

धेनो  
`dhéno`

मधु, मधो  
`mádhu`, `mádho` 

Dual:

N. A. V.

शत्रू  
`çátrū`

धेनू  
`dhenū́`

मधुनी  
`mádhunī`

I. D. Ab.

शत्रुभ्याम्  
`çátrubhyām`

धेनुभ्याम्  
`dhenúbhyām`

मधुभ्याम्  
`mádhubhyām`

G. L.

शत्र्वोस्  
`çátrvos`

धेन्वोस्  
`dhenvós`

मधुनोस्  
`mádhunos`

Plural:

N. V.

शत्रवस्  
`çátravas`

धेनवस्  
`dhenávas`

मधूनि  
`mádhūni`

A.

शत्रून्  
`çátrūn`

धेनूस्  
`dhenū́s`

मधूनि  
`mádhūni`

I.

शत्रुभिस्  
`çátrubhis`

धेनुभिस्  
`dhenúbhis`

मधुभिस्  
`mádhubhis`

D. Ab.

शत्रुभ्यस्  
`çátrubhyas`

धेनुभ्यस्  
`dhenúbhyas`

मधुभ्यस्  
`mádhubhyas`

G.

शत्रूणाम्  
`çátrūṇām`

धेनूनाभ्  
`dhenūnā́m`

मधूनाभ्  
`mádhūnām`

L.

शत्रुषु  
`çátruṣu`

धेनुषु  
`dhenúṣu`

मधुषु  
`mádhuṣu`

342\. The forms of Vedic occurrence are given here for the `u`-stems in
the same manner as for the `i`-stems above.

a\. Singular. Nom.: masc. and fem. as above; neut. `urú`, `urū́`.

b\. Accus.: masc. `ketúm`, `ábhīruam`, `sucetúnam` (?); fem. `dhenúm`.

c\. Instr.: masc. `ketúnā`, `paçvā́` and `krátuā`; fem. `ádhenuā` and
`panvā́`, `āçuyā́`; neut. `mádhunā`, `mádhvā`.

d\. Dat.: masc. `ketáve`, `çíçve`; fem. `çárave`, `íṣvāi`; neut. `páçve`
(?), `uráve`, `mádhune`.

e\. Abl.-gen.: masc. `manyós`, `pitvás`, `cā́ruṇas`; fem. `síndhos`,
`íṣvās`; neut. `mádhvas` and `mádhuas`, `mádhos`, `mádhunas`.

f\. Loc.: masc. `pūrāú`, `sūnávi`; fem. `síndhāu`, `rájjvām`; neut.
`sā́nāu`, `sā́navi`, `sā́no`, `sā́nuni`.

g\. Voc.: as above.

h\. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc.: masc. and fem. as above; neut. `urvī́`,
`jā́nunī`.

i\. Instr.-dat.-abl.: as above.

j\. Gen.-loc.: as above (but `vos` or `uos`).

k\. Plural. Nom.: masc. `ṛbhávas`, `mádhuas` and `mádhvas`; fem.
`dhenávas`, `çatakratvas`; neut. `purū́ṇi`, `purú`, `purū́`. 

l\. Accus.: masc. `ṛtū́n`, `paçvás`; fem. `íṣūs`, `mádhvas`.

m\. Instr., dat.-abl., and loc., as above; also gen. (but with the
resolution `ūnaam` in part).

343\. Irregular declension. There are no irregular `u`-stems, and only a
very few `i`-stems.

a\. `Sákhi` m. *friend* has for the five strong cases a peculiarly
strengthened base (vriddhied), namely `sákhāy`, which in the nom. sing.
is reduced to `sákhā` (without ending), and in the other cases takes the
normal endings. The instr. and dat. sing. have the normal endings
simply, without inserted `n` or `guṇa`; the abl.-gen. sing. adds `us`;
and the loc. sing. adds `āu`: the rest is like `agní`. Thus:

Sing. `sákhā`, `sákhāyam`, `sákhyā`, `sákhye`, `sákhyus`, `sákhyāu`,
`sákhe`; Du. `sákhāyāu`, `sákhibhyām`, `sákhyos`; Pl. `sákhāyas`,
`sákhīn`, etc. etc.

b\. The Veda has usually `sákhāyā` du., and often resolves the `y` to
`i`, in `sákhiā`, `sákhius`, etc. The compounds are usually declined
like the simple word, unless (1315 b) `sakha` be substituted.

c\. There is a corresponding fem., `sakhī` (declined like `devī`: 364);
but the forms of `sakhi` are also sometimes found used with feminine
value.

d\. `Páti` m. is declined regularly in composition, and when it has the
meaning *lord, master*; when uncompounded and when meaning *husband*, it
is inflected like `sákhi` in the instr., dat., abl.-gen., and loc.
sing., forming `pátyā`, `pátye`, `pátyus`, `pátyāu`. There are
occasional instances of confusion of the two classes of forms.

e\. For `pati` as the final member of a possessive compound is regularly
and usually substituted `patnī` in the fem.: thus, `jīvapatnī` *having a
living husband*; `dāsapatnī` *having a barbarian for master*.

f\. `Jáni` f. *wife* has the gen. sing. `jányus` in the Veda.

g\. `Arí` *eager, greedy, hostile* has in the Veda `aryás` in pl. nom.
and accus., masc. and fem. Its accus. sing. is `arím` or `aryám`.

h\. `Ví` *bird* has in RV. the nom. `vés` (beside `vís`). In the plural
it accents `víbhis`, `víbhyas`, but `vīnā́m`.

i\. The stems `ákṣi` *eye*, `ásthi` *bone*, `dádhi` *curds*, and
`sákthi` *thigh*, are defective, their forms exchanging with and
complementing forms from stems in `án` (`akṣán` etc.): see the stems in
`an`, below (431).

j\. The stem `pathí` *road* is used to make up part of the inflection of
`páthan`: see below, 433.

k\. `Króṣṭu` m. *jackal* lacks the strong cases, for which the
corresponding forms of `kroṣṭṛ́` are substituted.

Adjectives.

344\. Original adjectives stems in `i` are few; those in `u` are much
more numerous (many derivative verb-stems forming a participial
adjective in `u`). Their inflection is like that of nouns, and has been
included in the rules given above. In those weak cases, however—namely,
the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing., and the gen.-loc. dual—in which
neuter nouns differ from masculines in the later language by an inserted
`n` (we have seen above that this difference does not exist in the
Veda), the neuter adjective is allowed to take either form. The stem is
the same for masculine and neuter, and generally (and allowably always)
for feminine also.

a\. There are a few instances of a feminine noun in `ī` standing
(sometimes with changed accent) beside a masculine in `i`: thus, `krími`
m., `krimī́` f.; `sákhi` (343 a) m., `sakhī́` f.; `dundubhí` m.,
`dundubhī` f., `dhúni` m., `dhunī` f.; `çakúni` m., `çakunī` or -`ni` f.
In the later language, especially, there is a very frequent interchange
of `i` and `ī` as finals of the same stem. No adjective in `i` makes a
regular feminine in `ī`.

b\. With stems in `u` the case is quite different. While the feminine
may, and in part does, end in `u`, like the masculine and neuter, a
special feminine-stem is often made by lengthening the `u` to `ū`, or
also by adding `ī`; and for some stems a feminine is formed in two of
these three ways, or even in all the three: thus, `kārū`, -`dipsū́`,
`çundhyū́`, `cariṣṇū́`, `vacasyū́`; -`aṇvī`, `urvī́`, `gurvī`, `pūrvī́` (with
a prolongation of `u` before `r`: compare 245 b), `bahvī́`, `prabhvī́`,
`raghvī́`, `sādhvī́`, `svādvī́`;—`pṛthú` and `pṛthvī́`, `vibhū́` and
`vibhvī́`, `mṛdú` and `mṛdvī́`, `laghu` and `laghvī`, `vásu` and `vásvī`;
`babhrú` and `babhrū́`, `bībhatsú` and `bībhatsū́`, `bhīrú` and
`bhīrū`;—`tanú` and `tanū́` and `tanvī́`, `phalgú` and `phalgū́` and
`phalgvī`, `mádhu` and `madhū́` and `mádhvī`. There are also some
feminine noun-stems in `ū` standing (usually with changed accent) beside
masculines in `u`: thus, `ágru` m., `agrū́` f.; `kádru` m., `kadrū́` f.;
`gúggulu` m., `guggulū́` f.; `jatu` m., `jatū́` f.; `pṛ́dāku` m., `pṛdākū́`
f.

345\. Roots ending in `i` or `u` (or `ṛ`: 376 b) regularly add a `t`
when used as root-words or as root-finals of compounds; and hence there
are no adjectives of the root-class in this declension.

a\. Yet, in the Veda, a few words ending in a short radical `u` are
declined as if this were suffixal: thus, `ásmṛtadhru`, `suṣṭú`; and the
AV. has `pṛtanājí` (once). Roots in ū sometimes also shorten `ū` to `u`:
thus, `prabhú`, `vibhú`, etc. (354); `go` (361 e) becomes `gu` in
composition; and `re` perhaps becomes `ri` (361 e); while roots in `ā`
sometimes apparently weaken `ā` to `i` (in -`dhi` from √`dhā` etc.:
1155).

346\. Compound adjectives having nouns of this declension as final
members are inflected in general like original adjectives of the same
endings.

a\. But in such compounds a final `i` or `u` is sometimes lengthened to
form a feminine stem: thus, `suçroṇī`, `svayonī` or -`ni`, -`gātrayaṣṭī`
or -`ṭi`; `vāmorū` or -`ru`, `durhaṇū` or -`ṇu`, `varatanū`,
`mātṛbandhū`; and RV. has `áçiçvī` from `çíçu`. 

Declension III.  
Stems in long vowels: आ `ā`, ई `ī`, ऊ `ū`.

347\. The stems ending in long vowels fall into two well-marked classes
or divisions: A. monosyllabic stems—mostly bare roots—and their
compounds, with a comparatively small number of others inflected like
them; B. derivative feminine stems in आ `ā` and ई `ī`, with a small
number in ऊ `ū` which in the later language have come to be inflected
like them. The latter division is by far the larger and more important,
since most feminine adjectives, and considerable classes of feminine
nouns, ending in आ `ā` or ई `ī`, belong to it.

A. Root-words, and those inflected like them.

348\. The inflection of these stems is by the normal endings throughout,
or in the manner of consonant-stems (with अम् `am`, not म् `m`, in the
accus. sing.); peculiarities like those of the other vowel-declensions
are wanting. The simple words are, as nouns, with few exceptions
feminine; as adjectives (rarely), and in adjective compounds, they are
alike in masculine and feminine forms. They may, for convenience of
description, be divided into the following subclasses:

1\. Root-words, or monosyllables having the aspect of such. Those in `ā`
are so rare that it is hardly possible to make up a whole scheme of
forms in actual use; those in `ī` and `ū` are more numerous, but still
very few.

2\. Compounds having such words, or other roots with long final vowels,
as last member.

3\. Polysyllabic words, of various origin and character, including in
the Veda many which later are transferred to other declensions.

4\. As an appendix to this class we may most conveniently describe the
half-dozen stems, mostly of regular inflection, ending in diphthongs. 

349\. Monosyllabic stems. Before the endings beginning with vowels,
final `ī` is changed to `iy` and `ū` to `uv`; while final `ā` is dropped
altogether, except in the strong cases, and in the acc. pl., which is
like the nominative (according to the grammarians, `ā` is lost here
also: no instances of the occurrence of such a form appear to be
quotable). Stems in `ī` and `ū` are in the later language allowed to
take optionally the fuller endings `āi`, `ās`, `ām` in the singular
(dat., abl.-gen., loc.); but no such forms are ever met with in the Veda
(except `bhiyāí` \[?\], RV., once). Before `ām` of gen. pl., `n` may or
may not be inserted; in the Veda it is regularly inserted, with a single
exception (`dhiyā́m`, once). The vocative is like the nominative in the
singular as well as the other numbers; but instances of its occurrence
in uncompounded stems are not found in the Veda, and must be extremely
rare everywhere. The earlier Vedic dual ending is `ā` instead of `āu`.

350\. To the `ī`- and `ū`-stems the rules for monosyllabic accent apply:
the accent is thrown forward upon the endings in all the weak cases
except the accus. pl., which is like the nom. But the `ā`-stems appear
(the instances are extremely few) to keep the accent upon the stem
throughout.

351\. Examples of declension. As models of monosyllabic inflection we
may take जा `jā́` f. *progeny*; धी `dhī́` f. *thought*; and भू `bhū́` f.
*earth*.

a\. The first of these is rather arbitrarily extended from the four
cases which actually occur; of the loc. sing. and gen.-loc. du., no
Vedic examples from `ā`-stems are found.

Singular:

N.

जास्  
`jā́s`

धीस्  
`dhī́s`

भूस्  
`bhū́s`

A.

जाम्  
`jā́m`

धियम्  
`dhíyam`

भुवम्  
`bhúvam`

I.

जा  
`jā́`

धिया  
`dhiyā́`

भुवा  
`bhuvā́`

D.

जे  
`jé`

धिये, धियै  
`dhiyé`, `dhiyāí`

भुवे, भुवै  
`bhuvé`, `bhuvāí`

Ab. G.

जस्  
`jás`

धियस्, धियास्  
`dhiyás`, `dhiyā́s`

भुवस्, भुवास्  
`bhuvás`, `bhuvā́s`

L.

जि  
`jí`

धियि, धियाम्  
`dhiyí`, `dhiyā́m`

भुवि, भुवाम्  
`bhuví`, `bhuvā́m`

V.

जास्  
`jā́s`

धीस्  
`dhī́s`

भूस्  
`bhū́s` 

Dual:

N. A. V.

जौ  
`jāú`

धियौ  
`dhíyāu`

भुवौ  
`bhúvāu`

I. D. Ab.

जाभ्याम्  
`jā́bhyām`

धीभ्याम्  
`dhībhyā́m`

भूभ्याम्  
`bhūbhyā́m`

G. L.

जोस्  
`jós`

धियोस्  
`dhiyós`

भुवोस्  
`bhuvós`

Plural:

N. V.

जास्  
`jā́s`

धियस्  
`dhíyas`

भुवस्  
`bhúvas`

A.

जास् (जस्?)  
`jā́s`, `jás`

धियस्  
`dhíyas`

भुवस्  
`bhúvas`

I.

जाभिस्  
`jā́bhis`

धीभिस्  
`dhībhís`

भूभिस्  
`bhūbhís`

D. Ab.

जाभ्यस्  
`jā́bhyas`

धीभ्यस्  
`dhībhyás`

भूभ्यस्  
`bhūbhyás`

G.

जानाम् (जाम्?)  
`jā́nām`, `jā́m`

धियाभ्, धीनाम्  
`dhiyā́m`, `dhīnā́m`

भुवाभ्, भूनाभ्  
`bhuvā́m`, `bhūnā́m`

L.

जासु  
`jā́su`

धीषु  
`dhīṣú`

भूषु  
`bhūṣú`

352\. Monosyllabic stems in composition. When the nouns above described
occur as a final member of a compound, or when any root in `ā` or `ī` or
`ū` is found in a like position, the inflection of an `ā`-stem is as
above. But `ī`- and `ū`-stems follow a divided usage: the final vowel
before a vowel-ending is either converted into a short vowel and
semivowel (`iy` or `uv`, as above) or into a semivowel simply (`y` or
`v`). The accent is nowhere thrown forward upon the endings; and
therefore, when `ī` and `ū` become `y` and `v`, the resulting syllable
is circumflex (83–4). Thus:

Masc. and fem. Singular:

N. V.

`-dhī́s`

`-bhū́s`

A.

`-dhíyam`

`-dhyàm`

`-bhúvam`

`-bhvàm`

I.

`-dhíyā`

`-dhyā̀`

`-bhúvā`

`-bhvā̀`

D.

`-dhíye`

`-dhyè`

`-bhúve`

`-bhvè`

Ab. G.

`-dhíyas`

`-dhyàs`

`-bhúvas`

`-bhvàs`

L.

`-dhíyi`

`-dhyì`

`-bhúvi`

`-bhvì` 

Dual:

N. A. V.

`-dhíyāu`

`-dhyaù`

`-bhúvāu`

`-bhvāù`

I. D. Ab.

`-dhī́bhyām`

`-bhū́bhyām`

G. L.

`-dhíyos`

`-dhyòs`

`-bhúvos`

`-bhvòs`

Plural:

N. A. V.

`-dhíyas`

`-dhyàs`

`-bhúvas`

`-bhvàs`

I.

`-dhī́bhis`

`-bhū́bhis`

D. Ab.

`-dhī́bhyas`

`-bhū́bhyas`

G.

`-dhíyām`

`-dhyā̀m`

`-bhúvām`

`-bhvā̀m`

`-dhī́nām`

`-bhū́nām`

L.

`-dhī́ṣu`

`-bhū́ṣu`

a\. As to the admissibility of the fuller endings `āi`, `ās`, and `ām`
in the singular (feminine), grammatical authorities are somewhat at
variance; but they are never found in the Veda, and have been omitted
from the above scheme as probably unreal.

b\. If two consonants precede the final `ī` or `ū`, the dissyllabic
forms, with `iy` and `uv`, are regularly written; after one consonant,
the usage is varying. The grammarians prescribe `iy` and `uv` when the
monosyllabic stem has more the character of a noun, and `y` and `v` when
it is more purely a verbal root with participial value. No such
distinction, however, is to be seen in the Veda—where, moreover, the
difference of the two forms is only graphic, since the `yā`- and
`vā`-forms and the rest are always to be read as dissyllabic: `iā` or
`īā` and `uā` or `ūā`, and so on.

c\. As to neuter stems for such adjectives, see 367.

353\. A few further Vedic irregularities or peculiarities may be briefly
noticed.

a\. Of the `ā`-stems, the forms in `ās`, `ām`, `ā` (du.) are sometimes
to be read as dissyllables, `aas`, `aam`, `aa`. The dative of the stem
used as infinitive is `āí` (as if `ā́`+`e`): thus, `prakhyāí`,
`pratimāí`, `parādāí`.

b\. Irregular transfer of the accent to the ending in compopunds is seen
in a case or two: thus, `avadhyabhiyā́` (RV.), `ādhiā́` (AV.).

354\. But compounds of the class above described are not infrequently
transferred to other modes of inflection: the `ā` shortened to `a` for a
masculine (and neuter) stem, or declined like a stem of the derivative
`ā`-class (below, 364) as feminine; the `ī` and `ū` shortened to `i` and
`u`, and inflected as of the second declension.

a\. Thus, compound stems in -`ga`, -`ja`, -`da`, -`stha`, -`bhu`, and
others, are found even in the Veda, and become frequent later (being
made from all, or nearly all, the roots in `ā`); and sporadic cases from
yet others occur: for example, `çṛtapā́n`, `vayodhāís` and
`ratnadhébhis`, `dhanasāís` (all RV.); and, from `ī` and `ū` compounds,
`veṣaçrís` (TS.), `áhrayas` (RV.), `gaṇaçríbhis` (RV.), `karmaṇís` (ÇB),
and `ṛtaníbhyas` (RV.) and `senāníbhyas` (VS.) and `grímaṇíbhis` (TB.),
`supúnā` (AV.), `çitíbhráve` (TS.).

b\. Still more numerous are the feminines in `ā` which have lost their
root-declension: examples are `prajā́` (of which the further compounds in
part have root-forms), `svadhā́`, `çraddhā́`, `pratimā́`, and others.

c\. Thus, in the later language, a few feminines in `ī` are made from
the stems in `a` shortened from `ā`: thus, `gopī`, `goṣṭhī`, `pannagī`,
`pan̄kajī`, `bhujagī`, `bhujaṁgī`, `surāpī`.

355\. Polysyllabic Stems. Stems of this division (A) of more than one
syllable are very rare indeed in the later language, and by no means
common in the earlier. The Rig-Veda, however, presents a not
inconsiderable body of them; and as the class nearly dies out later, by
the disuse of its stems or their transfer to other modes of declension,
it may be best described on a Vedic basis.

a\. Of stems in `ā`, masculines, half-a-dozen occur in the Veda:
`pánthā`, `mánthā`, and `ṛbhukṣā́` are otherwise viewed by the later
grammar: see below, 433-4; `uçánā` (nom. pr.) has the anomalous nom.
sing. `uçánā` (and loc. as well as dat. `uçáne`); `mahā́` *great* is
found only in accus. sing. and abundantly in composition; `ā́tā` *frame*
has only `ā́tāsu` not derivable from `ā́ta`.

b\. Of stems in `ī`, over seventy are found in the Veda, nearly all
feminines, and all accented on the final. Half of the feminines are
formed from masculines with change of accent: thus, `kalyāṇī́` (m.
`kalyā́ṇa`), `puruṣī́` (m. `púruṣa`); others show no change of accent:
thus, `yamī́` (m. `yamá`); others still have no corresponding masculines:
thus, `nadī́`, `lakṣmī́`, `sūrmī́`. The masculines are about ten in number:
for example, `rathī́`, `prāvī́`, `starī́`, `ahī́`, `āpathī́`.

c\. Of stems in `ū`, the number is smaller: these, too, are nearly all
feminines, and all accented on the final. The majority of them are the
feminine adjectives in `ū́` to masculines in `ú` or `u` (above, 344b):
thus, `caraṇyū́`, `cariṣṇū́`, `jighatsū́`, `madhū́`. A few are nouns in `ū́`,
with change of accent: thus, `agrū́` (`ágru`), `pṛdākū́` (`pṛ́dāku`),
`çvaçrū́` (`çváçura`); or without change, as `nṛtū́`. And a few have no
corresponding masculines: thus, `tanū́`, `vadhū́`, `camū́`. The masculines
are only two ore three: namely, `prāçū́`, `kṛkadāçū́`, `makṣū́` (?); and
their forms are of the utmost rarity.

356\. The mode of declension of these words may be illustrated by the
following examples: `rathī́` m. *charioteer*; `nadī́` f. *stream*; `tanū́`
f. *body*.

a\. No one of the selected examples occurs in all the forms; forms for
which no example at all is quotable are put in brackets. No loc. sing.
from any `ī`-stem occurs, to determine what the form would be. The stem
`nadī́` is selected as an example partly in order to emphasize the
difference between the earlier language and the later in regard to the
words of this division: `nadī́` is later the model of derivative
inflection. 

Singular:

N.

`rathī́s`

`nadī́s`

`tanū́s`

A.

`rathíam`

`nadíam`

`tanúam`

I.

`rathíā`

`nadíā`

`tanúā`

D.

`rathíe`

`nadíe`

`tanúe`

Ab. G.

`rathías`

`nadías`

`tanúas`

L.

.....

.....

`tanúi`

V.

`ráthi` (?)

`nádi`

`tánu`

Dual:

N. A. V.

`rathíā`

`nadíā`

`tanúā`

I. D. Ab.

\[`rathī́bhyām`\]

`nadī́bhyām`

\[`tanū́bhyām`\]

G. L.

\[`rathíos`\]

`nadíos`

`tanúos`

Plural:

N. A.

`rathías`

`nadías`

`tanúas`

I.

\[`rathī́bhis`\]

`nadī́bhis`

`tanū́bhis`

D. Ab.

\[`rathī́bhyas`\]

`nadī́bhyas`

`tanū́bhyas`

G.

`rathī́nām`

`nadī́nām`

`tanū́nām`

L.

\[`rathī́ṣu`\]

`nadī́ṣu`

`tanū́ṣu`

b\. The cases — `nadíam`, `tanúam`, etc — are written above according to
their true phonetic form, almost invariably belonging to them in the
Veda; in the written text, of course, the stem-final is made a
semi-vowel, and the resulting syllable is circumflexed: thus, `nadyàm`,
`tanvàm`, etc.; only, as usual, after two consonants the resolved forms
`iy` and `uv` are written instead; and also where the combination `yv`
would otherwise result: thus, `cakríyā`, \[`agrúvāi`,\] and
`mitrāyúvas`. The RV. really reads `staryàm` etc. twice, and `tanvàs`
etc. four times; and such contractions are more often made in the AV.
The ending `ā` of the nom.-acc.-voc. du. is the equivalent of the later
`āu`. The nom. sing. in `s` from `ī`-stems is found in the older
language about sixty times, from over thirty stems.

357\. Irregularities of form, properly so called, are very few in this
division: `camū́` as loc. sing. (instead of `camvi`) occurs a few times;
and there is another doubtful case or two of the same kind; the final
`ū́` is regarded as `pragṛhya` or uncombinable (138); `tanúi` is
lengthened to `tanvī̀` in a passage or two; -`yúvas` is once or twice
abbreviated to -`yū́s`.

358\. The process of transfer to the other form of `ī`- and
`ū`-declension (below, 362 ff.), which has nearly extinguished this
category of words in the later language, has its beginnings in the Veda;
but in RV. they are excessively scanty: namely, `dūtiā́m`, loc. sing.,
once, and `çvaçruā́m`, do., once, and `dravitnuā́`, instr. sing., with two
or three other doubtful cases. In the Atharvan, we find the acc. sing.
`kuhū́m`, `tanū́m`, `vadhū́m`; the instr. sing. `palāliā́` and one or two
others; the dat. sing. `vadhvāí`, `çvaçruāí`, `agrúvāi`; the abl.-gen.
sing. `punarbhúvās`, `pṛdākuā́s`, `çvaçruā́s`; and the loc. sing. `tanúām`
(with anomalous accent). Accusative plural in `īs` and `ūs` are nowhere
met with. 

359\. Adjective compounds from these words are very few; those which
occur are declined like the simple stems: thus, `híraṇyavāçīs` and
`sahásrastarīs`, `átaptatanūs` and `sárvatanūs`, all nom. sing.
masculine.

Stems ending in diphthongs.

360\. There are certain monosyllabic stems ending in diphthongs, which
are far too few and too diverse in infliction to make a declension of,
and which may be most appropriately disposed of here, in connection with
the stems in `ī` and `ū`, with which they have most affinity. They are:

a\. stems in `āu`: `nāú` and `glāú`;

b\. stems in `āi`: `rāí`;

c\. stems in `o`: `gó` and `dyó` (or `dyú`, `dív`).

361\. a. The stem `nāú` f. *ship* is entirely regular, taking the normal
endings throughout, and following the rules for monosyllabic
accentuation (317)—except that the accus. pl. is said (it does not
appear to occur in accented texts) to be like the nom. Thus: `nāús`,
`nā́vam`, `nāvā́`, `nāvé`, `nāvás`, `nāví`; `nā́vāu`, `nāubhyā́m`, `nāvós`;
`nā́vas`, `nā́vas`, `nāubhís`, `nāubhyás`, `nāvā́m`, `nāuṣú`. The stem
`glāú` m. *ball* is apparently inflected in the same way; but few of its
forms have been met with in use.

b\. The stem `rāí` f. (or m.) *wealth* might be better described as `rā`
with a union-consonant `y` (258) interposed before vowel endings, and is
regularly inflected as such, with normal endings and monosyllabic
accent. Thus: `rā́s`, `rā́yam`, `rāyā́`, `rāyé`, `rāyás`, `rāyí`; `rā́yāu`,
`rābhyā́m`, `rāyós`; `rā́yas`, `rāyás`, `rābhís`, `rābhyás`, `rāyā́m`,
`rāsú`. But in the Veda the accus. pl. is either `rāyás` or `rā́yas`; for
accus. sing. and pl. are also used the briefer forms `rām` (RV. once:
`rā́yam` does not occur in V.) and `rā́s` (SV., once); and the gen.-sing.
is sometimes anomalously accented rā́yas.

c\. The stem `gó` m. or f. *bull* or *cow* is much more irregular. In
the strong cases, except accus. sing., it is strengthened to `gāú`,
forming (like `naú`) `gāús`, `gā́vāu`, `gā́vas`. In accus. sing. and pl.
it has (like `rāí`) the brief forms `gā́m` and `gā́s`. The abl.-gen. sing.
is `gós` (as if from `gu`). The rest is regularly made from `go`, with
the normal endings, but with accent always remaining irregularly upon
the stem: thus, `gávā`, `gáve`, `gávi`, `gávos`, `gávām`; `góbhyām`,
`góbhis`, `góbhyas`, `góṣu`. In the Veda, another form of the gen. pl.
is `gónam`; the nom. etc. du. is (as in all other such cases) also
`gā́vā`; and `gā́m`, `gós`, and `gā́s` are not infrequently to be
pronounced as dissyllables. As acc. pl. is found a few times `gāvas`.

d\. The stem `dyó` f. (but in V. usually m.) *sky, day* is yet more
anomalous, having beside it a simpler stem `dyu`, which becomes `div`
before a vowel-ending. The native grammarians treat the two as
independent words, but it is more convenient to put them together. The
stem `dyó` is inflected precisely like `gó`, as above described. The
complete declension is as follows (with forms not actually met with in
use bracketed):

Singular.

Dual.

Plural.

N.

`dyāús`

\[`dívāu`\]

`dyā́vāu`

`dívas`

`dyā́vas`

A.

`dívam`

`dyā́m`

`divás`, `dyū́n`

\[`dyā́s`\]

I.

`divā́`

\[`dyávā`\]

\[`dyúbhyām`\]

\[`dyóbhyām`\]

`dyúbhis`

\[`dyóbhis`\]

D.

`divé`

`dyáve`

\[`dyúbhyas`\]

\[`dyóbhyas`\]

Ab.

`divás`

`dyós`

G.

`divás`

`dyós`

\[`divós`\]

\[`dyávos`\]

\[`divā́m`\]

\[`dyávām`\]

L.

`diví`

`dyávi`

`dyúṣu`

\[`dyóṣu`\]

e\. The dat. sing. `dyáve` is not found in the early language. Both
`dívas` and `divás` occur as accus. pl. in V. As nom. etc. du., `dyā́vā`
is, as usual, the regular Vedic form: once occurs `dyávī` (du.), as if a
neuter form; and `dyāús` is found once used as ablative. The cases
`dyāus`, `dyām` and `dyūn` (once) are read in V. sometimes as
dissyllables; and the first as accented vocative then becomes `dyāùs`
(i.e. `díāus`: see 314).

f\. Adjective compounds having a diphthongal stem as final member are
not numerous, and tend to shorten the diphthong to a vowel. Thus, from
`nāu` we have `bhinnanu`; from `go`, several words like `águ`,
`saptágu`, `sugu`, `bor hugú` (f. `gū́` JB.); and, correspondingly, `rāi`
seems to be reduced to `ri` in `bṛhádraye` and `ṛdhádrayas` (RV.). In
derivation, `go` maintains its full form in `gotra`, `agótā`, -`gava`
(f. -`gavī`), etc.; as first member of a compound, it is variously
treated: thus, `gávāçir`, `gáviṣṭi` (but `gaāçir`, `gaīṣṭi` K.), etc.;
`goaçvá` or `go‘çva`, `góṛjīka`, `góopaça`, etc. In certain compounds,
also, `dyu` or `dyo` takes an anomalous form: thus, `dyāurdā` (K.),
`dyāurloká` (ÇB.), `dyāúsaṁçita` (AV.). In `revánt` (unless this is for
`rayivant`) `rāi` becomes `re`. RV. has `ádhrigāvas` from `ádhrigu` (of
questionable import); and AV. has `ghṛtastā́vas`, apparently accus. pl.
of `ghṛtastú` or -`stó`.

B. Derivative stems in `ā`, `ī`, `ū`.

362\. To this division belong all the `ā` and `ī`-stems which have not
been specified above as belonging to the other or root-word division;
and also, in the later language, most of the `ī` and `ū`-stems of the
other division, by transfer to a more predominant mode of inflection.
Thus:

1\. a. The great mass of derivative feminine `ā`-stems, substantive and
adjective.

b\. The inflection of these stems has maintained itself with little
change through the whole history of the language, being almost precisely
the same in the Vedas as later. 

2\. c. The great mass of derivative feminine `ī`-stems.

d\. This class is without exception in the later language. In the
earlier, it suffers the exception pointed out above (355 b): that
feminines made with change of accent follow this mode of declension only
when the accent is not on the `ī́`: thus, `táviṣī`, `páruṣṇī`, `páliknī`,
`róhiṇī`.

e\. The `ī`-stems of this division in general are regarded as made by
contraction of an earlier ending in `yā`. Their inflection has become in
the later language somewhat mixed with that of the other division, and
so far different from the Vedic inflection: see below, 363 g.

f\. Very few derivative stems in `ī` are recognized by the grammarians
as declined like the root-division; the Vedic words of that class are,
if retained in use, transferred to this mode of inflection.

g\. A very small number of masculine `ī`-stems (half-a-dozen) are in the
Veda declined as of the derivative division: they are a few rare proper
names, `mā́talī` etc.; and `rā́ṣṭrī` and `sirī́` (only one case each).

3\. h. The `ū`-stems are few in number, and are transfers from the other
division, assimilated in inflection to the great class of derivative
`ī-`stems (except that they retain the ending `s` of the nom. sing.).

363\. Endings. The points of distinction between this and the other
division are as follows:

a\. In nom. sing. the usually `s`-ending is wanting: except in the
`ū`-stems and a very few `ī`-stems — namely, `lakṣmī`, `tarī`, `tantrī`,
`tandrī` — which have preserved the ending of the other division.

b\. The accus. sing. and pl. add simply `m` and `s` respectively.

c\. The dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing. take always the fuller endings
`āi`, `ās`, `ām`; and these are separated from the final of the
`ā`-stems by an interposed `y`. In Brāhmaṇa etc., `āi` is generally
substituted for ās (307 h).

d\. Before the endings `ā` of instr. sing. and `os` of gen.-loc. du.,
the final of `ā`-stems is treated as if changed to `e`; but in the Veda,
the instr. ending `ā` very often (in nearly half the occurrences) blends
with the final to `ā`. The `yā` of `ī`-stems is in a few Vedic examples
contracted to `ī`, and even to `i`. A loc. sing. in `ī` occurs a few
times.

e\. In all the weakest cases above mentioned, the accent of an `ī`- or
`ū`-stem having acute final is thrown forward upon the ending. In the
remaining case of the same class, the gen. pl., a `n` is always
interposed between stems and ending, and the accent remains upon the
former (in RV., however, it is usually thrown forward upon the ending,
as in `i` and `u`-stems).

f\. In voc. sing., final `ā` becomes `e`; final `ī` and `ū` are
shortened.

g\. In nom.-acc.-voc. du. and nom. pl. appears in `ī` (and `ū`)-stems a
marked difference between the earlier and later language, the latter
borrowing the forms of the other division. The du. ending `āu` is
unknown in RV., and very rare in AV.; the Vedic ending is `ī` (a
corresponding dual of `ū`-stems does not occur). The regular later pl.
ending `as` has only a doubtful example or two in RV., and a very small
number in AV.; the case there (and it is one of very frequent
occurrence) adds `s` simply; and though `yas`-forms occur in the
Brāhmaṇas, along with `īs`-forms, both are used rather indifferently as
nom. and accus. (as, indeed, they sometimes interchange also in the
epics). Of `ā`-stems, the du. nom. etc. ends in `e`, both earlier and
later; in pl., of course, `s`-forms are indistinguishable from
`as`-forms. The RV. has a few examples of `āsas` for `ās`.

h\. The remaining cases call for no remark.

364\. Examples of declension. As models of the inflection of derivative
stems ending in long vowels, we may take सेना `sénā` f. *army*; कन्या
`kanyā̀` f. *girl*; देवी `devī́` f. *goddess*; वधू `vadhū́` f. *woman*.

Singular:

N.

सेना  
`sénā`

कन्या  
`kanyā̀`

देवी  
`devī́`

वधूस्  
`vadhū́s`

A.

सेनाम्  
`sénām`

कन्याम्  
`kanyā̀m`

देवीम्  
`devī́m`

वधूम्  
`vadhū́m`

I.

सेनया  
`sénayā`

कन्यया  
`kanyàyā`

देव्या  
`devyā́`

वध्वा  
`vadhvā́`

D.

सेनायै  
`sénāyāi`

कन्यायै  
`kanyā̀yāi`

देव्यै  
`devyāí`

वध्वै  
`vadhvāí`

Ab. G.

सेनायास्  
`sénāyās`

कन्यायास्  
`kanyā̀yās`

देव्यास्  
`devyā́s`

वध्वास्  
`vadhvā́s`

L.

सेनायाम्  
`sénāyām`

कन्यायाम्  
`kanyā̀yām`

देव्याम्  
`devyā́m`

वध्वाम्  
`vadhvā́m`

V.

सेने  
`séne`

कन्ये  
`kánye`

देवि  
`dévi`

वधु  
`vádhuv`

Dual:

N. A. V.

सेने  
`séne`

कन्ये  
`kanyè`

देव्यौ  
`devyāú`

वध्वौ  
`vadhvāù`

I. D. Ab.

सेनाभ्याम्  
`sénābhyām`

कन्याभ्याम्  
`kanyā̀bhyām`

देवीभ्याम्  
`devī́bhyām`

वधूभ्याम्  
`vadhū́bhyām`

G. L.

सेनयोस्  
`sénayos`

कन्ययोस्  
`kanyàyos`

देव्योस्  
`devyós`

वध्वोस्  
`vadhvós` 

Plural:

N. V.

सेनास्  
`sénās`

कन्यास्  
`kanyā̀s`

देव्यास्  
`devyàs`

वध्वास्  
`vadhvàs`

A.

सेनास्  
`sénās`

कन्यास्  
`kanyā̀s`

देवीस्  
`devī́s`

वधूस्  
`vadhū́s`

I.

सेनाभिस्  
`sénābhis`

कन्याभिस्  
`kanyā̀bhis`

देवीभिस्  
`devī́bhis`

वधूभिस्  
`vadhū́bhis`

D. Ab.

सेनाभ्यस्  
`sénābhyas`

कन्याभ्यस्  
`kanyā̀bhyas`

देवीभ्यस्  
`devī́bhyas`

वधूभ्यस्  
`vadhū́bhyas`

G.

सेनानाम्  
`sénānām`

कन्यानाम्  
`kanyā̀nām`

देवीनाम्  
`devī́nām`

वधूनाम्  
`vadhū́nām`

L.

सेनासु  
`sénāsu`

कन्यासु  
`kanyā̀su`

देवीषु  
`devī́ṣu`

वधूषु  
`vadhū́ṣu`

a\. In the Veda `vadhū́` is a stem belonging to the other division (like
`tanū́`, above, 356).

365\. Examples of Vedic forms are:

a\. `ā`-stems: instr. sing. `manīṣā́` (this simpler form is especially
common from stems in `tā` and `iā`); nom. pl. `vaçā́sas` (about twenty
examples); accus. pl. `araṁgamā́sas` (a case or two). Half the
`bhyas`-cases are to be read as `bhias`; the `ām` of gen. pl. is a few
times to be resolved into `aam`; and the `ā` and `ām` of nom. accus.
sing. are, very rarely, to be treated in the same manner.

b\. ī-stems: instr. sing. `çámī`, `çámi`; loc. `gaurī́`; nom. etc. du.
`devī́`; nom. pl. `devī́s`; gen. pl. `bahvīnā́m`. The final of the stem is
to be read as a vowel (not `y`) frequently, but not in the majority of
instances: thus, `deviā́`, `deviā́s`, `deviā́m`, `ródasios`.

c\. The sporadic instances of transfer between this division and the
preceding have been already sufficiently noticed.

d\. Of the regular substitution made in the Brāhmaṇa language (307 g,
336 g, 363 c) of the dat. sing. ending `ai` for the gen.-abl. ending
`ās`, in all classes of words admitting the latter ending, a few
examples may be given here: `abhibhūtyāi rūpam` (AB.) *a sign of
overpowering*; `triṣṭubhaç ca jagatyāi ca` (AB.) *of the metres triṣṭubh
and jagati*; `vāco dāivyāi ca mānuṣyāi ca` (AA.) *of speech, both divine
and human*; `striyāi payaḥ` (AB.) *woman's milk*;
`dhenvāí vā́ etád rétaḥ` (TB.) *that, forsooth, is the seed of the cow*;
`jīrṇāyāi tvacaḥ` (KB.) of dead skin; `jyāyasī yājyāyāi` (AB.) *superior
to the* `yājyā`; `asyāi divo ‘smād antarikṣāt` (ÇÇS.) *from this heaven,
from this atmosphere*. The same substitution is made once in the AV.:
thus, `svápantv asyāi jñātáyaḥ` *let her relatives sleep*. 

366\. The noun `strī́` f. *woman* (probably contracted from `sūtrī́`
*generatrix*), follows a mixed declension: thus, `strī́`, `stríyam` or
`strī́m`, `striyā́`, `striyāí`, `striyā́s`, `striyā́m`, `strí`; `stríyāu`,
`strībhyā́m`, `striyós`; `stríyas`, `stríyas` or `strī́s`, `strībhís`,
`strībhyás`, `strīṇā́m`, `strīṣú` (but the accusatives `strī́m` and
`strī́s` are not found in the older language, and the voc. `stri` is not
quotable). The accentuation is that of a root-word; the forms
(conspicuously the nom. sing.) are those of the other or derivative
division.

Adjectives.

367\. a. The occurrence of original adjectives in long final vowels, and
of compounds having as final member a stem of the first division, has
been sufficiently treated above, so far as masculine and feminine forms
are concerned. To form a neuter stem in composition, the rule of the
later language is that the final long vowel be shortened; and the stem
so made is to be inflected like an adjective in `i` or `u` (339, 341,
344).

b\. Such neuter forms are very rare, and in the older language almost
unknown. Of neuters from `ī`-stems have been noted in the Veda only
`hariçríyam`, acc. sing. (a masc. form), and `suādhías`, gen. sing.
(same as mac. and fem.); from `ū`-stems, only a few examples, and from
stem-forms which might be masc. and fem. also: thus, `vibhú`, `subhú`,
etc. (nom.-acc. sing.: compare 354); `supúā` and `mayobhúvā`, instr.
sing.; and `mayobhú`, acc. pl. (compare `purú`: 342 k); from `ā`-stems
occur only half-a-dozen examples of a nom. sing. in `ās`, like the masc.
and fem. form.

c\. Compounds having nouns of the second division as final member are
common only from derivatives in `ā`; and these shorten the final to `a`
in both masculine and neuter: thus, from `a` *not* and `prajā` *progeny*
come the masc. and neut. stem `apraja`, fem. `aprajā` *childless*. Such
compounds with nouns in `ī` and `ū` are said to be inflected in masc.
and fem. like the simple words (only with `īn` and `ūn` in acc. pl.
masc.); but the examples given by the grammarians are fictitious.

d\. Stems with shortened final are occasionally met with: thus,
`ekapatni`, `āttalakṣmi`; and such adverbs (neut. sing. accus.) as
`upabhāimi`, `abhyujjayini`. The stem `strī` is directed to be shortened
to `stri` for all genders.

368\. It is convenient to give a complete paradigm, for all genders, of
an adjective stem in अ `a`. We take for the purpose पाप `pāpá` *evil*,
of which the feminine is usually made in आ `ā` in the later language ,
but in ई `ī` in the older. 

Singular:

m\.

n\.

f\.

f\.

N.

पापस्  
`pāpás`

पापम्  
`pāpám`

पापा  
`pāpā́`

पापी  
`pāpī́`

A.

पापम्  
`pāpám`

पापम्  
`pāpā́m`

पापीम्  
`pāpī́m`

I.

पापेन  
`pāpéna`

पापया  
`pāpáyā`

पाप्या  
`pāpyā́`

D.

पापाय  
`pāpā́ya`

पापायै  
`pāpā́yāi`

पाप्यै  
`pāpyāí`

Ab.

पापात्  
`pāpā́t`

पापायास्  
`pāpā́yās`

पाप्यास्  
`pāpyā́s`

G.

पापत्य  
`pāpásya`

पापायास्  
`pāpā́yās`

पाप्यास्  
`pāpyā́s`

L.

पापे  
`pāpé`

पापायाम्  
`pāpā́yām`

पाप्याम्  
`pāpyā́m`

V.

पाप  
`pā́pa`

पापे  
`pā́pe`

पापि  
`pā́pi`

Dual:

N. A. V.

पापौ  
`pāpāú`

पापे  
`pāpé`

पापे  
`pāpé`

पाप्यौ  
`pāpyāù`

I. D. Ab.

पापाभ्याम्  
`pāpā́bhyām`

पापाभ्याम्  
`pāpā́bhyām`

पापीभ्याम्  
`pāpī́bhyām`

G. L.

पापयोस्  
`pāpáyos`

पापयोस्  
`pāpáyos`

पाप्योस्  
`pāpyós`

Plural:

N.

पापास्  
`pāpā́s`

पापानि  
`pāpā́ni`

पापास्  
`pāpā́s`

पाप्यस्  
`pāpyàs`

A.

पापान्  
`pāpā́n`

पापानि  
`pāpā́ni`

पापास्  
`pāpā́s`

पापीस्  
`pāpī́s`

I.

पापैस्  
`pāpāís`

पापाभिस्  
`pāpā́bhis`

पापीभिस्  
`pāpī́bhis`

D. Ab.

पापेभ्यस्  
`pāpébhyas`

पापाभ्यस्  
`pāpā́bhyas`

पापीभ्यस्  
`pāpī́bhyas` 

G.

पापानाम्  
`pāpā́nām`

पापानाम्  
`pāpā́nām`

णाणीनाम्  
`pāpī́nām`

L.

पापेषु  
`pāpéṣu`

पापासु  
`pāpā́su`

णाणीषु  
`pāpī́ṣu`

Declension IV.  
Stems in ऋ `ṛ` (or अर् `ar`).

369\. This declension is a comparatively limited one, being almost
entirely composed of derivative nouns formed with the suffix तृ `tṛ` (or
तर् `tar`), which makes masculine *nomina agentis* (used also
participially), and a few nouns of relationship.

a\. But it includes also a few nouns of relationship not made with that
suffix: namely `devṛ́` m., `svásṛ` and `nánāndṛ` f.; and besides these,
`nṛ́` m., `stṛ́` (in V.) m., `usṛ́` (in V.) f., `savyaṣṭhṛ` m., and the
feminine numerals `tisṛ` and `catasṛ` (for which, see 482 e, g). The
feminines in `tṛ` are only `mātṛ́`, `duhitṛ́`, and `yā́tṛ`.

b\. The inflection of these stems is quite closely analogous with that
of stems in `i` and `u` (second declension); its peculiarity, as
compared with them, consists mainly in the treatment of the stem itself,
which has a double form, fuller in the strong cases, briefer in the weak
ones.

370\. Forms of the Stem. In the weak cases (excepting the loc. sing.)
the stem-final is `ṛ`, which in the weakest cases, or before a
vowel-ending, is changed regularly to `r` (129). But as regards the
strong cases, the stems of this declension fall into two classes: in one
of them — which is very much the larger, containing all the *nomina
agentis*, and also the nouns of relationship `náptṛ` and `svásṛ`, and
the irregular words `stṛ́` and `savyaṣṭhṛ` — the `ṛ` is vriddhied, or
becomes `ār`; in the other, containing most of the nouns of
relationship, with `nṛ́` and `usṛ́`, the `ṛ` is gunated, or changed to
`ar`. In both classes, the loc. sing. has `ar` as stem-final.

371\. Endings: These are in general the normal, but with the following
exceptions:

a\. The nom. sing. (masc. and fem.) ends always in `ā` (for original
`ars` or `ārs`). The voc. sing. ends in `ar`.

b\. The accus. sing. adds `am` to the (strengthened) stem; the accus.
pl. has (like `i`- and `u`-stems) `n` as masc. ending and `s` as fem.
ending, with the `ṛ` lengthened before them. 

c\. The abl.-gen. sing. changes `ṛ` to `ur` (or `us`: 169 b).

d\. The gen. pl. (as in `i` and `u`-stems) inserts `n` before `ām`, and
lengthens the stem-final before it. But the `ṛ` of `nṛ́` may also remain
short.

e\. The above are the rules of the later language. The older presents
certain deviations from them. Thus:

f\. The ending in nom.-acc.-voc. du. is (as universally in the Veda)
regularly `ā` instead of `āu` (only ten `āu`-forms in RV.).

g\. The `i` of loc. sing. is lengthened to `ī` in a few words: thus,
`kartárī`.

h\. In the gen. pl., the RV. has once `svásrām`, without inserted `n`;
and `narā́m` instead of `nṛṇā́m` is frequent.

i\. Other irregularities of `nṛ́` are the sing. dat. `náre`, gen.
`náras`, and loc. `nári`. The Veda writes always `nṛṇā́m` in gen. pl.,
but its `ṛ` is in a majority of cases metrically long.

j\. The stem `usṛ́` f. *dawn* has the voc. sing. `uṣar`, the gen. sing.
`usrás`; and the accus. pl. also `usrás`, and loc. sing. `usrā́m` (which
is metrically trisyllable: `usṛā́m`), as if in analogy with `ī` and
`ū`-stems. Once occurs `usrí` in loc. sing., but it is to be read as if
the regular trisyllable form, `uṣúri` (for the exchange of `s` and `ṣ`,
see 181 a).

k\. From `stṛ́` come only `tā́ras` (apparently) and `stṛ́bhis`.

l\. In the gen.-loc. du., the `r` is almost always to be read as a
separate syllable, `ṛ`, before the ending `os`: thus, `pitṛós`, etc. On
the contrary, `nánāndari` is once to be read `nánāndri`.

m\. For neuter forms, see below, 375.

372\. Accent. The accentuation follows closely the rules for `i`- and
`u`-stems: if on the final of the stem, it continues, as acute, on the
corresponding syllable throughout, except in the gen. pl., where it may
be (and in the Veda always is) thrown forward upon the ending; where, in
the weakest cases, `ṛ` becomes `r`, the ending has the accent. The two
monosyllabic stems, `nṛ́` and `stṛ́`, do not show the monosyllabic accent:
thus (besides the forms already given above), `nṛ́bhis`, `nṛ́ṣu`.

373\. Examples of declension. As models of this mode of inflection, we
may take from the first case (with आर् `ār` in the strong forms) the
stems दातृ `dātṛ́` m. *giver* and स्वसृ `svásṛ` f. *sister*; from the
second class (with अर् `ar` in the strong forms), the stem पितृ `pitṛ́`
m. *father*.

Singular:

N.

दाता  
`dātā́`

स्वसा  
`svásā`

पिता  
`pitā́`

A.

दातारम्  
`dātā́ram`

स्वसारम्  
`svásāram`

पितरम्  
`pitáram` 

I.

दात्रा  
`dātrā́`

स्वस्रा  
`svásrā`

पित्रा  
`pitrā́`

D.

दात्रे  
`dātré`

स्वस्रे  
`svásre`

पित्रे  
`pitré`

Ab. G.

दातुर्  
`dātúr`

स्वसुर्  
`svásur`

पितुर्  
`pitúr`

L.

दातरि  
`dātári`

स्वसरि  
`svásari`

पितरि  
`pitári`

V.

दातर्  
`dā́tar`

स्वसर्  
`svásar`

पितर्  
`pítar`

Dual:

N. A. V.

दातारौ  
`dātā́rāu`

स्वसारौ  
`svásārāu`

पितरौ  
`pitárāu`

I. D. Ab.

दातृभ्याम्  
`dātṛ́bhyām`

स्वसृभ्याम्  
`svásṛbhyām`

पितृभ्याम्  
`pitṛ́bhyām`

G. L.

दात्रोस्  
`dātrós`

स्वस्रोस्  
`svásros`

पित्रोस्  
`pitrós`

Plural:

N. V.

दातारस्  
`dātā́ras`

स्वसारस्  
`svásāras`

पितरस्  
`pitáras`

A.

दातॄन्  
`dātṝ́n`

स्वसॄस्  
`svásṝs`

पितॄन्  
`pitṝ́n`

I.

दातृभिस्  
`dātṛ́bhis`

स्वसृभिस्  
`svásṛbhis`

पितृभिस्  
`pitṛ́bhis`

D. Ab.

दातृभ्यस्  
`dātṛ́bhyas`

स्वसृभ्यस्  
`svásṛbhyas`

पितृभ्यस्  
`pitṛ́bhyas`

G.

दातॄणाम्  
`dātṝṇā́m`

स्वसॄणाम्  
`svásṝṇām`

पितॄणाम्  
`pitṝṇā́m`

L.

दातृषु  
`dātṛ́ṣu`

स्वसृषु  
`svásṛṣu`

पितृषु  
`pitṛ́ṣu`

a\. The feminine stem मातृ `mātṛ́`, *mother*, is inflected precisely like
पितृ `pitṛ́`, excepting that its accusative plural is मातॄस् `mātṝ́s`. 

b\. The peculiar Vedic forms have been sufficiently instanced above; the
only ones of other than sporadic occurrence being the nom. etc. du.
`dātā́rā`, `svásārā`, `pitárā`, and the gen. pl. of `nṛ`, `narā́m`.

c\. The nom. pl. forms `pitaras` and `mātaras` etc. are found used also
as accus. in the epics.

374\. The stem `kroṣṭṛ́` m. *jackal* (lit'ly *howler*) substitutes in the
middle cases the corresponding forms of `króṣṭu`.

375\. Neuter forms. The grammarians prescribe a complete neuter
declension also for bases in `tṛ`, precisely accordant with that of
`vā́ri` or `mádhu` (above, 339, 341). Thus, for example:

Sing.

Du.

Plur.

N. A.

`dhātṛ́`

`dhātṛ́ṇī`

`dhātṝ́́ṇi`

I.

`dhātṛ́ṇā`

`dhātṛ́bhyām`

`dhātṛ́bhis`

G.

`dhātṛ́ṇas`

`dhātṛ́ṇos`

`dhātṝṇā́m`

V.

`dhā́tṛ`, `dhā́tar`

`dhā́tṛṇī`

`dhā́tṝṇi`

a\. The weakest cases, however (as of `i`- and `u`-stems used
adjectively: 344), are allowed also to be formed like the corresponding
masculine cases: thus, `dhātrā́` etc.

b\. No such neuter forms chance to occur in the Veda, but they begin to
appear in the Brāhmaṇas, under influence of the common tendency (compare
Germ. *Retter*, *Retterin*; Fr. *menteur*, *menteuse*) to give this
*nomen agentis* a more adjective character, making it correspond in
gender with the noun which it (appositively) qualifies. Thus, we have in
TB. `bhartṛ́` and `janayitṛ́`, qualifying `antárikṣam`; and `bhartṝ́́ṇi` and
`janayitṝ́́ṇi`, qualifying `nákṣatrāṇi`; as, in M., `grahītṝṇi`,
qualifying `indriyāṇi`.

c\. When a feminine noun is to be qualified in like manner, the usual
feminine derivative in `ī` is employed: thus, in TB., `bhartryàs` and
`bhartryāù`, `janayitryàs` and `janayitryāù`, qualifying `ā́pas` and
`ahorātré`; and such instances are not uncommon.

d\. The RV. shows the same tendency very curiously once in the accus.
pl. `mātṝ́́n`, instead of `mātṝ́́s`, in apposition with masculine nouns (RV.
x. 35.2).

e\. Other neuter forms in RV. are `sthātúr` gen. sing., `dhmātárī` loc.
sing.; and for the nom. sing., instead of -`tṛ`, a few more or less
doubtful cases, `sthātar`, `sthātúr`, `dhartári`.

Adjectives.

376\. a. There are no original adjectives of this declension: for the
quasi-adjectival character of the nouns composing it, see above (375 b).
The feminine stem is made by the suffix `ī`: thus, `dātrī́`, `dhātrī`.

b\. Roots ending in `ṛ` (like those in `i` and `u`: 345) add a `t` to
make a declinable stem, when occurring as final member of a compound:
thus, `armakṛ́t` (√`kṛ`), `vajrabhṛ́t` (√`bhṛ`), `balihṛ́t` (√`hṛ`). From
some `ṛ`-roots, also, are made stems in `ir` and `ur`: see below, 383 a,
b.

c\. Nouns in `ṛ` as finals of adjective compounds are inflected in the
same manner as when simple, in the masculine and feminine; in the
neuter, they would doubtless have the peculiar neuter endings in
nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers.

d\. But TS. has once `tvátpitāras`, nom. pl., *having thee for father*.

Declension V.  
Stems ending in Consonants.

377\. All stems ending in consonants may properly be classed together,
as forming a single comprehensive declension; since, though some of them
exhibit peculiarities of inflection, these have to do almost exclusively
with the stem itself, and not with the declensional endings.

387\. In this declension, masculines and feminines of the same final are
inflected alike; and neuters are peculiar (as usually in the other
declensions) only in the nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers.

a\. The majority of consonantal stems, however, are not inflected in the
feminine, but form a special feminine derivative stem in ई `ī` (never in
आ `ā`), by adding that ending to the weak form of the masculine.

b\. Exceptions are in general the stems of divisions A and B — namely,
the radical stems etc., and those in `as` and `is` and `us`. For special
cases, see below.

379\. Variations, as between stronger and weaker forms, are very general
among consonantal stems: either of two degrees (strong and weak), or of
three (strong, middle, and weakest): see above, 311.

a\. The peculiar neuter forms, according to the usual rule (311 b), are
made in the plural from the strong stem, in singular and dual from the
weak — or, when the gradation is threefold, in singular from the middle
stem, in dual from the weakest. 

b\. As in the case of stems ending in short vowels (`āsyā̀ni`, `vā́rīṇi`,
`mádhūni`, `dātṝ́ṇi`, etc.), a nasal sometimes appears in the special
neuter plural cases which is found nowhere else in inflection. Thus,
from the stems in `as`, `is`, `us`, the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. in -`āṅsi`,
-`īṅṣi`, -`ūṅṣi` are very common at every period. According to the
grammarians, the radical stems etc. (division A) are treated in the same
way; but examples of such neuters are of extreme rarity in the language;
no Vedic text offers one, and in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras have been
noted only -`hunti` (AB. vii. 2. 3), -`vṛnti` (PB. xvi. 2. 7 et al.),
-`bhāñji` (KB. xxvii. 7), -`bhṛ́nti` (ÇB. viii. 1. 31), and -`yuñji`
(LÇS. ii. 1. 8); while in the later language is found here and there a
case, like -`çrunti` (Ragh.), -`pūṅṣi` (Çiç.); it may be questioned
whether they are not later analogical formations.

380\. The endings are throughout those given above (310) as the
"normal".

a\. By the general law as to finals (150), the `s` of the nom. sing,
masc. and fem. is always lost; and irregularities of treatment of the
final of the stem in this case are not infrequent.

b\. The gen. and abl. sing. are never distinguished in form from one
another — nor are, by ending, the nom. and accus. pl.: but these
sometimes differ in stem-form, or in accent, or in both.

381\. Change in the place of the accent is limited to monosyllabic stems
and the participles in `ánt` (accented on the final). For details, see
below, under divisions A and E.

a\. But a few of the compounds of the root `añc` or `ac` show an
irregular shift of accent in the oldest language: see below, 410.

382\. a. For convenience and clearness of presentation, it will be well
to separate from the general mass of consonantal stems certain special
classes which show kindred peculiarities of inflection, and may be best
described together.

Thus:

B. Derivative stems in `as`, `is`, `us`;

C. Derivative stems in `an` (`an`, `man`, `van`);

D. Derivative stems in `in` (`in`, `min`, `vin`);

E. Derivative stems in `ant` (`ant`, `mant`, `vant`);

F. Perfect active participles in `vāṅs`;

G. Comparatives in `yāṅs` or `yas`.

b\. There remain, then, to constitute division A, especially radical
stems, or those identical in form with roots, together with a
comparatively small number of others which are inflected like these.

They will be taken up in the order thus indicated.

A. Root-stems, and those inflected like them.

383\. The stems of this division may be classified as follows:

I. a. Root-stems, having in them no demonstrable element added to a
root: thus, `ṛ́c` *verse*, `gír` *song*, `pád` *foot*, `díç`,
*direction*, `máh` (V.) *great*.

b\. Such stems, however, are not always precisely identical in form with
the root: thus, `vā́c` from √`vac`, `sráj` from √`sṛj`, `mū́ṣ` from
√`muṣ`, `vríç` from √`vraçc` (?), `úṣ` from √`vas` *shine*; — from roots
in final `ṛ` come stems in `ir` and `ur`: thus, `gír`, `ā-çír`, `stír`;
`júr`, `túr`, `dhúr`, `púr`, `múr`, `stúr`, `sphúr`; and `psúr` from
√`psar`.

c\. With these may be ranked the stems with reduplicated root, as
`cikít`, `yavīyúdh`, `vánīvan`, `sasyád`.

d\. Words of this division in uncompounded use are tolerably frequent in
the older language: thus, in RV. are found more than a hundred of them;
in AV., about sixty; but in the classical Sanskrit the power of using
any root at will in this way is lost, and the examples are comparatively
few. In all periods, however, the adjective use as final of a compound
is very common (see below, 401).

e\. As to the infinitive use of various cases of the root-noun, see 971.

II\. f. Stems made by the addition of `t` to a final short vowel of a
root.

g\. No proper root-stem ends in a short vowel, although there are (354)
examples of transfer of such to short-vowel-declensions; but `i` or `u`
or `ṛ` adds a `t` to make a declinable form: thus, -`jít`, -`çrút`,
-`kṛ́t`. Roots in `ṛ`, however, as has just been seen (b), also make
stems in `ir` or `ur`.

h\. As regards the frequency and use of these words, the same is true as
was stated above respecting root-stems. The Veda offers examples of
nearly thirty such formations, a few of them (`mít`, `rít`, `stút`,
`hrút`, `vṛ́t`, and `dyút` if this is taken from `dyu`) in independent
use. Of roots in `ṛ`, `t` is added by `kṛ`, `dhṛ`, `dhvṛ`, `bhṛ`, `vṛ`,
`sṛ`, `spṛ`, `hṛ`, and `hvṛ`. The roots `gā` (or `gam`) and `han` also
make -`gát` and -`hát` by addition of the `t` to an abbreviated form in
`a` (thus, `adhvagát`, `dyugát`, `dvigat`, `navagát`, and `saṁhát`).

III\. i. Monosyllabic (also a few apparently reduplicated) stems not
certainly connectible with any verbal root in the language, but having
the aspect of root-stems, as containing no traceable suffix: thus,
`tvác` *skin*, `páth` *road*, `hṛ́d` *heart*, `áp` and `vā́r` *water*,
`dvā́r` *door*, `ā́s` *mouth*, `kakúbh` and `kakúd`, *summit*.

j\. Thirty or forty such words are found in the older language, and some
of them continue in later use, while others have been transferred to
other modes of declension or have become extinct.

k\. Stems more or less clearly derivative, but made with suffixes of
rare or even isolated occurrence. Thus:

1\. derivatives (V.) from prepositions with the suffix vat: `arvāvát`,
`āvát`, `udvát`, `nivát`, `parāvát`, `pravát`, `saṁvát`; — 2.
derivatives (V.) in `tāt` (perhaps abbreviated from `tāti`), in a few
isolated forms: thus, `uparátāt`, `devátāt`, `vṛkátāt`, `satyátāt`,
`sarvátāt`; — 3. other derivatives in `t` preceded by various vowels:
thus, `daçát`, `vehát`, `vahát`, `sravát`, `saçcát`, `vāghát`; `nápāt`;
`taḍít`, `divít`, `yoṣít`, `rohít`, `sarít`, `harít`; `marút`; `yákṛt`,
`çákṛt`; and the numerals for 30, 40, 50, `triṅçát` etc. (475); — 4.
stems in `ad`: thus, `dṛṣád`, `dhṛṣád`, `bhasád`, `vanád`, `çarád`,
`samád`; — 5. stems in `j` preceded by various vowels: thus, `tṛṣṇáj`,
`dhṛṣáj`, `sanáj`, `bhiṣáj`; `uçíj`, `vaṇíj`, `bhuríj`, `niṇíj` (?);
`ásṛj`; — 6. a few stems ending in a sibilant apparently formative:
thus, `jñā́s`, -`dās`, `bhā́s`, `mā́s`, `bhī́ṣ`; — 7. a remnant of
unclassifiable cases, such as `viṣṭáp`, `vípāç`, `kápṛth`, `çurúdh`,
`iṣídh`, `pṛkṣúdh`, `raghát` (?), `sarágh`, `visrúh`, `uṣṇíh`, `kaváṣ`.

384\. Gender. The root-stems are regularly feminine as *nomen actionis*,
and masculine as *nomen agentis* (which is probably only a substantive
use of their adjective value: below, 400). But the feminine noun,
without changing its gender, is often also used concretely: e.g., `druh`
(√`druh` *be inimical*) means *harming, enmity*, and also *harmer,
hater, enemy* — thus bordering on the masculine value. And some of the
feminines have a completely concrete meaning. Through the whole
division, the masculines are much less numerous than the feminines, and
the neuters rarest of all.

a\. The independent neuter stems are `hṛ́d` (also -`hārd`), `dám`, `vā́r`,
`svàr`, `mā́s` *flesh*, `ā́s` *mouth*, `bhā́s`, `dós` (with which may be
mentioned the indeclinables `çā́m` and `yós`); also the apparent
derivatives `yákṛt`, `çákṛt`, `kápṛth`, `ásṛj`.

385\. Strong and weak stem-forms. The distinction of these two classes
of forms is usually made either by the presence or absence of a nasal,
or by a difference in the quantity of the stem-vowel, as long or short;
less often, by other methods.

386\. A nasal appears in the strong cases of the following words:

1\. Compounds having as final member the root `ac` or `añc`: see below.
407 ff.; and RV. has once `uruvyáñcam` from root `vyac`; — 2. The stem
`yuj`, sometimes, in the older language: thus, nom. sing. `yúñ` (for
`yúñk`), accus. `yúñjam`, du. `yúñjā` (but also `yújam` and `yújā`); —
3. The stem -`dṛç`, as final of a compound in the older language; but
only in the nom. sing, masc., and not always: thus, `anyādṛ́n̄`, `īdṛ́n`̄,
`kīdṛ́n̄`, `tādṛ́n̄`, `etādṛn`, `sadṛ́n`̄ and `pratisadṛ́n̄`: but also `īdṛ́k`,
`tādṛ́k`, `svardṛ́k`, etc.; — 4. For `path` and `puṁs`, which substitute
more extended stems, and for `dant`, see below, 394–6.

387\. The vowel `a` is lengthened in strong cases as follows:

1\. Of the roots `vac`, `sac`, `sap`, `nabh`, `ças`, in a few instances
(V.), at the end of compounds; — 2. Of the roots `vah` and `sah`, but
irregularly; see below, 403–5; — 3. Of `ap` *water* (see 393); also in
its compound `rītyàp`; — 4. Of `pad`, *foot*: in the compounds of this
word, in the later language, the same lengthening is made in the middle
cases also; and in RV. and AV. the nom. sing. neut. is both -`pat` and
-`pāt`, while RV. has once -`pāde`, and -`pādhbis` and -`pātsu` occur in
the Brāhmaṇas; — 5. Of `nas` *nose* (? `nā́sā` nom. du. fem. RV., once);
— 6. Sporadic cases (V.) are: `yāj` (?), voc. sing.; `pāthás` and
-`rāpas`, accus. pl.; `vánīvānas`, nom. pl. The strengthened forms
`bhāj` and `rāj` are constant, through all classes of cases.

388\. Other modes of differentiation, by elision of a or contraction of
the syllable containing it, appear in a few stems:

1\. In -`han`: see below, 402; — 2. In `kṣam` (V.), along with
prolongation of `a`: thus, `kṣā́mā` du., `kṣā́mās` pl.; `kṣamā́` instr.
sing., `kṣámi` loc. sing., `kṣmás` abl. sing.; — 3. In `dvā́r`,
contracted (V.) to `dur` in weak cases (but with some confusion of the
two classes); — 4. In `svàr`, which becomes, in RV., `sūr` in weak
cases; later it is indeclinable.

389\. The endings are as stated above (380).

a\. Respecting their combination with the final of the stem, as well as
the treatment of the latter when it occurs at the end of the word, the
rules of euphonic combination (chap. III.) are to be consulted; they
require much more constant and various application here than anywhere
else in declension.

b\. Attention may be called to a few exceptional cases of combination
(V.): `mādbhís` and `mādbhyás` from `mā́s` *month*; the wholly anomalous
`paḍbhís` (RV. and VS.: AV. has always `padbhís`) from `pád`; and
`saráṭ` and `saráḍbhyas` corresponding to a nom. pl. `sarághas` (instead
of `saráhas`: 222). `Dán` is apparently for `dám`, by 143 a.

c\. According to the grammarians, neuter stems, unless they end in a
nasal or a semivowel, take in nom.-acc.-voc. pl. a strengthening nasal
before the final consonant. But no such cases from neuter noun-stems
appear ever to have been met with in use; and as regards adjective stems
ending in a root, see above, 379 b. 

390\. Monosyllabic stems have the regular accent of such, throwing the
tone forward upon the endings in the weak cases.

a\. But the accusative plural has its normal accentuation as a weak
case, upon the ending, in only a minority (hardly more than a third) of
the stems: namely in `datás`, `pathás`, `padás`, `nidás`, `apás`,
`uṣás`, `jñāsás`, `puṁsás`, `māsás`, `mahás`; and sometimes in `vācás`,
`srucás`, `hrutás`, `sridhás`, `kṣapás`, `vipás`, `durás`, `iṣás`,
`dviṣás`, `druhás` (beside `vā́cas` etc.).

b\. Exceptional instances, in which a weak case has the tone on the
stem, occur as follows: `sádā`, `nádbhyas`, `tánā` (also `tanā́`) and
`táne`, `bā́dhe` (infln.), `ráṇe` and `ráṅsu`, `váṅsu`, `sváni`, `vípas`,
`kṣámi`, `sū́rā` and `sū́ras` (but `sūré`), `áṅhas`, and `vánas` and
`bṛ́has` (in `vánaspáti`, `bṛ́haspáti`). On the other hand, a strong case
is accented on the ending in `mahás`, nom. pl., and `kāsám` (AV.:
perhaps a false reading). And `preṣā́`, instr. sing., is accented as if
`préṣ` were a simple stem, instead of `pra`-`íṣ`. `Vimṛdháḥ` is of
doubtful character. For the sometimes anomalous accentuation of stems in
`ac` or `añc`, see 410.

391\. Examples of inflection. As an example of normal monosyllabic
inflection, we may take the stem वाच् `vā́c` f. *voice* (from √वच् `vac`,
with constant prolongation); of inflection with strong and weak stem,
पद् `pád` m. *foot*; of polysyllabic inflection, मरुत् `marút`, m.
*wind* or *wind-god*; of a monosyllabic root-stem in composition,
त्रिवृत् `trivṛ́t`, *three-fold*, in the neuter. Thus:

Singular:

N. V.

वाक्  
`vā́k`

पात्  
`pā́t`

मरुत्  
`marút`

त्रिवृत्  
`trivṛ́t`

A.

वाचम्  
`vā́cam`

पादम्  
`pā́dam`

मरुतम्  
`marútam`

त्रिवृत्  
`trivṛ́t`

I.

वाचा  
`vācā́`

पदा  
`padā́`

मरुता  
`marútā`

त्रिवृता  
`trivṛ́tā`

D.

वाचे  
`vācé`

पदे  
`padé`

मरुते  
`marúte`

त्रिवृते  
`trivṛ́te`

Ab. G.

वाचस्  
`vācás`

पदस्  
`padás`

मरुतस्  
`marútas`

त्रिवृतस्  
`trivṛ́tas`

L.

वाचि  
`vācí`

पदि  
`padí`

मरुति  
`marúti`

त्रिवृति  
`trivṛ́ti` 

Dual:

N. A. V.

वाचौ  
`vā́cāu`

पादौ  
`pā́dāu`

मरुतौ  
`marútāu`

त्रिवृती  
`trivṛ́tī`

I. D. Ab.

वाग्भ्याम्  
`vāgbhyā́m`

पद्भ्याम्  
`padbhyā́m`

मरुद्भ्याम्  
`marudbhyām`

त्रिवृद्भ्याम्  
`trivṛ́dbhyām`

G. L.

वाचोस्  
`vācós`

पदोस्  
`padós`

मरुतोस्  
`marútos`

त्रिवृतोस्  
`trivṛ́tos`

Plural:

N. V.

वाचस्  
`vā́cas`

पादस्  
`pā́das`

मरुतस्  
`marútas`

त्रिवृन्ति  
`trivṛ́nti`

A.

वाचस्  
`vācás`, `vā́cas`

पदस्  
`pádas`

मरुतस्  
`marútas`

त्रिवृन्ति  
`trivṛ́nti`

I.

वाग्भिस्  
`vāgbhís`

पद्भिस्  
`padbhís`

मरुद्भिस्  
`marúdbhis`

त्रिवृद्भिस्  
`trivṛ́dbhis`

D. Ab.

वाग्भ्यस्  
`vāgbhyás`

पद्भ्यस्  
`padbhyás`

मरुद्भ्यस्  
`marúdbhyas`

त्रिवृद्भ्यस्  
`trivṛ́dbhyas`

G.

वाचाम्  
`vācā́m`

पदाम्  
`padā́m`

मरुताम्  
`marútām`

त्रिवृताम्  
`trivṛ́tām`

L.

वाक्षु  
`vākṣú`

पत्सु  
`patsú`

मरुत्सु  
`marútsu`

त्रवृत्सु  
`trivṛ́tsu`

By way of illustration of the leading methods of treatment of a
stem-final, at the end of the word and in combination with case-endings,
characteristic case-forms of a few more stems are here added. Thus:

a\. Stems in `j`: `yuj`-class (219 a, 142), `bhiṣáj` *physician*:
`bhiṣák`, `bhiṣájam`, `bhiṣágbhis`, `bhiṣákṣu`; — `mṛj`-class (219 b,
142), `samrā́j` *universal ruler*: `samrā́ṭ`, `samrā́jam`, `samrā́ḍbhis`,
`samrā́ṭsu`.

b\. Stems in `dh`: -`vṛ́dh` *increasing*: -`vṛ́t`, -`vṛ́dham`, -`vṛ́dbhis`,
-`vṛ́tsu`; -`búdh` (155) *waking*: -`bhút`, -`búdham`, -`bhúdbhis`,
-`bhútsu`.

c\. Stems ending in `bh`: -`stúbh` *prasing*: -`stúp`, -`stúbham`,
-`stúbbhis`, -`stúpsu`.

d\. Stems in `ç`: `díç` (218 a, 145) *direction*: `dík`, `díçam`,
`digbhís`, `dikṣú`; — `víç` (218, 145) *the people*: `víṭ`, `víçam`,
`viḍbhís`, `viṭsú` (V. `vikṣú`: 218 a).

e\. Stems in `ṣ` (226 b, 145): `dvíṣ` *enemy*: `dvíṭ`, `dvíṣam`,
`dviḍbhís`, `dviṭsú`.

f\. Stems in `h`: `duh`-class (232-3 a, 155 b, 147), `dúh` *milki*
*yielding*: -`dhúk`, -`dúham`, -`dhúgbhis`, -`dhúkṣu`; — `ruh`-class
(223 b, 147), -`lih` *licking*: -`liṭ`, -`liham`, -`liḍbhis`, -`liṭsu`.

g\. Stems in `m` (143 a, 212 a: only `praçā́n`, nom. sing., quotable):
-`çām` *quieting*: -`çā́n`, -`çā́mam`, -`çā́nbhis`, -`çā́nsu`.

392\. The root-stems in `ir` and `ur` (383 b) lengthen their vowel when
the final `r` is followed by another consonant (245 b), and also in the
nom. sing. (where the case-ending `s` is lost).

a\. Thus, from `gír` f. *song* come `gī́r` (`gī́ḥ`), `gíram`, `girā́`,
etc.; `gírāu`, `gīrbhyā́m`, `girós`; `gíras`, `gīrbhís`, `gīrbhyás`,
`girā́m`, `gīrṣú` (165); and, in like manner, from `púr` f. *stronghold*
come `pū́r` (`pū́ḥ`), `púram`, `purā́`, etc.; `púrāu`, `pūrbhyā́m`, `purós`;
`púras`, `pūrbhís`, `pūrbhyás`, `purā́m`, `pūrṣú`.

b\. There are no roots in `is` (except the excessively rare `pis`) or in
`us`; but from the root `çās` with its `ā` weakened to `i` (250) comes
the noun `āçís` f. *blessing*, which is inflected like `gír`: thus,
`āçī́s` (`āçī́ḥ`), `āçíṣam`, `āçíṣā`, etc.; `āçíṣāu`, `āçī́rbhyām`,
`āçíṣos`; `āçíṣas`, `āçī́rbhis`, `āçī́rbhyas`, `āçíṣām`, `āçī́ḥṣu`. And
`sajū́s` *together* is apparently a stereotyped nominative of like
formation from the root `juṣ`. The form `aṣṭā́prūṭ` (TS.), from the
root-stem `pruṣ`, is isolated and anomalous.

c\. These stems in `ir`, `ur`, is show a like prolongation of vowel also
in composition and derivation: thus, `gīrvāṇa`, `pūrbhíd`, `dhūrgata`,
`dhūstva`, `āçīrdā́`, `āçī́rvant`, etc. (but also `gírvan`, `gírvaṇas`).

d\. The native grammar sets up a class of quasi-radical stems like
`jigamis` *desiring to go*, made from the desiderative conjugation-stem
(1027), and prescribes for it a declension like that of `āçís`: thus,
`jigamīs`, `jigamiṣā`, `jigamīrbhis`, `jigamīḥṣu`, etc. Such a class
appears to be a mere figment of the grammarians, since no example of it
has been found quotable from the literature, either earlier or later,
and since there is, in fact, no more a desiderative stem `jigamis` than
a causative stem `gamay`.

393\. The stem `áp` f. *water* is inflected only in the plural, and with
dissimilation of its final before `bh` to `d` (151 e): thus, `ā́pas`,
`apás`, `adbhís`, `adhbyás`, `apā́m`, `apsú`.

a\. But RV. has the sing. instr. `apā́` and gen. `apás`. In the earlier
language (especially AV.), and even in the epics, the nom. and accus.
pl. forms are occasionally confused in use, `ā́pas` being employed as
accus., and `apás` as nominative.

b\. Besides the stem `ap`, case-forms of this word are sometimes used in
composition and derivation: thus, for example, `abjā́`, `āpodevata`,
`āpomáya`, `apsumant`.

394\. The stem `púṁs` m. *man* is very irregular, substituting `púmāṅs`
in the strong cases, and losing its `s` (necessarily) before initial
`bh` of a case-ending, and likewise (by analogy with this, or by an
abbreviation akin with that noticed at 231) in the loc. plural. The
vocative is (in accordance with that of the somewhat similarly
inflected perfect participles: see 462 a) `púman` in the later
language, but `púmas` in the earlier. Thus: `púmān`, `púmāṅsam`,
`puṁsā́`, `puṁsé`, `puṁsás`, `puṁsí`, `púman`; `púmāṅsāu`, `pumbhyā́m`,
`puṁsós`; `púmāṅsas`, `puṁsás`, `pumbhís`, `pumbhyás`, `puṁsā́m`,
`puṁsú`.

a\. The accentuation of the weak forms, it will be noticed, is that of a
true monosyllabic stem. The forms with `bh`-endings nowhere occur in the
older language, nor do they appear to have been cited from the later.
Instances of the confusion of strong and weak forms are occasionally met
with. As to the retention of `s` unlingualized in the weakest cases
(whence necessarily follows that in the loc. pl.), see 183 a.

b\. This stem appears under a considerable variety of forms in
composition and derivation: thus, as `puṁs` in `puṁçcalī́`, `puṁstva`,
`púṁsvant`, -`puṁska`, etc; as `pum` in `púṁvatsa`, `púṁrūpa`, `puṁvat`,
`pumartha`, etc.; as `puṁsa` in `puṁsavant`; — at the end of a compound,
either with its full inflection, as in `strīpúṁs` etc.; or as `puṁsa`,
in `strīpuṁsa`, `mahāpuṁsa`; or as `puma` in `strīpuma` (TS. TA.).

395\. The stem `path` m. *road* is defective in declension, forming only
the weakest cases, while the strong are made from `pánthā` or `pánthan`,
and the middle from `pathí`: see under `an`-stems, below, 433.

396\. The stem `dánt` m. *tooth* is perhaps of participial origin, and
has, like a participle, the forms `dánt` and `dát`, strong and weak:
thus (V.), `dán`, `dántam`, `datā́`, etc.; `datás` acc. pl. etc. But in
the middle cases it has the monosyllabic and not the participial accent:
thus, `dadbhís`, `dadbhyás`. In nom. pl. occurs also -`datas` instead of
-`dantas`. By the grammarians, the strong cases of this word are
required to be made from `dánta`.

397\. A number of other words of this division are defective, making
part of their inflection from stems of a different form.

a\. Thus, `hṛ́d` n. *heart*, `mā́ṅs` or `mā́s` n. *meat*, `mā́s` m. *month*,
`nás` f. *nose*, `niç` f. *night* (not found in the older language),
`pṛ́t` f. *army*, are said by the grammarians to lack the nom. of all
numbers and the accus. sing. and du. (the neuters, of course, the acc.
pl. also), making them respectively from `hṛ́daya`, `māṅsá`, `mā́sa`,
`nā́sikā`, `niçā`, `pṛ́tanā`. But the usage in the older language is not
entirely in accordance with this requirement: thus, we find `mā́s`
*flesh* accus. sing.; `mā́s` *month* nom. sing.; and `nā́sā` *nostrils*
du. From `pṛ́t` occurs only the loc. pl. `pṛtsú` and (RV., once) the same
case with double ending, `pṛtsúṣu`.

398\. On the other hand, certain stems of this division, allowed by the
grammarians a full inflection, are used to fill up the deficiencies of
those of another form.

a\. Thus, `ásṛj` n. *blood*, `çákṛt` n. *ordure*, `yákṛt` n. *liver*,
`dós` n. (also m.) *fore-arm*, have beside them defective stems in `án`:
see below, 432. Of none of them, however, is anything but the nom.-acc.
sing. found in the older language, and other cases later are but very
scantily represented. 

b\. Of `ā́s` n. *mouth*, and `úd` *water*, only a case or two are found,
in the older language, beside `āsán` and `āsyà`, and `udán` and `údaka`
(432).

399\. Some of the alternative stems mentioned above are instances of
transition from the consonant to a vowel declension: thus, `dánta`,
`mā́sa`. A number of other similar cases occur, sporadically in the older
language, more commonly in the later. Such are `pā́da`, -`māda`, -`dāça`,
`bhrājá`, `viṣṭápa`, `dvāra` and `dura`, `pura`, `dhura`, -`dṛça`,
`nā́sā`, `nidā`, `kṣípā`, `kṣapā́`, `āçā́`, and perhaps a few others.

a\. A few irregular stems will find a more proper place under the head
of Adjectives.

Adjectives.

400\. Original adjectives having the root-form are comparatively rare
even in the oldest language.

a\. About a dozen are quotable from the RV., for the most part only in a
few scattering cases. But `mah`, *great*, is common in RV., though it
dies out rapidly later. It makes a derivative feminine stem, `mahī́`,
which continues in use, as meaning *earth* etc.

401\. But compound adjectives, having a root as final member, with the
value of a present participle, are abundant in every period of the
language.

a\. Possessive adjective compounds, also, of the same form, are not very
rare: examples are `yatásruc` *with offered bowl*; `sū́ryatvac`
*sun-skinned*; `cátuṣpad` *four-footed*; `suhā́rd` *kind-hearted,
friendly*; `rītyàp` (i.e. `rītí`-`ap`) *having streaming waters*;
`sahásradvār` *furnished with a thousand doors*.

b\. The inflection of such compounds is like that of the simple
root-stems, masculine and feminine being throughout the same, and the
neuter varying only in the nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers. But special
neuter forms are of rare occurrence, and masc.-fem. are sometimes used
instead.

c\. Only rarely is a derivative feminine stem in `ī` formed: in the
older language, only from the compounds with `ac` or `añc` (407 ff.),
those with `han` (402), those with `pad`, as `ékapadī`, `dvipádī`, and
with `dant`, as `vṛ́ṣadatī`, and `mahī`, `ámucī` (AV.), `úpasadī` (? ÇB).

Irregularities of inflection appear in the following:

402\. The root `han` *slay*, as final of a compound, is inflected
somewhat like a derivative noun in `an` (below, 420 ff.), becoming `hā`
in the nom. sing., and losing its `n` in the middle cases and its `a` in
the weakest cases (but only optionally in the loc. sing.). Further, when
the vowel is lost, `h` in contact with following `n` reverts to its
original `gh`. Thus: 

Singular.

Dual.

Plural.

N.

`vṛtrahā́`

`vṛtraháṇāu`

`vṛtraháṇas`

A.

`vṛtraháṇam`

`vṛtraghnás`

I.

`vṛtraghnā́`

`vṛtrahábhyām`

`vṛtrahábhis`

D.

`vṛtraghné`

`vṛtrahábhyas`

Ab.

`vṛtraghnás`

G.

`vṛtraghnós`

`vṛtraghnā́m`

L.

`vṛtraghní`, -`háṇi`

`vṛtrahásu`

V.

`vṛ́trahan`

`vṛ́trahaṇāu`

`vṛ́trahaṇas`

a\. As to the change of `n` to `ṇ`, see 193, 195.

b\. A feminine is made by adding `ī` to, as usual, the stem-form shown
in the weakest cases: thus, `vṛtraghnī́`.

c\. An accus. pl. -`hánas` (like the nom.) also occurs. `Vṛtrahábhis`
(RV., once) is the only middle case-form quotable from the older
language. Transitions to the `a`-declension begin already in the Veda:
thus, to -`há` (RV. AV.), -`ghná` (RV.), -`hana`.

403\. The root `vah` *carry* at the end of a compound is said by the
grammarians to be lengthened to `vāh` in both the strong and middle
cases, and contracted in the weakest cases to `ūh`. which with a
preceding `a`-vowel becomes `āu` (137 c): thus, from `havyaváh`
*sacrifice-bearing* (epithet of Agni), `havyavā́ṭ`, `havyavā́ham`,
`havyāúhā`, etc.; `havyavā́hāu`, `havyavā́ḍbhyām`, `havyāúhos`;
`havyavā́has`, `havyāúhas`, `havyavā́ḍbhis`, etc. And `çvetaváh` (not
quotable) is said to be further irregular in making the nom. sing. in
`vās` and the vocative in `vas` or `vās`.

a\. In the earlier language, only strong forms of compounds with `vah`
have been found to occur: namely, -`vā́ṭ`, -`vā́ham`, -`vā́hāu` or -`vā́hā`,
and -`vā́has`. But feminines in `ī`, from the weakest stem — as
`turyāuhī́`, `dityāuhī́`, `paṣṭhāuhī́` — are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. TS.
has the irregular nom. sing. `paṣṭhavā́t`.

404\. Of very irregular formation and inflection is one common compound
of `vah`, namely `anaḍváh` (`anas`+`vah`, *burden-bearing* or
*cart-drawing*, i.e. *ox*). Its stem-form in the strong cases is
`anaḍvā́h`, in the weakest `anaḍúh`, and in the middle `anaḍúd` (perhaps
by dissimilation from `anaḍúḍ`). Moreover, its nom. and voc. sing, are
made in `vān` and `van` (as if from a `vant`-stem). Thus:

Singular.

Dual.

Plural.

N.

`anaḍvā́n`

`anaḍvā́hāu`

`anaḍvā́has`

A.

`anaḍvā́ham`

`anaḍúhas`

I.

`anaḍúhā`

`anaḍúdbhyām`

`anaḍúdbhis`

D.

`anaḍúhe`

`anaḍúdbhyas`

Ab.

`anaḍúhas`

G.

`anaḍúhos`

`anaḍúhām`

L.

`anaḍúhi`

`anaḍútsu`

V.

`ánaḍvan`

`ánaḍvāhāu`

`ánaḍvāhas`

a. `Anaḍúdbhyas` (AV., once) is the only middle case-form quotable from
the older language. But compounds showing the middle stem — as
`anaḍucchata`, `anaḍudarha` — are met with in Brāhmaṇas etc.

b\. The corresponding feminine stem (of very infrequent occurrence) is
either `anaḍuhī́` (ÇB.) or `anaḍvāhī́` (K. MS.).

405\. The root `sah` *overcome* has in the Veda a double irregularity:
its `s` is changeable to `ṣ` even after an `a`-vowel — as also in its
single occurrence as an independent adjective (RV., tváṁ `ṣā́ṭ`) — while
it sometimes remains unchanged after an `i` or `u`-vowel; and its `a` is
either prolonged or remains unchanged, in both strong and weak cases.
The quotable forms are: -`ṣā́ṭ`, -`ṣā́ham` or -`sā́ham` or -`sáham`,
-`sáhā`, -`sā́he` or -`sáhe`, -`ṣā́has` or -`ṣáhas` or -`sáhas`; -`sáhā`
(du.); -`ṣā́has` or -`sáhas`.

406\. The compound `avayā́j` (√`yaj` *make offering*) *a certain priest*
or (BR.) *a certain sacrifice* is said to form the nom. and voc. sing
`avayā́s`, and to make its middle cases from `avayás`.

a\. Its only quotable form is `avayā́s` f. (RV. and AV., each once). If
the stem is a derivative from `ava`+√`yaj` *conciliate*, `avayā́s` is
probably from `ava` + √`yā`, which has the same meaning. But `sadhamā́s`
(RV., once) and `purodā́s` (RV., twice) show a similar apparent
substitution in nom. sing. of the case-ending `s` after long `ā` for a
final root-consonant (`d` and `ç` respectively). Compare also the
alleged `çvetavās` (above, 403).

407\. Compounds with `añc` or `ac`. The root `ac` or `añc` makes, in
combination with prepositions and other words, a considerable class of
familiarly used adjectives, of quite irregular formation and inflection,
in some of which it almost loses its character of root, and becomes an
ending of derivation.

a\. A part of these adjectives have only two stem-forms: a strong in
`añc` (yielding `an`̄, from `an̄ks`, in nom. sing. masc.), and a weak in
`ac`; others distinguish from the middle in `ac` a weakest stem in `c`,
before which the `a` is contracted with a preceding `i` or `u` into `ī`
or `ū`.

b\. The feminine is made by adding `ī` to the stem-form used in the
weakest cases, and is accented like them.

408\. As examples of inflection we may take `prā́ñc` *forward, east*,
`pratyáñc` *opposite, west*, `víṣvañc` *going apart*.

Singular:

N. V.

`prā́n̄` `prā́k`

`pratyán̄` `pratyák`

`víṣvan̄` `víṣvak`

A.

`prā́ñcam` `prā́k`

`pratyáñcam` `pratyák`

`víṣvañcam` `víṣvak`

I.

`prā́cā`

`pratīcā́`

`víṣūcā`

D.

`prā́ce`

`pratīcé`

`víṣūce`

Ab. G.

`prā́cas`

`pratīcás`

`víṣūcas`

L.

`prā́ci`

`pratīcí`

`víṣūci`

Dual:

N. A. V.

`prā́ñcāu` `prā́cī`

`pratyáñcāu` `pratīcī́`

`víṣvañcāu` `víṣūcī`

I. D. Ab.

`prā́gbhyām`

`pratyágbhyām`

`víṣvagbhyām`

G. L.

`prā́cos`

`pratīcós`

`víṣūcos` 

Plural

N. V.

prā́ñcas prā́ñci

pratyáñcas pratyáñci

víṣvañcas víṣvañci

A.

prā́cas prā́ñci

pratīcás pratyáñci

víṣūcas víṣvañci

I.

prā́gbhis

pratyágbhis

víṣvagbhis

D. Ab.

prā́gbhyas

pratyágbhyas

víṣvagbhyas

G.

prā́cām

pratīcā́m

víṣūcām

L.

prā́kṣu

pratyákṣu

víṣvakṣu

a\. The feminine stems are prā́cī, practīcī́, víṣūcī, respectively.

b\. No example of the middle forms excepting the nom. etc. sing. neut.
(and this generally used as adverb) is found either in RV. or AV. In the
same texts is lacking the nom. etc. pl. neut. in ñci; but of this a
number of examples occur in the Brāhmaṇas: thus, prā́ñci, pratyáñci,
arvāñci, samyáñci, sadhryañci, anvañci.

409\. a. Like prā́ñc are inflected ápāñc, ávāñc, párāñc, arvā́ñc,
adharā́ñc, and others of rare occurrence.

b\. Like pratyáñc are inflected nyàñc (i.e. níañc), samyáñc (sam+añc,
with irregularly inserted i), and údañc (weakest stem údīc: ud+añc, with
i inserted in weakest cases only), with a few other rare stems.

c\. Like víṣvañc is inflected anváñc, also three or four others of which
only isolated forms occur.

d\. Still more irregular is tiryáñc, of which the weakest stem is tiráçc
(tirás+ac: the other stems are made from tir+añc or ac, with the
inserted i).

410\. The accentuation of these words is irregular, as regards both the
stems themselves and their inflected forms. Sometimes the one element
has the tone and sometimes the other, without any apparent reason for
the difference. If the compound is accented on the final syllable, the
accent is shifted in RV. to the ending in the weakest cases provided
their stem shows the contraction to ī or ū: thus, prā́cā, arvā́cā,
adharā́cas, but pratīcā́, anūcás, samīcī́. But AV. and later texts usually
keep the accent upon the stem: thus, pratī́cī, samī́cī, antū́cī (RV. has
pratī́cīm once). The change of accent to the endings, and even in
polysyllabic stems, is against all usual analogy.

B. Derivative stems in as, is, us.

411\. The stems of this division are prevailingly neuter; but there are
also a few masculines, and one or two feminines.

412\. The stems in अस् as are quite numerous, and mostly made with the
suffix अस् as (a small number also with तस् `tas` and नस् `nas`, and
some are obscure); the others are few, and almost all made with the
suffixes इस् `is` and उस् `us`.

413\. Their inflection is almost entirely regular. But masculine and
feminine stems in अस् `as` lengthen the vowel of the ending in nom.
sing.; and the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut. make the same prolongation (of अ
`a` or इ `i` or उ `u`) before the inserted nasal (`anusvāra`).

414\. Examples of declension. As examples we may take मनस् `mánas` n.
*mind*; अङ्गिरस् `án̄giras` m. *Angiras*; हविस् `havís` n. *oblation*.

Singular:

N.

मनस्  
`mánas`

अङ्गिरास्  
`án̄girās`

हविस्  
`havís`

A.

मनस्  
`mánas`

अङ्गिरसम्  
`án̄girasam`

हविस्  
`havís`

I.

मनसा  
`mánasā`

अङ्गिरसा  
`án̄girasā`

हविषा  
`havíṣā`

D.

मनसे  
`mánase`

अङ्गिरसे  
`án̄girase`

हविषे  
`havíṣe`

Ab. G.

मनसस्  
`mánasas`

अङ्गिरसस्  
`án̄girasas`

हविषस्  
`havíṣas`

L.

मनसि  
`mánasi`

अङ्गिरसि  
`án̄girasi`

हविषि  
`havíṣi`

V.

मनस्  
`mánas`

अङ्गिरस्  
`án̄giras`

हविस्  
`havís`

Dual:

N. A. V.

मनसी  
`mánasī`

अङ्गिरसौ  
`án̄girasāu`

हविषी  
`havíṣī`

I. D. Ab.

मनोभ्याम्  
`mánobhyām`

अङ्गिरोभ्याम्  
`án̄girobhyām`

हविर्भ्याम्  
`havírbhyām`

G. L.

मनसोस्  
`mánasos`

अङ्गिरसोस्  
`án̄girasos`

हविषोस्  
`havíṣos` 

Plural:

N. A. V.

मनांसि  
`mánāṅsi`

अङ्गिरसस्  
`án̄girasas`

हवींषि  
`havī́ṅṣi`

I.

मनोभिस्  
`mánobhis`

अङ्गिरोभिस्  
`án̄girobhis`

हविर्भिस्  
`havírbhis`

D. Ab.

मनोभ्यस्  
`mánobhyas`

अङ्गिरोभ्यस्  
`án̄girobhyas`

हविर्भ्यस्  
`havírbhyas`

G.

मनसाम्  
`mánasām`

अङ्गिरसाम्  
`án̄girasām`

हविषाम्  
`havíṣām`

L.

मनःसु  
`mánaḥsu`

अङ्गिरःसु  
`án̄giraḥsu`

हवीःषु  
`havī́ḥṣu`

In like manner, चक्षुस् `cákṣus` n. *eye* forms चक्षुषा `cákṣuṣā`,
चक्षुर्म्याम् `cákṣurbhyām`, चक्षूंषि `cakṣūṅṣui`, and so on.

415\. Vedic etc. Irregularities, a. In the older language, the endings
-`asam` (acc. sing.) and -`asas` (generally nom.-acc. pl.; once or twice
gen.-abl. sing.) of stems in `as` are not infrequently contracted to
-`ām`, -`ās` — e. g. `āçā́m`, `vedhā́m`; `surā́dhās`, `ánāgās` — and out of
such forms grow, both earlier and later, substitute-stems in `ā`, as
`āçā́`, `jarā́`, `medhā́`. So from other forms grow stems in `a` and in
`asa`, which exchange more or less with those in as through the whole
history of the language.

b\. More scattering irregularities may be mentioned, as follows: 1. The
usual masc. and fem. du. ending in `ā` instead of `āu`; — 2. `uṣás` f.
*dawn* often prolongs its `a` in the other strong cases, as in the nom.
sing.: thus, `uṣā́sam`, `uṣā́sā`, `uṣā́sas` (and once in a weak case,
`uṣā́sas`); and in its instr. pl. occurs once (RV.) `uṣádbhis` instead of
`uṣóbhis`; — 3. from `toçás` is once (RV.) found a similar dual,
`toçā́sā`; — 4. from `svávas` and `svátavas` occur in RV. a nom. sing.
masc. in `vān`, as if from a stem in `vant`; and in the Brāhmaṇas is
found the dat.-abl. pl. of like formation `svátavadbhyas`.

c\. The stems in `is` and `us` also show transitions to stems in `i` and
`u`, and in `iṣa` and `uṣa`. From `janús` is once (RV.) made the nom.
sing, `janū́s`, after the manner of an `as`-stem (cf. also `janūrvā́sas`
ÇB.).

416\. The grammarians regard `uçánas` m. as regular stem-form of the
proper name noticed above (355 a), but give it the irregular nom.
`uçánā` and the voc. `uçanas` or `uçana` or `uçanan`. Forms from the
`as`-stem, even nom., are sometimes met with in the later literature.

a\. As to forms from `as`-stems to `áhan` or `áhar` and `ū́dhan` or
`ū́dhar`, see below, 430. 

Adjectives

417\. a. A few neuter nouns in `as` with accent on the radical syllable
have corresponding adjectives or appellatives in `ás`, with accent on
the ending: thus, for example, `ápas` *work*, `apás` *active*; `táras`
*quickness*, `tarás` *quick*; `yáças` *glory*, `yaçás` *glorious*. A few
other similar adjectives — as `tavás` *mighty*, `vedhás` *pious* — are
without corresponding nouns.

b\. Original adjectives in `is` do not occur (as to alleged desiderative
adjectives in `is`, see 392 d). But in us are found as many adjectives
as nouns (about ten of each class); and in several instances adjective
and noun stand side by side, without difference of accent such as
appears in the stems in `as`: e.g. `tápus` *heat* and *hot*; `vápus`
*wonder* and *wonderful*.

418\. Adjective compounds having nouns of this division as final member
are very common: thus, `sumánas` *favorably minded*; `dīrghā́yus`
*long-lived*; `çukráçocis` *having brilliant brightness*. The stem-form
is the same for all genders, and each gender is inflected in the usual
manner, the stems in as making their nom. sing. masc. and fem. in `ās`
(like `án̄giras`, above). Thus, from `sumánas`, the nom. and accus. are
as follows:

Singular.

Dual.

Plural.

m\.

f\.

n\.

m\.

f\.

n\.

m\.

f\.

n\.

N.

`sumánās`

\-`nas`

`sumánasāu`

\-`nasī`

`sumánasas`

\-`nāṅsi`

A.

`sumánasam`

\-`nas`

and the other cases (save the vocative) are alike in all genders.

a\. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, the neut. nom. sing. is in a considerable
number of instances made in `ās`, like the other genders.

b\. From `dīrghā́yus`, in like manner:

N.

`dīrghā́yus`

`dīrghā́yuṣāu`

\-`yuṣī`

`dīrghā́yuṣas`

\-`yūṅṣi`

A.

`dīrghā́yuṣam`

\-`yus`

I.

`dīrghā́yuṣā`

`dīrghā́yurbhyām`

`dīrghā́yurbhis`

etc.

etc.

etc.

419\. The stem `anehás` *unrivalled* (defined as meaning *time* in the
later language) forms the nom. sing. masc. and fem, `anehā́`.

C. Derivative stems in `an`.

420\. The stems of this division are those made by the three suffixes
अन् `an`, मन् `man`, and वन् `van`, together with a few of more
questionable etymology which are inflected like them. They are almost
exclusively masculine and neuter.

421\. The stem has a triple form. In the strong cases of the masculine,
the vowel of the ending is prolonged to आ `ā`; in the weakest cases it
is in general struck out altogether; in the middle cases, or before a
case-ending beginning with a consonant, the final न् `n` is dropped. The
न् `n` is also lost in the nom. sing. of both genders (leaving आ `ā` as
final in the masculine, अ `a` in the neuter).

a\. The peculiar cases of the neuter follow the usual analogy (311 b):
the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. have the lengthening to आ `ā`, as strong cases;
the nom.-acc.-voc. du., as weakest cases, have the loss of अ `a` — but
this only optionally, not necessarily.

b\. In the loc. sing., also, the `a` may be either rejected or retained
(compare the corresponding usage with `ṛ`-stems: 373). And after the `m`
or `v` of `man` or `van`, when these are preceded by another consonant,
the `a` is always retained, to avoid a too great accumulation of
consonants.

422\. The vocative sing. is in masculines the pure stem; in neuters,
either this or like the nominative. The rest of the inflection requires
no description.

423\. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked that when, in the
weakest cases, an acute `á` of the suffix is lost, the tone is thrown
forward upon the ending.

424\. Examples of declension. As such may be taken राजन् `rā́jan` m.
*king*; आत्मन् `ātmán` m. *soul, self*; नामन् `nā́man` n. *name*. Thus:

Singular

N.

राजा  
`rā́jā`

आत्मा  
`ātmā́`

नाम  
`nā́ma`

A.

राजानम्  
`rā́jānam`

आत्मानम्  
`ātmā́nam`

नाम  
`nā́ma`

I.

राज्ञा  
`rā́jñā`

आत्मना  
`ātmánā`

नाम्ना  
`nā́mnā`

D.

राज्ञे  
`rā́jñe`

आत्मने  
`ātmáne`

नाम्ने  
`nā́mne` 

Ab. G.

राज्ञस्  
`rā́jñas`

आत्मनस्  
`ātmánas`

नाम्नस्  
`nā́mnas`

L.

राज्ञि, राजनि  
`rā́jñi`, `rā́jani`

आत्मनि  
`ātmáni`

नाम्नि, नामनि  
`nā́mni`, `nā́mani`

V.

राजन्  
`rā́jan`

आत्मन्  
`ā́tman`

नामन्, नाम  
`nā́man`, `nā́ma`

Dual:

N. A. V.

राजानौ  
`rā́jānāu`

आत्मानौ  
`ātmā́nāu`

नाम्नी, नामनी  
`nā́mnī`, `nā́manī`

I. D. Ab.

राजभ्याम्  
`rā́jabhyām`

आत्मभ्याम्  
`ātmábhyām`

नामभ्याम्  
`nā́mabhyām`

G. L.

राज्ञोस्  
`rā́jños`

आत्मनोस्  
`ātmános`

नाम्नोस्  
`nā́mnos`

Plural:

N.

राजानस्  
`rā́jānas`

आत्मानस्  
`ātmā́nas`

नामानि  
`nā́māni`

A.

राज्ञस्  
`rā́jñas`

आत्मनस्  
`ātmánas`

नामानि  
`nā́māni`

I.

राजभिस्  
`rā́jabhis`

आत्मभिस्  
`ātmábhis`

नामभिस्  
`nā́mabhis`

D. Ab.

राजभ्यस्  
`rā́jabhyas`

आत्मभ्यस्  
`ātmábhyas`

नामभ्यस्  
`nā́mabhyas`

G.

राज्ञाम्  
`rā́jñām`

आत्मनाम्  
`ātmánām`

नाम्नाम्  
`nā́mnām`

L.

राजसु  
`rā́jasu`

आत्मसु  
`ātmásu`

नामसु  
`nā́masu`

a\. The weakest cases of `mūrdhán` m. *head*, would be accented
`mūrdhnā́`, `mūrdhné`, `mūrdhnós`, `mūrdhnás` (acc. pl.), `mūrdhnā́m`,
etc.; and so in all similar cases (loc. sing., `mūrdhní` or `mūrdháni`).

425\. Vedic Irregularities. a. Here, as elsewhere, the ending of the
nom.-acc.-voc. du. masc. is usually `ā` instead of `āu`.

b\. The briefer form (with ejected `a`) of the loc. sing., and of the
neut. nom.-acc.-voc. du., is quite unusual in the older language. RV.
writes once `çatadā́vni`, but it is to be read `çatadā́vani`; and similar
cases occur in AV. (but also several times -`mni`). In the Brāhmaṇas,
too, such forms as `dhāmani` and `sāmanī` are very much more common than
such as `ahni` and `lomnī`. 

c\. But throughout both Veda and Brāhmaṇa, an abbreviated form of the
loc. sing., with the ending `i` omitted, or identical with the stem, is
of considerably more frequent occurrence than the regular form: thus,
`mūrdhán`, `kárman`, `ádhvan`, beside `mūrdháni` etc. The `n` has all
the usual combinations of a final `n`: e. g. `mūrdhann asya`,
`mūrdhant sa`, `mūrdnaṅs tvā`.

d\. In the nom.-acc. pl. neut., also, an abbreviated form is common,
ending in `ā` or (twice as often) `a`, instead of `āni`: thus, `bráhma`
and `bráhmā`, beside `bráhmāṇi`: compare the similar series of endings
from `a`-stems, 329 c.

e\. From a few stems in man is made an abbreviated instr. sing., with
loss of `m` as well as of `a`: thus, `mahinā́`, `prathinā́`, `variṇā́`,
`dānā́`, `preṇā́`, `bhūnā́`, for `mahimnā́` etc. And `drāghmā́` and `raçmā́`
(RV., each once) are perhaps for `drāghmáṇā`, `raçmánā`.

f\. Other of the weakest cases than the loc. sing. are sometimes found
with the `a` of the suffix retained: thus, for example, `bhū́manā`,
`dā́mane`, `yā́manas`, `ukṣáṇas` (accus. pl.), etc. In the infinitive
datives (970 d) — `trā́maṇe`, `vidmáne`, `dāváne`, etc. — the `a` always
remains. About as numerous are the instances in which the `a`, omitted
in the written form of the text, is, as the metre shows, to be restored
in reading.

g\. The voc. sing. in `vas`, which is the usual Vedic form from stems in
`vant` (below, 454 b), is found also from a few in `van`, perhaps by a
transfer to the `vant`-declension: thus, `ṛtāvas`, `evayāvas`,
`khidvas` (?), `prātaritvas`, `mātariçvas`, `vibhāvas`.

h\. For words of which the `a` is not made long in the strong cases, see
the next paragraph.

426\. A few stems do not make the regular lengthening of `a` in the
strong cases (except the nom. sing.). Thus:

a\. The names of divinities, `pūṣán`, `aryamán`: thus, `pūṣā́`,
`pūṣáṇam`, `pūṣṇā́`, etc.

b\. In the Veda, `ukṣán` *bull* (but also `ukṣā́ṇam`); `yóṣan` *maiden*;
`vṛ́ṣan` *virile, bull* (but `vṛ́ṣāṇam` and `vṛ́ṣāṇas` are also met with);
`tmán`, abbreviation of `ātmán`; and two or three other scattering
forms: `anarváṇam`, `jémanā`. And in a number of additional instances,
the Vedic metre seems to demand `a` where `ā` is written.

427\. The stems `çván` m. *dog* and `yúvan` *young* have in the weakest
cases the contracted form `çún` and `yū́n` (with retention of the
accent); in the strong and middle cases they are regular. Thus, `çvā́`,
`çvā́nam`, `çúnā`, `çúne`, etc., `çvábhyām`, `çvábhis`, etc.; `yúvā`,
`yúvānam`, `yū́nā`, `yúvabhis`, etc.

a\. In dual, RV. has once `yū́nā` for `yúvānā`.

428\. The stem `maghávan` *generous* (later, almost exclusively a name
of Indra) is contracted in the weakest cases to `maghón`: thus,
`maghávā`, `maghávānam`, `maghónā`, `maghóne`, etc. 

a\. The RV. has once the weak form `maghónas` in nom. pl.

b\. Parallel with this is found the stem `maghávant` (division E); and
from the latter alone in the older language are made the middle cases:
thus, `maghavadbhis`, `maghavatsu`, etc. (not `maghavabhis` etc.).

429\. a. Stems in `a`, `ma`, `va`, parallel with those in `an`, `man`,
`van`, and doubtless in many cases derived from those through
transitional forms, are frequent in both the earlier and the later
language, particularly as final members of compounds.

b\. A number of `an`-stems are more or less defective, making a part of
their forms from other stems. Thus:

430\. a. The stem `áhan` n. *day* is in the later language used only in
the strong and weakest cases, the middle (with the nom. sing., which
usually follows their analogy) coming from `áhar` or `áhas`: namely,
`áhar` nom.-acc. sing., `áhobhyām`, `áhobhis`, etc. (PB. has
`aharbhis`); but `áhnā` etc., `áhni` or `áhani` (or `áhan`), `áhnī` or
`áhanī`, `áhāni` (and, in V., `áhā`).

b\. In the oldest language, the middle cases `áhabis`, `áhabhyas`,
`áhasu` also occur.

c\. In composition, only `ahar` or `ahas` is used as preceding member;
as final member, `ahar`, `ahas`, `ahan`, or the derivatives `aha`,
`ahna`.

d\. The stem `ū́dhan` n. *udder* exchanges in like manner, in the old
language, with `ū́dhar` and `ū́dhas`, but has become later an `as`-stem
only (except in the fem `ūdhnī` of adjective compounds): thus, `ū́dhar`
or `ū́dhas`, `ū́dhnas`, `ū́dhan` or `ū́dhani`, `ū́dhabhis`, `ū́dhaḥsu`. As
derivative from it are made both `ūdhanyà` and `ūdhasya`.

431\. The neuter stems `akṣán` *eye*, `asthán` *bone*, `dadhán` *curds*,
`sakthán` *thigh*, form in the later language only the weakest cases,
`akṣṇā́`, `asthné`, `dadhnás`, `sakthní` or `saktháni`, and so on; the
rest of the inflection is made from stems in `i`, `ákṣi` etc.: see
above, 343 i.

a\. In the older language, other cases from the `an`-stems occur: thus,
`akṣā́ṇi`, `akṣábhis`, and `akṣasu`; `asthā́ni`, `asthábhis`, and
`asthábhyas`; `sakthā́ni`.

432\. The neuter stems `asán` *blood*, `yakán` *liver*, `çakán`
*ordure*, `āsán` *mouth*, `udán` *water*, `doṣán` *fore-arm*, `yūṣán`
*broth*, are required to make their nom.-acc.-voc. in all numbers from
the parallel stems `ásṛj`, `yákṛt`, `çákṛt`, `āsyà`, `údaka` (in older
language `udaká`), `dós`, `yūṣá`, which are fully inflected.

a\. Earlier occurs also the dual `doṣáṇī`.

433\. The stems `pánthan` m. *road* is reckoned in the later language as
making the complete set of strong cases, with the irregularity that the
nom.-voc. sing. adds a `s`. The corresponding middle cases are made from
`pathí`, and the weakest from `path`. Thus: 

from `pánthan` — `pánthās`, `pánthānam`; `pánthānāu`; `pánthānas`;

from `pathí` — `pathíbhyām`; `pathíbhis`, `pathíbhyas`, `pathíṣu`;

from `path` — `pathā́`, `pathé`, `pathás`, `pathí`; `pathós`; `pathás` or
`páthas` (accus.), `pathā́m`.

a\. In the oldest language (RV.), however, the strong stem is only
`pánthā`: thus, `pánthās`, nom. sing.; `pánthām`, acc. sing.; `pánthās`,
nom. pl.; and even in AV., `pánthānam` and `pánthānas` are rare compared
with the others. From `pathí` occur also the nom. pl. `patháyas` and
gen. pl. `pathīnā́m`. RV. has once `pāthás`, acc. pl., with long `ā`.

434\. The stems `mánthan` m. *stirring-stick*, and `ṛbhukṣán` m., an
epithet of Indra, are given by the grammarians the same inflection with
`pánthan`; but only a few cases have been found in use. In V. occur from
the former the acc. sing. `mánthām`, and gen. pl. `mathīnā́m` (like the
corresponding cases from `pánthan`); from the latter, the nom. sing.
`ṛbhukṣā́s` and voc. pl. `ṛbhukṣās`, like the corresponding Vedic forms
of `pánthan`; but also the acc. sing. `ṛbhukṣáṇam` and nom. pl.
`ṛbhukṣáṇas`, which are after quite another model.

Adjectives

435\. Original adjective stems in `an` are almost exclusively those made
with the suffix `van`, as `yájvan` *sacrificing*, `sútvan` *pressing the
soma*, `jítvan` *conquering*. The stem is masc and neut. only (but
sporadic cases of its use as fem. occur in RV.); the corresponding fem.
stem is made in `varī`: thus, `yájvarī`, `jítvarī`.

436\. Adjective compounds having a noun in `an` as final member are
inflected after the model of noun-stems; and the masculine forms are
sometimes used also as feminine; but usually a special feminine is made
by adding `ī` to the weakest form of the masculine stem: thus,
`sómarājñī`, `kīlā́lodhnī`, `ékamūrdhnī`, `durṇā́mnī`.

437\. But (as was pointed out above: 429 a) nouns in `an` occurring as
final members of compounds often substitute a stem in `a` for that in
`an`: thus, -`rāja`, -`janma`, -`adhva`, -`aha`; their feminine is in
`ā`. Occasional exchanges of stems in `van` and in `vant` also occur:
thus, `vivásvan` and `vivásvant`.

a\. The remaining divisions of the consonantal declension are made up of
adjective stems only.

D. Derivative stems (adjective) in in.

438\. The stems of this division are those formed with the suffixes इन्
`in`, मिन् `min`, विन् `vin`. They are masculine and neuter only; the
corresponding feminine is made by adding ई `ī`.

a\. The stems in `in` are very numerous, since almost any noun in `a` in
the language may form a possessive derivative adjective with this
suffix: thus, `bála` *strength*, `balín` m. n. `balínī` f. *possessing
strength, strong*. Stems in `vin` (1232), however, are very few, and
those in `min` (1231) still fewer.

439\. Their inflection is quite regular, except that they lose their
final न् `n` in the middle cases (before an initial consonant of the
ending), and also in the nom. sing., where the masculine lengthens the इ
`i` by way of compensation. The voc. sing. is in the masculine the bare
stem; in the neuter, either this or like the nominative.

a\. In all these respects, it will be noticed, the `in`-declension
agrees with the `an`-declension; but it differs from the latter in never
losing the vowel of the ending.

440\. Examples of inflection. As such may be taken बलिन् `balín`
*strong*. Thus:

Singular.

Dual.

Plural.

m\.

n\.

m\.

n\.

m\.

n\.

N.

बली  
`balī́`

बलि  
`balí`

बलिनौ  
`balínāu`

बलिनी  
`balínī`

बलिनस्  
`balínas`

बलीनि  
`balī́ni`

A.

बलिनम्  
`balínam`

बलि  
`balí`

I.

बलिना  
`balínā`

बलिभ्याभ्  
`balíbhyām`

बलिभिस्  
`balíbhis`

D.

बलिने  
`balíne`

बलिभ्यस्  
`balíbhyas`

Ab.

बलिनस्  
`balínas`

G.

बलिनोस्  
`balínos`

बलिनाम्  
`balínām`

L.

बलिनि  
`balíni`

बलिषु  
`balíṣu`

V.

बलिन  
`bálin`

बलिन, बलि  
`bálin`, `báli`

बलिनौ  
`bálināu`

बलिनी  
`bálinī`

बलिनस्  
`bálinas`

बलीनि  
`bálīni`



a\. The derived feminine stem in `inī` is inflected, of course, like any
other feminine in derivative `ī` (364).

441\. a. There are no irregularities in the inflection of `in`-stems, in
either the earlier language or the later — except the usual Vedic dual
ending in `ā` instead of `āu`.

b\. Stems in `in` exchange with stems in `i` throughout the whole
history of the language, those of the one class being developed out of
those of the other often through transitional forms. In a much smaller
number of cases, stems in `in` are expanded to stems in `ina`: e.g.
`çākiná` (RV.), `çuṣmiṇa` (B.), `barhiṇa`, `bhajina`.

E. Derivative stems (adjective) in `ant` (or `at`).

442\. These stems fall into two sub-divisions: 1. those made by the
suffix अन्त् `ant` (or अत् `at`), being, with a very few exceptions,
active participles, present and future; 2. those made by the possessive
suffixes मन्त् `mant` and वन्त् `vant` (or मत् `mat` and वत् `vat`).
They are masculine and neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made
by adding ई `ī`.

1\. Participles in `ant` or `at`.

443\. The stem has in general a double form, a stronger and a weaker,
ending respectively in अन्त् `ant` and अत् `at`. The former is taken in
the strong cases of the masculine, with, as usual, the nom.-acc.-voc.
pl. neuter; the latter is taken by all the remaining cases.

a\. But, in accordance with the rule for the formation of the feminine
stem (below, 449), the future participles, and the present participles
of verbs of the `tud`-class or accented `á`-class (752), and of verbs of
the `ad`-class or root-class ending in `ā`, are by the grammarians
allowed to make the nom.-acc.-voc. du. neut. from either the stronger or
the weaker stem; and the present participles from all other
present-stems ending in `a` are required to make the same from the
strong stem.

444\. Those verbs, however, which in the 3d pl. pres. active lose न् `n`
of the usual ending न्ति `nti` (550 b), lose it also in the present
participle, and have no distinction of strong and weak stem. 

a\. Such are the verbs forming their present-stem by reduplication
without adding `a`: namely, those of the reduplicating or `hu`-class
(655) and the intensives (1012): thus, from √`hu`, present-stem `juhu`,
participle-stem `júhvat`; intensive-stem `johu`, intensive
participle-stem `jóhvat`. Further, the participles of roots apparently
containing a contracted reduplication: namely, `cákṣat`, `dā́çat`,
`dā́sat`, `çā́sat`, `sáçcat`; the aorist participle `dhákṣat`, and
`vāghát` (?). `Vavṛdhánt` (RV., once), which has the `n` notwithstanding
its reduplication, comes, like the desiderative participles (1032), from
a stem in `a`: compare `vāvṛdhánta`, `vāvṛdhásva`.

b\. Even these verbs are allowed by the grammarians to make the
nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut. in `anti`.

445\. The inflection of these stems is quite regular. The nom. sing.
masc. comes to end in अन् `an` by the regular (150) loss of the two
final consonants from the etymological form अन्त्स् `ants`. The vocative
of each gender is like the nominative.

446\. Stems accented on the final syllable throw the accent forward upon
the case-ending in the weakest cases (not in the middle also).

a\. In the dual neut. (as in the feminine stem) from such participles,
the accent is `ántī` if the `n` is retained, `atī́` if it is lost.

447\. Examples of declension. As such may serve भवन्त् `bhávant`
*being*, अदन्त् `adánt` *eating*, जुह्वत् `júhvat` *sacrificing*. Thus:

Singular:

N.

भवन्  
`bhávan`

भवत्  
`bhávat`

अदन्  
`adán`

अदत्  
`adát`

जुह्वत्  
`júhvat`

जुह्वत्  
`júhvat`

A.

भवन्तम्  
`bhávantam`

भवत्  
`bhávat`

अदन्तम्  
`adántam`

अदत्  
`adát`

जुह्वतम्  
`júhvatam`

जुह्वत्  
`júhvat`

I.

भवता  
`bhávatā`

अदता  
`adatā́`

जुह्वता  
`júhvatā`

D.

भवते  
`bhávate`

अदते  
`adaté`

जुह्वते  
`júhvate`

Ab. G.

भवतस्  
`bhávatas`

अदतस्  
`adatás`

जुह्वतस्  
`júhvatas`

L.

भवति  
`bhávati`

अदति  
`adatí`

जुह्वति  
`júhvati` 

V.

भवन्  
`bhávan`

भवत्  
`bhávat`

अदन्  
`ádan`

अदत्  
`ádat`

जुह्वत्  
`júhvat`

Dual:

N. A. V.

भवन्तौ  
`bhávantāu`

भवन्ती  
`bhávantī`

अदन्तौ  
`adántāu`

अदती  
`adatī́`

जुह्वतौ  
`júhvatāu`

जुह्वती  
`júhvatī`

I. D. Ab.

भवद्भ्याम्  
`bhávadbhyām`

अदद्भ्याम्  
`adádbhyām`

जुह्वद्भ्याम्  
`júhvadbhyām`

G. L.

भवतोस्  
`bhávatos`

अदतोस्  
`adatós`

जुह्वतोस्  
`júhvatos`

Plural:

N. V.

भवन्तस्  
`bhávantas`

भवन्ति  
`bhávanti`

अदन्तस्  
`adántas`

अदन्ति  
`adánti`

जुह्वतस्  
`júhvatas`

जुह्वति  
`júhvati`

A.

भवतस्  
`bhávatas`

भवन्ति  
`bhávanti`

अदतस्  
`adatás`

अदन्ति  
`adánti`

जुह्वतस्  
`júhvatas`

जुह्वति  
`júhvati`

I.

भवद्भिस्  
`bhávadbhis`

अदद्भिस्  
`adádbhis`

जुह्वद्भिस्  
`júhvadbhis`

D. Ab.

भवद्भ्यस्  
`bhávadbhyas`

अदद्भ्यस्  
`adádbhyas`

जुह्वद्भ्यस्  
`júhvadbhyas`

G.

भवताम्  
`bhávatām`

अदताम्  
`adatā́m`

जुह्वताम्  
`júhvatām`

L.

भवत्सु  
`bhávatsu`

अदत्सु  
`adátsu`

जुह्वत्सु  
`júhvatsu`

a\. The future participle `bhaviṣyánt` may form in nom. etc. dual neuter
either `bhaviṣyántī` or `bhaviṣyatī́`; `tudánt`, either `tudántī` or
`tudatī́`; `yā́nt` (√`yā`), either `yā́ntī` or `yātī́`. And `júhvat`, in
nom. etc. plural neuter, may make also `júhvanti` (beside `júhvati`, as
given in the paradigm above).

b\. But these strong forms (as well as `bhávantī`, du., and its like
from present-stems in unaccented `a`) are quite contrary to general
analogy, and of somewhat doubtful character. No example of them is
quotable, either from the older or from the later language. The cases
concerned, indeed, would be everywhere of rare occurrence.

448\. The Vedic derivations from the model as above given are few. The
dual ending `āu` is only one sixth as common as `ā`. Anomalous accent is
seen in a case or two: `acodáte`, `rathirāyátām`, and `vāghádbhis` (if
this is a participle). The only instance in V. of nom. etc. pl. neut. is
`sā́nti`, with lengthened `ā` (compare the forms in ānti, below, 451 a,
454 c); one or two examples in `anti` are quotable from B. 

449\. The feminine participle-stem, as already stated, is made by adding
ई `ī` to either the strong or the weak stem-form of the masc.-neut. The
rules as to which of the two forms shall be taken are the same with
those given above respecting the nom. etc. dual neuter; namely:

a\. Participles from tense-stems ending in unaccented `a` add `ī` to the
strong stem-form, or make their feminines in antī.

b\. Such are the `bhū` or unaccented `a`-class and the `dīv` or
`ya`-class of present-stems (chap. IX.), and the desideratives and
causatives (chap. XIV.): thus, from √`bhū` (stem `bháva`), `bhávantī`;
from √`dīv` (stem `dī́vya`), `dī́vyantī`; from `búbhūṣa` and `bhāváya`
(desid. and caus. of √`bhū`), `búbhūṣantī` and `bhāváyantī`.

c\. Exceptions to this rule are now and then met with, even from the
earliest period. Thus, RV. has `járatī`, and AV. the desiderative
`síṣāsatī`; in B. occur `vadatī`, `çocatī`, `tṛpyatī`, and in S. further
`tiṣṭhatī`, and the causative `namayatī`; while in the epics and later
such cases (including desideratives and causatives) are more numerous
(about fifty are quotable), though still only sporadic.

d\. Participles from tense-stems in accented `á` may add the
feminine-sign either to the strong or to the weak stem-form, or may make
their feminines in `ántī` or in `atī́` (with accent as here noted).

e\. Such are the present-stems of the `tud` or accented `á`-class (751
ff.), the `s`-futures (932 ff.), and the denominatives (1053 ff.): thus,
from √`tud` (stem `tudá`), `tudántī` or `tudatī́`; from `bhaviṣyá` (fut.
of √`bhū`), `bhaviṣyántī` or `bhaviṣyatī́`; from `devayá` (denom. of
`devá`), `devayántī` or `devayatī́`.

f\. The forms in `ántī` from this class are the prevailing ones. No
future fem. participle in `ati`̄́ is quotable from the older language.
From pres.-stems in `á` are found there `ṛñjatī́` and `siñcstī́` (RV.),
`tudatī́` and `pinvatī` (AV.) From denominatives, `devayatī́` (RV.),
`durasyatī́` and `çatrūyatī́` (AV.). In BhP. occurs `dhakṣyatī`.

g\. Verbs of the `ad` or root-class (611 ff.) ending in `ā` are given by
the grammarians the same option as regard the feminine of the present
participle: thus, from √`yā`, `yā́ntī` or `yātī́`. The older language
affords no example of the former, so far as noted.

h\. From other tense-stems than those already specified — that is to
say, from the remaining classes of present-stems and from the intensives
— the feminine is formed in `atī́` (or, if the stem be otherwise accented
than on the final, in `atī`) only.

i\. Thus, `adatī́` from √`ad`; `júhvatī` from √`hu`; `yuñjatī́` from
√`yuj`; `sunvatī́` from √`su`; `kurvati`̄́ from √`kṛ`; `krīṇatī́` from
√`krī`; `dédiçatī` from `dédiç` (intens. of √`diç`). 

j\. Feminine stems of this class are occasionally (but the case is much
less frequent than its opposite: above, c) found with the nasal: thus,
`yántī` (AV., once), `undántī` (ÇB.; but probably from the secondary
`á`-stem), `gṛhṇantī` (S.), and, in the epics and later, such forms as
`bruvantī`, `rudantī`, `cinvantī`, `kurvantī`, `jānantī`, `muṣṇantī`.

450\. A few words are participial in form and inflection, though not in
meaning. Thus:

a\. `bṛhánt` (often written `vṛhánt`) *great*; it is inflected like a
participle (with `bṛhati`̄́ and `bṛhánti` in du. and pl. neut.).

b\. `mahánt` *great*; inflected like a participle, but with the
irregularity that the `a` of the ending is lengthened in the strong
forms: thus, `mahā́n`, `mahā́ntam`; `mahā́ntāu` (neut. `mahatī́`);
`mahā́ntas`, `mahā́nti`: instr. `mahatā́` etc.

c\. `pṛ́ṣant` *speckled*, and (in Veda only) `rúçant` *shining*.

d\. `jágat` *moveable, lively* (in the later language, as neuter noun,
*world*), a reduplicated formation from √`gam` *go*; its nom. etc. neut.
pl. is allowed by the grammarians to be only `jáganti`.

e\. `ṛhánt` *small* (only once, in RV., `ṛhaté`).

f\. All these form their feminine in `atī` only: thus, `bṛhatī́`,
`mahatī́`, `pṛ́ṣatī` and `rúçatī` (contrary to the rule for participles),
`jágatī`.

g\. For `dánt` *tooth*, which is perhaps of participial origin, see
above, 396.

451\. The pronominal adjectives `íyant` and `kíyant` are inflected like
adjectives in `mant` and `vant`, having (452) `íyān` and `kíyān` as nom.
masc. sing., `íyatī` and `kíyatī` as nom. etc. du. neut. and as feminine
stems, and `íyanti` and `kíyanti` as nom. etc. plur. neut.

a\. But the neut. pl. `íyanti` and the loc. sing. (?) `kíyāti` are found
in RV.

2\. Possessives in `mant` or `vant`.

452\. The adjectives formed by these two suffixes are inflected
precisely alike, and very nearly like the participles in अन्त् `ant`.
From the latter they differ only by lengthening अ `a` in the nom. sing.
masc.

a\. The voc. sing. is in `an`, like that of the participle (in the later
language, namely: for that of the oldest, see below, 454 b). The neut.
nom. etc. are in the dual only `atī` (or `átī`), and in the plural
`anti` (or `ánti`).

b\. The feminine is always made from the weak stem: thus, `matī`, `vatī`
(or `mátī`, `vátī`). One or two cases of `nī` instead of `ī` are met
with: thus, `antárvatnī` (B. and later), `patívatnī` (C.). 

c\. The accent, however, is never thrown forward (as in the participle)
upon the case-ending or the feminine ending.

453\. To illustrate the inflection of such stems, it will be sufficient
to give a part of the forms of पशुमन्त् `paçumánt` *possessing cattle*,
and भगवन्त् `bhágavant` *fortunate, blessed*. Thus:

Singular:

m\.

n\.

m\.

n\.

N.

पशुमान्  
`paçumā́n`

पशुमत्  
`paçumát`

भगवान्  
`bhágavān`

भगवत्  
`bhágavat`

A.

पशुमन्तम्  
`paçumántam`

पशुमत्  
`paçumát`

भगवन्तम्  
`bhágavantam`

भगवत्  
`bhágavat`

I.

पशुमता  
`paçumátā`

भगवता  
`bhágavatā`

etc.

etc.

V.

पशुमन्  
`páçuman`

पशुमत्  
`páçumat`

भगवन्  
`bhágavan`

भगवत्  
`bhágavat`

Dual:

N. A. V.

पशुमन्तौ  
`paçumántāu`

पशुमती  
`paçumátī`

भगवन्तौ  
`bhágavantāu`

भगवती  
`bhágavatī`

etc.

etc.

Plural:

N. V.

पशुमन्तस्  
`paçumántas`

पशुमन्ति  
`paçumánti`

भगवन्तस्  
`bhágavantas`

भगवन्ति  
`bhágavanti`

A.

पशुमतस्  
`paçumátas`

पशुमन्ति  
`paçumánti`

भगवतस्  
`bhágavatas`

भगवन्ति  
`bhágavanti`

I.

पशुमद्भिस्  
`paçumádbhis`

भगवद्भिस्  
`bhágavadbhis`

etc.

etc.

454\. Vedic Irregularities. a. In dual masc. nom. etc., `ā` (for `āu`)
is the greatly prevailing ending.

b\. In voc. sing. masc., the ending in the oldest language (RV.) is
almost always in `as` instead of `an` (as in the perfect participle:
below, 462 a): thus, `adrivas`, `harivas`, `bhānumas`, `haviṣmas`. Such
vocatives in RV. occur more than a hundred times, while not a single
unquestionable instance of one in `an` is to be found. In the other
Vedic texts, vocatives in as are extremely rare (but `bhagavas` and its
contraction `bhagos` are met with, even in the later language); and in
their reproduction of RV passages the `as` is usually changed to `an`.
It was pointed out above (425 g) that the RV. makes the voc. in `as`
also apparently from a few `an`-stems.

C. In RV., the nom. etc. pl. neut., in the only two instances that
occur, ends in `ānti` instead of `anti`: thus, `ghṛtávānti`,
`paçumā́nti`. No such forms have been noted elsewhere in the older
language: the SV. reads `anti` in its version of the corresponding
passages, and a few examples of the same ending are quotable from the
Brāhmaṇas: thus, `tāvanti`, `etā́vanti`, `yā́vanti`, `ghṛtávanti`,
`pravanti`, `ṛtumanti`, `yugmanti`. Compare 448, 451.

d\. In a few (eight or ten) more or less doubtful cases, a confusion of
strong and weak forms of stem is made; they are too purely sporadic to
require reporting. The same is true of a case or two where a masculine
form appears to be used with a feminine noun.

455\. The stem `árvant` *running, steed*, has the nom. sing. `árvā`,
from `árvan`; and in the older language also the voc. `arvan` and accus.
`árvāṇam`.

456\. Besides the participle `bhávant`, there is another stem `bhávant`,
frequently used in respectful address as substitute for the pronoun of
the second person (but construed, of course, with a verb in the third
person), which is formed with the suffix `vant`, and so declined, having
in the nom. sing, `bhávān`; and the contracted form `bhos` of its
old-style vocative `bhavas` is a common exclamation of address: *you,
sir!* Its origin has been variously explained; but it is doubtless a
contraction of `bhágavant`.

457\. The pronominal adjectives `tā́vant`, `etā́vant`, `yā́vant`, and the
Vedic `ī́vant`, `mā́vant`, `tvā́vant`, etc., are inflected like ordinary
derivatives from nouns.

F. Perfect Participles in `vāṅs`.

458\. The active participles of the perfect tense-system are quite
peculiar as regards the modifications of their stem. In the strong
cases, including the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut, the form of their suffix
is वांस् `vāṅs`, which becomes, by regular process (150), `vān` in the
nom. sing., and which is shortened to वन् `van` in the voc. sing. In the
weakest cases, the suffix is contracted into उष् `uṣ`. In the middle
cases, including the nom.-acc.-voc. neut. sing., it is changed to वत्
`vat`.

a\. A union-vowel `i`, if present in the strong and middle cases,
disappears in the weakest, before `uṣ`. 

459\. The forms as thus described are masculine and neuter only; the
corresponding feminine is made by adding ई `ī` to the weakest form of
stem, ending thus in उषी `úṣī`.

460\. The accent is always upon the suffix, whatever be its form.

461\. Examples of inflection. To show the inflection of these
participles, we may take the stems विद्वांस् `vidvā́ṅs` *knowing* (which
has irregular loss of the usual reduplication and of the perfect
meaning) from √विद् `vid`, and तस्थिवांस् `tasthivā́ṅs` *having stood*
from √स्था `sthā`.

Singular:

m\.

n\.

m\.

n\.

N.

विद्वान्  
`vidvā́n`

विद्वत्  
`vidvát`

तस्थिवान्  
`tasthivā́n`

तस्थिवत्  
`tasthivát`

A.

विद्वांसम्  
`vidvā́ṅsam`

विद्वत्  
`vidvát`

तस्थिवांसम्  
`tasthivā́ṅsam`

तस्थिवत्  
`tasthivát`

I.

विदुषा  
`vidúṣā`

तस्थुषा  
`tasthúṣā`

D.

विदुषे  
`vidúṣe`

तस्थुषे  
`tasthúṣe`

Ab. G.

विदुषस्  
`vidúṣas`

तस्थुषस्  
`tasthúṣas`

L.

विदुषि  
`vidúṣi`

तस्थुषि  
`tasthúṣi`

V.

विद्वन्  
`vídvan`

विद्वत्  
`vídvat`

तस्थिवन्  
`tásthivan`

तस्थिवत्  
`tásthivat`

Dual:

N. A. V.

विद्वांसौ  
`vidvā́ṅsāu`

विदुषी  
`vidúṣī`

तस्थिवांसौ  
`tasthivā́ṅsāu`

तस्थुषी  
`tasthúṣī`

I. D. Ab.

विद्वद्भ्याम्  
`vidvádbhyām`

तस्थिवद्भ्याम्  
`tasthivádbhyām`

G. L.

विदुषोस्  
`vidúṣos`

तस्थुषोस्  
`tasthúṣos` 

Plural:

N. V.

विद्वांसस्  
vidvā́ṅsas

विद्वांसि  
vidvā́ṅsi

तस्थिवांसस्  
tasthivā́ṅsas

तस्थिवांसि  
tasthivā́ṅsi

A.

विदुषस्  
vidúṣas

विद्वांसि  
vidvā́ṅsi

तस्थुषस्  
tasthúṣas

तस्थिवांसि  
tasthivā́ṅsi

I.

विद्वद्भिस्  
vidvádbhis

तस्थिवद्भिस्  
tasthivádbhis

D.

विद्वद्भ्यस्  
vidvádbhyas

तस्थिवद्भ्यस्  
tasthivádbhyas

Ab. G.

विदुषाम्  
vidúṣām

तस्थुषाम्  
tasthúṣām

L.

विद्वत्सु  
vidvátsu

तस्थिवत्सु  
tasthivátsu

a\. The feminine stems of these two participles are विदुषी vidúṣī and
तस्थुषी tasthúṣī.

b\. Other examples of the different stems are:  
from √kṛ — cakṛvā́ṅs, cakṛvát, cakrúṣ, cakrúṣī;  
from √nī — ninīvā́ṅs, ninīvát, ninyúṣ, ninyúṣī;  
from √bhū — babhūvā́ṅs, babhūvát, babhūvúṣ, babhūvúṣī;  
from √tan — tenivā́ṅs, tenivát, tenúṣ, tenúṣī.

462\. a. In the oldest language (RV.), the vocative sing. masc. (like
that of vant and mant- stems: above, 454 b) has the ending vas instead
of van: thus, cikitvas (changed to -van in a parallel passage of AV.),
titirvas, dīdivas, mīḍhvas.

b\. Forms from the middle stem, in vat, are extremely rare earlier: only
three (tatanvát and vavṛtvát, neut. sing., and jāgṛvádbhis, instr. pl.),
are found in RV., and not one in AV. And in the Veda the weakest stem
(not, as later, the middle one) is made the basis of comparison and
derivation: thus, vidúṣṭara, ádāçuṣṭara, mīḍhúṣṭama, mīḍhúṣmant.

c\. An example or two of the use of the weak stem-form for cases
regularly made from the strong are found in RV.: they are cakrúṣam, acc.
sing., and ábibhyuṣas, nom. pl.; emuṣám, by its accent (unless an
error), is rather from a derivative stem emuṣá; and ÇB. has proṣúṣam.
Similar instances, especially from vidvā́ṅs, are now and then met with
later (see BR., under vidvā́ṅs).

d\. The AV. has once bhaktivā́ṅsas, as if a participial form from a noun;
but K. and TB. give in the corresponding passage bhaktivā́nas; cakhvā́ṅsam
(RV., once) is of doubtful character; okivā́ṅsā (RV., once) shows a
reversion to guttural form of the final of √uc, elsewhere unknown. 

G. Comparatives in `yāṅs` or `yas`.

463\. The comparative adjectives of primary formation (below, 467) have
a double form of stem for masculine and neuter: a stronger, ending in
यांस् `yāṅs` (usually ईयांस् `īyāṅs`) in the strong cases, and a weaker,
in यस् `yas` (or ईयस् `īyas`), in the weak cases (there being no
distinction of middle and weakest). The voc. sing. masc. ends in यन्
`yan` (but for the older language see below, 465 a).

a\. The feminine is made by adding ई `ī` to the weak masc.-neut. stem.

464\. As models of inflection, it will be sufficient to give a part of
the forms of श्रेयस् `çréyas` *better*, and of गरीयस् `gárīyas`
*heavier*. Thus:

Singular.

N.

श्रेयान्  
`çréyān`

श्रेयस्  
`çréyas`

गरीयान्  
`gárīyān`

गरीयस्  
`gárīyas`

A.

श्रेयांसम्  
`çréyāṅsam`

श्रेयस्  
`çréyas`

गरीयांसम्  
`gárīyāṅsam`

गरीयस्  
`gárīyas`

I.

श्रेयसा  
`çréyasā`

गरीयसा  
`gárīyasā`

etc.

etc.

V.

श्रेयन्  
`çréyan`

श्रेयस्  
`çréyas`

गरीयन्  
`gárīyan`

गरीयस्  
`gárīyas`

Dual:

N. A. V.

श्रेयांसौ  
`çréyāṅsāu`

श्रेयसी  
`çréyasī`

गरीयांसौ  
`gárīyāṅsāu`

गरीयसी  
`gárīyasī`

etc.

etc.

Plural:

N. V.

श्रेयांसस्  
`çréyāṅsas`

श्रेयांसि  
`çréyāṅsi`

गरीयांसस्  
`gárīyāṅsas`

गरीयांसि  
`gárīyāṅsi`

A.

श्रेयसस्  
`çréyasas`

श्रेयांसि  
`çréyāṅsi`

गरीयसस्  
`gárīyasas`

गरीयांसि  
`gárīyāṅsi`

I.

श्रेयोभिस्  
`çréyobhis`

गरीयोभिस्  
`gárīyobhis`

etc.

etc.

a. The feminine stems of these adjectives are श्रेयसी `çréyasī` and
गरीयसी `gárīyasī`.

485\. a. The Vedic voc. masc. (as in the two preceding divisions: 454 b,
462 a) is in `yas` instead of `yan`: thus, `ojīyas`, `jyāyas` (RV.: no
examples elsewhere have been noted).

b\. No example of a middle case occurs in RV. or AV.

c\. In the later language are found a very few apparent examples of
strong cases made from the weaker stem-form: thus, `kanīyasam` and
`yavīyasam` acc. masc., `kanīyasāu` du., `yavīyasas` nom. pl.

Comparison.

466\. Derivative adjective stems having a comparative and superlative
meaning — or often also (and more originally) a merely intensive value —
are made either directly from roots (by primary derivation), or from
other derivative or compound stems (by secondary derivation).

a\. The subject of comparison belongs more properly to the chapter of
derivation; but it stands in such near relation to inflection that it
is, in accordance with the usual custom in grammars, conveniently and
suitably enough treated briefly here.

467\. The suffixes of primary derivation are ईयस् `īyas` (or ईयांस्
`īyāṅs`) for the comparative and इष्ठ `iṣṭha` for the superlative. The
root before them is accented, and usually strengthened by gunating, if
capable of it — or, in some cases, by nasalization or prolongation. They
are much more frequently and freely used in the oldest language than
later; in the classical Sanskrit, only a limited number of such
comparatives and superlatives are accepted in use; and these attach
themselves in meaning for the most part to other adjectives from the
same root, which seem to be their corresponding positives; but in part
also they are artificially connected with other words, unrelated with
them in derivation.

a\. Thus, from `√kṣip` *hurl* come kṣépīyas and `kṣépiṣṭha`, which
belong in meaning to `kṣiprá` *quick*; from `√vṛ` *encompass* come
`várīyas` and `váriṣṭha`, which belong to `urú` *broad*; while, for
example, `kánīyas` and `kániṣṭha` are attached by the grammarians to
`yúvan` *young*, or `álpa` *small*; and `várṣīyas` and `várṣiṣṭha` to
`vṛddhá` *old*.

468\. From Veda and Brāhmaṇa together, considerably more than a hundred
instances of this primary formation in `īyas` and `iṣṭha` (in many cases
only one of the pair actually occurring) are to be quoted.

a\. About half of these (in RV., the decided majority) belong, in
meaning as in form, to the bare root in its adjective value, as used
especially at the end of compounds, but sometimes also independently:
thus, from √`tap` *burn* comes `tápiṣṭha` *excessively burning*; from
√`yaj` *offer* come `yájīyas` and `yájiṣṭha` *better* and *best* (or
*very well*) *sacrificing*; from √`yudh` *fight* comes `yódhīyas`
*fighting better*; — in a few instances, the simple root is also found
used as corresponding positive: thus, `jū́` *hasty, rapid* with `jávīyas`
and `jáviṣṭha`.

b\. In a little class of instances (eight), the root has a preposition
prefixed, which then takes the accent: thus, `ā́gamiṣṭha` *especially
coming hither*; `vícayiṣṭha` *best clearing away*; — in a couple of
cases (`áçramiṣṭha`, `áparāvapiṣṭa`, `ástheyas`), the negative particle
is prefixed; — in a single word (`çámbhaviṣṭha`), an element of another
kind.

c\. The words of this formation sometimes take an accusative object (see
271 e).

d\. But even in the oldest language appears not infrequently the same
attachment in meaning to a derivative adjective which (as pointed out
above) is usual in the later speech.

e\. Besides the examples that occur also later, others are met with like
`váriṣṭha` *choicest* (`vára` *choice*), `bárhiṣṭha` *greatest*
(`bṛhánt` *great*), `óṣiṣṭha` *quickest* (`óṣam` *quickly*), and so on.
Probably by analogy with these, like formations are in a few cases made
from the apparently radical syllables of words which have no otherwise
traceable root in the language: thus, `kradhīyas` and `kradhiṣṭha` (K.)
from `kṛdhú`, `sthávīyas` and `stháviṣṭha` from `sthūrá`, `çáçīyas`
(RV.) from `çáçvant`, `áṇīyas` (AV.) and `áṇiṣṭha` (TS.) from `aṇú`; and
so on. And yet again, in a few exceptional cases, the suffixes `īyas`
and `iṣṭha` are applied to stems which are themselves palpably
derivative: thus, `ā́çiṣṭha` from `āçú` (RV.: only case), `tī́kṣṇīyas`
(AV.) from `tīkṣṇá`, `bráhmīyas` and `bráhmiṣṭha` (TS. etc.) from
`bráhman`, `dhármiṣṭha` (TA.) from `dhárman`, `dráḍhiṣṭha` (TA.: instead
of `dárhiṣṭha`) from `dṛḍhá`, `rághīyas` (TS.) from `raghu`. These are
beginnings, not followed up later, of the extension of the formation to
unlimited use.

f\. In `návīyas` or `návyas` and `náviṣṭha`, from `náva` *new*, and in
`sányas` from `sána` *old* (all RV.), we have also formations
unconnected with verbal roots.

469\. The stems in `iṣṭha` are inflected like ordinary adjectives in
`a`, and make their feminines in `ā`; those in `īyas` have a peculiar
declension, which has been described above (463 ff.). 

470\. Of peculiarities and irregularities of formation, the following
may be noticed:

a\. The suffix `īyas` has in a few instances the briefer form `yas`,
generally as alternative with the other: thus, `távīyas` and `távyas`,
`návīyas` and `návyas`, `vásīyas` and `vásyas`, `pánīyas` and `pányas`;
and so from `rabh` and `sah`; `sányas` occurs alone. From `bhū` come
`bhū́yas` and `bhū́yiṣṭha`, beside which RV. has also `bhávīyas`.

b\. Of roots in `ā`, the final blends with the initial of the suffix to
`e`: thus, `sthéyas`, `dhéṣṭha`, `yéṣṭha`; but such forms are in the
Veda generally to be resolved, as `dháïṣṭha`, `yáïṣṭha`. The root `jyā`
forms `jyéṣṭha`, but `jyā́yas` (like `bhū́yas`).

c\. The two roots in `ī`, `prī` and `çrī`, form `préyas` and `préṣṭha`
and `çréyas` and `çréṣṭha`.

d\. From the root of `ṛjú` come, without strengthening, `ṛ́jīyas` and
`ṛ́jiṣṭha`; but in the older language also, more regularly, `rájīyas` and
`rájiṣṭha`.

471\. The suffixes of secondary derivation are तर `tara` and तम `tama`.
They are of almost unrestricted application, being added to adjectives
of every form, simple and compound, ending in vowels or in consonants —
and this from the earliest period of the language until the latest. The
accent of the primitive remains (with rare exceptions) unchanged; and
that form of stem is generally taken which appears before an initial
consonant of a case-ending (weak or middle form).

a\. Examples (of older as well as later occurrence) are: from
vowel-stems, `priyátara`, `váhnitama`, `rathī́tara` and `rathī́tama`
(RV.), `cā́rutara`, `potṛ́tama`, `saṁraktatara`; — from consonant-stems,
`çáṁtama`, `çáçvattama`, `mṛḍayáttama`, `tavástara` and `tavástama`,
`tuvíṣṭama`, `vápuṣṭara`, `tapasvítara`, `yaçasvítama`, `bhágavattara`,
`hiraṇyavāçīmattama`; — from compounds, `ratnadhā́tama`, `abhibhū́tara`,
`sukṛ́ttara`, `pūrbhíttama`, `bhūyiṣṭabhā́ktama`, `bhūridā́vattara`,
`çúcivratatama`, `strīkāmatama`.

b\. But in the Veda the final `n` of a stem is regularly retained; thus,
`madíntara` and `madíntama`, `vṛṣántama`; and a few stems even add a
nasal: thus, `surabhíntara`, `rayíntama`, `madhúntama`. In a case or
two, the strong stem of a present participle is taken: thus,
`vrā́dhanttama`, `sáhanttama`; and, of a perfect participle, the weakest
stem: thus, `vidúṣṭara`, `mīḍhúṣṭama`. A feminine final `ī` is
shortened: thus, `devitamā` (RV.), `tejasvinitamā` (K.). 

c\. In the older language, the words of this formation are not much more
frequent than those of the other: thus, in RV. the stems in `tara` and
`tama` are to those in `īyas` and `iṣṭha` as three to two; in AV., only
as six to five: but later the former win a great preponderance.

472\. These comparatives and superlatives are inflected like ordinary
adjectives in `a`, forming their feminine in `ā`.

473\. a. That (especially in the Veda) some stems which are nouns rather
than adjectives form derivatives of comparison is natural enough,
considering the uncertain nature of the division-line between
substantive and adjective value. Thus, we have `vīrátara`, `vīrátama`,
`váhnitama`, `mātṛ́tama`, `nṛ́tama`, `marúttama`, and so on.

b\. The suffixes `tara` and `tama` also make forms of comparison from
some of the pronominal roots, as `ka`, `ya`, `i` (see below, 520); and
from certain of the prepositions, as `ud`; and the adverbially used
accusative (older, neuter, -`taram`; later, feminine, -`tarām`) of a
comparative in `tara` from a preposition is employed to make a
corresponding comparative to the preposition itself (below, 1119); while
-`tarām` and -`tamām` make degrees of comparison from a few adverbs:
thus, `natarā́m`, `natamā́m`, `kathaṁtarām`, `kutastarām`, `addhātamā́m`,
`nīcāistarām`, etc.

c\. By a wholly barbarous combination, finding no warrant in the earlier
and more genuine usages of the language, the suffixes of comparison in
their adverbial feminine form, -`tarām` and -`tamām`, are later allowed
to be added to personal forms of verbs: thus, `sīdatetarām` (R.: the
only case noted in the epics) *is more despondent*, `vyathayatitarām`
*disturbs more*, `alabhatatarām` *obtained in a higher degree*,
`hasiṣyatitarām` *will laugh more*. No examples of this use of -`tamām`
are quotable.

d\. The suffixes of secondary comparison are not infrequently added to
those of primary, forming double comparatives and superlatives: thus,
`garīyastara`, `çreṣṭhatara` and `çréṣṭhatama`, `pāpīyastara`,
`pāpiṣṭhatara` and -`tama`, `bhūyastaram`, etc.

a\. The use of `tama` as ordinal suffix is noted below (487); with this
value, it is accented on the final, and makes its feminine in `ī`: thus,
`çatatamá` m. n., `çatatamī́` f., *hundredth*.

474\. From a few words, mostly prepositions, degrees of comparison are
made by the briefer suffixes `ra` and `ma`: thus, `ádhara` and `adhamá`,
`ápara` and `apamá`, `ávara` and `avamá`, `úpara` and `upamá`, `ántara`,
`ántama`, `paramá`, `madhyamá`, `caramá`, `antima`, `ādima`, `paçcima`.
And `ma` is also used to make ordinals (below, 487).
