+++
title = "12 Chapter VIII CONJUGATION"

+++




## CHAPTER VIII.

  

CONJUGATION.

527\. THE subject of conjugation or verbal inflection involves, as in
the other languages of the family, the distinctions of voice, tense,
mode, number, and person.

a\. Further, besides the simpler or ordinary conjugation of a verbal
root, there are certain more or less fully developed secondary or
derivative conjugations.

528\. Voice. There are (as in Greek) two voices, active and middle,
distinguished by a difference in the personal endings. This distinction
is a pervading one: there is no active personal form which does not have
its corresponding middle, and *vice versa;* and it is extended also in
part to the participles (but not to the infinitive).

529\. An active form is called by the Hindu grammarians `parasmāi padam`
*a word for another*, and a middle form is called `ātmane padam` *a word
for one's self*: the terms might be best paraphrased by *transitive* and
*reflexive*. And the distinction thus expressed is doubtless the
original foundation of the difference of active and middle forms; in the
recorded condition of the language, however, the antithesis of
transitive and reflexive meaning is in no small measure blurred, or even
altogether effaced.

a\. In the epics there is much effacement of the distinction between
active and middle, the choice of voice being very often determined by
metrical considerations alone.

530\. Some verbs are conjugated in both voices, others in one only;
sometimes a part of the tenses are inflected only in one voice, others
only in the other or in both; of a verb usually inflected in one voice
sporadic forms of the other occur; and sometimes the voice differs
according as the verb is compounded with certain prepositions. 

531\. The middle forms outside the present-system (for which there is a
special passive inflection: see below, 768 ff.), and sometimes also
within that system, are liable to be used likewise in a passive sense.

532\. Tense. The tenses are as follows: 1. a present, with 2. an
imperfect, closely related with it in form, having a prefixed augment;
3. a perfect, made with reduplication (to which in the Veda is added, 4.
a so-called pluperfect, made from it with prefixed augment); 5. an
aorist, of three different formations: a. simple; b. reduplicated; c.
sigmatic or sibilant; 6. a future, with 7. a conditional, an
augment-tense, standing to it in the relation of an imperfect to a
present; and 8. a second, a periphrastic, future (not found in the
Veda).

a\. The tenses here distinguished (in accordance with prevailing usage)
as imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, and aorist receive those names from
their correspondence in mode of formation with tenses so called in other
languages of the family, especially in Greek, and not at all from
differences of time designated by them. In no period of the Sanskrit
language is there any expression of imperfect or pluperfect time — nor
of perfect time, except in the older language, where the "aorist" has
this value; later, imperfect, perfect, and aorist are so many
undiscriminated past tenses or preterits: see below, under the different
tenses.

533\. Mode. In respect to mode, the difference between the classical
Sanskrit and the older language of the Veda — and, in a less degree, of
the Brāhmaṇas — is especially great.

a\. In the Veda, the present tense has, besides its indicative
inflection, a subjunctive, of considerable variety of formation, an
optative, and an imperative (in 2d and 3d persons). The same three modes
are found, though of much less frequent occurrence, as belonging to the
perfect; and they are made also from the aorists, being of especial
frequency from the simple aorist. The future has no modes (an occasional
case or two are purely exceptional).

b\. In the classical Sanskrit, the present adds to its indicative an
optative and an imperative — of which last, moreover, the first persons
are a remnant of the old subjunctive. And the aorist has also an
optative, of somewhat peculiar inflection, usually called the precative
(or benedictive).

534\. The present, perfect, and future tenses have each of them, alike
in the earlier and later language, a pair of participles, active and
middle, sharing in the various peculiarities of the tense-formations;
and in the Veda are found such participles belonging also to the aorist.

535\. Tense-systems. The tenses, then, with their accompanying modes and
participles, fall into certain well-marked groups or systems:

I. The present-system, composed of the present tense with its modes, its
participle, and its preterit which we have called the imperfect.

II\. The perfect-system, composed of the perfect tense (with, in the
Veda, its modes and its preterit, the so-called pluperfect) and its
participle.

III\. The aorist-system, or systems, simple, reduplicated, and sibilant,
composed of the aorist tense along with, in the later language, its
"precative" optative (but, in the Veda, with its various modes and its
participle).

IV\. The future-systems: 1. the old or sibilant future, with its
accompanying preterit, the conditional, and its participle; and 2. the
new periphrastic future.

536\. Number and Person. The verb has, of course, the same three numbers
with the noun: namely, singular, dual, and plural; and in each number it
has the three persons, first, second, and third. All of these are made
in every tense and mode — except that the first persons of the
imperative numbers are supplied from the subjunctive. 

537\. Verbal adjectives and nouns: Participles. The participles
belonging to the tense-systems have been already spoken of above (534).
There is besides, coming directly from the root of the verb, a
participle, prevailingly of past and passive (or sometimes neuter)
meaning. Future passive participles, or gerundives, of several different
formations, are also made.

538\. Infinitives. In the older language, a very considerable variety of
derivative abstract nouns — only in a few sporadic instances having
anything to do with the tense-systems — are used in an infinitive or
quasi-infinitive sense; most often in the dative case, but sometimes
also in the accusative, in the genitive and ablative, and (very rarely)
in the locative. In the classical Sanskrit, there remains a single
infinitive, of accusative case-form, having nothing to do with the
tense-systems.

539\. Gerunds. A so-called gerund (or absolutive) — being, like the
infinitive, a stereotyped case-form of a derivative noun — is a part of
the general verb-system in both the earlier and later language, being
especially frequent in the later language, where it has only two forms,
one for simple verbs, and the other for compound. Its value is that of
an indeclinable active participle, of indeterminate but prevailingly
past tense-character.

a\. Another gerund, an adverbially used accusative in form, is found,
but only rarely, both earlier and later.

540\. Secondary conjugations. The secondary or derivative conjugations
are as follows: 1. the passive; 2. the intensive; 3. the desiderative;
4. the causative. In these, a conjugation-stem, instead of the simple
root, underlies the whole system of inflection. Yet there is clearly to
be seen in them the character of a present-system, expanded into a more
or less complete conjugation; and the passive is so purely a
present-system that it will be described in the chapter devoted to that
part of the inflection of the verb.

a\. Under the same general head belongs the subject of denominative
conjugation, or the conversion of noun and adjective-stems into
conjugation-stems. Further, that of compound conjugation, whether by the
prefixion of prepositions to roots or by the addition of auxiliary verbs
to noun and adjective-stems. And finally, that of periphrastic
conjugation, or the looser combination of auxiliaries with verbal nouns
and adjectives.

541\. The characteristic of a proper (finite or personal) verb-form is
its personal ending. By this alone is determined its character as
regards number and person — and in part also as regards mode and tense.
But the distinctions of mode and tense are mainly made by the formation
of tense and mode-stems, to which, rather than to the pure root, the
personal endings are appended.

a\. In this chapter will be given a general account of the personal
endings, and also of the formation of mode-stems from tense-stems, and
of those elements in the formation of tense-stems — the augment and the
reduplication — which are found in more than one tense-system. Then, in
the following chapters, each tense-system will be taken up by itself,
and the methods of formation of its stems, both tense-stems and
mode-stems, and their combination with the endings, will be described
and illustrated in detail. And the complete conjugation of a few model
verbs will be exhibited in systematic arrangement in Appendix C.

Personal Endings.

542\. The endings of verbal inflection are, as was pointed out above,
different throughout in the active and middle voices. They are also, as
in Greek, usually of two somewhat varying forms for the same person in
the same voice: one fuller, called primary; the ther briefer, called
secondary. There are also less pervading differences, depending upon
other conditions.

a\. In the epics, exchanges of primary and secondary active endings
eespecially the substitution of `ma, va, ta,` for `mas, vas, tha`) are
not infrequent. 

b\. A condensed statement of all the varieties of ending for each person
and number here follows.

543\. Singular: First person, a. The primary ending in the active is
`mi`. The subjunctive, however (later imperative), has `ni` instead; and
in the oldest Veda this `ni` is sometimes wanting, and the person ends
in `ā` (as if the `ni` of `āni` were dropped). The secondary ending is
properly `m`; but to this `m` an `a` has come to be so persistently
prefixed, appearing regularly where the tense-stem does not itself end
in `a` (`vam` for `varm` or `varam` in RV., once, and `abhūm` MS.,
`avadhīm` TS. etc., `sanem` TB., are rare anomalies), that it is
convenient to reckon `am` as ending, rather than `m`. But the perfect
tense has neither `mi` nor `m`; its ending is simply `a` (sometimes `ā`:
248 c); or, from `ā`-roots, `āu`.

b\. The primary middle ending, according to the analogy of the other
persons, would be regularly `me`. But no tense or mode, at any period of
the language, shows any relic whatever of a `m` in this person; the
primary ending, present as well as perfect, from `a`-stems and others
alike, is `e`; and to it corresponds `i` as secondary ending, which
blends with the final of an `a`-stem to `e`. The optative has, however,
`a` instead of `i`; and in the subjunctive (later imperative) appears
`āi` for `e`.

544\. Second person. a. In the active, the primary ending is `si`, which
is shortened to `s` as secondary; as to the loss of this `s` after a
final radical consonant, see below, 555. But the perfect and the
imperative desert here entirely the analogy of the other forms. The
perfect ending is invariably `tha` (or `thā`: 248 c). The imperative is
far less regular. The fullest form of its ending is `dhi`; which,
however, is more often reduced to `hi`; and in the great majority of
verbs (including all `a`-stems, at every period of the language) no
ending is present, but the bare stem stands as personal form. In a very
small class of verbs (722–3), `āna` is the ending. There is also an
alternative ending `tāt`; and this is even used sporadically in other
persons of the imperative (see below, 570–1).

b\. In the middle voice, the primary ending, both present and perfect,
is `se`. The secondary stands in no apparent relation to this, being
`thās`; and in the imperative is found only `sva` (or `svā`: 248 c),
which in the Veda is not seldom to be read as `sua`. In the older
language, `se` is sometimes strengthened to `sāi` in the subjunctive.

545\. Third person. a. The active primary ending is `ti`; the secondary,
tt&gt;t; as to the loss of the latter after a final radical consonant,
see below, 555. But in the imperative appears instead the peculiar
ending `tu`; and in the perfect no characteristic consonant is present,
and the third person has the same ending as the first.

b\. The primary middle ending is `te`, with `ta` as corresponding
secondary. In the older language, `te` is often strengthened to `tāi` in
the subjunctive. In the perfect, the middle third person has, like the
active, the same ending with the first, namely `e` simply; and in the
older language, the third person present also often loses the
distinctive part of its termination, and comes to coincide in form with
the first (and MS. has `aduha` for `adugdha`). To this `e` perhaps
corresponds, as secondary, the `i` of the aorist 3d pers. passive (842
ff.). The imperative has `tām` (or, in the Veda, rarely `ām`) for its
ending.

546\. Dual: First person. Both in active and in middle, the dual first
person is in all its varieties precisely like the corresponding plural,
only with substitution of `v` for the `m` of the latter: thus, `vas` (no
`vasi` has been found to occur), `va`, `vahe`, `vahi`, `vahāi`. The
person is, of course, of comparatively rare use, and from the Veda no
form in `vas`, even, is quotable.

547\. Second and Third persons. a. In the active, the primary ending of
the second person is `thas`, and that of the third is `tas`; and this
relation of `th` to `t` appears also in the perfect, and runs through
the whole series of middle endings. The perfect endings are primary, but
have `u` instead of `a` as vowel; and an `a` has become so persistently
prefixed that their forms have to be reckoned as `athus` and `atus`. The
secondary endings exhibit no definable relation to the primary in these
two persons; they are `tam` and `tām`; and they are used in the
imperative as well.

b\. In the middle, a long `ā` — which, however, with the final `a` of
`a`-stems becomes `e` — has become prefixed to all dual endings of the
second and third persons, so as to form an inseparable part of them
(`dīdhīthām` AV., and `jihīthām` ÇB., are isolated anomalies). The
primary endings, present and perfect, are `āthe` and `āte`; the
secondary (and imperative) are `āthām` and `ātām` (or, with stem-final
`a`, `ethe` etc.).

c\. The Rig-Veda has a very few forms in `āithe` and `āite`, apparently
from `ethe` and `ete` with subjunctive strengthening (they are all
detailed below: see 615, 701, 737, 752, 836, 1008, 1043).

548\. Plural: First person. a. The earliest form of the active ending is
`masi`, which in the oldest language is more frequent than the briefer
`mas` (in RV., as five to one; in AV., however, only as three to four).
In the classical Sanskrit, `mas` is the exclusive primary ending; but
the secondary abbreviated `ma` belongs also to the perfect and the
subjunctive (imperative). In the Veda, `ma` often becomes `mā` (248 c),
especially in the perfect.

b\. The primary middle ending is `mahe`. This is lightened in the
secondary form to `mahi`; and, on the other hand, it is regularly (in
the Veda, not invariably) strengthened to mahāi in the subjunctive
(imperative).

549\. Second person. a. The active primary ending is `tha`. The
secondary, also imperative, ending is `ta` (in the Veda, `tā` only once
in impv.). But in the perfect any characteristic consonant is wanting,
and the ending is simply `a`. In the Veda, the syllable `na`, of
problematic origin, is not infrequently added to both forms of the
ending, making `thana` (rarely `thanā`) and `tana`. The forms in which
this occurs will be detailed below, under the different formations; the
addition is very rarely made excepting to persons of the first general
conjugation.

b\. The middle primary ending is `dhve`, which belongs to the perfect as
well as the present. In the subjunctive of the older language it is
sometimes strengthened to `dhvāi`. The secondary (and imperative) ending
is `dhvam` (in RV., once `dhva`); and `dhvāt` is once met with in the
imperative (570). In the Veda, the `v` of all these endings is sometimes
to be resolved into `u`, and the ending becomes dissyllabic. As to the
change of `dh` of these endings to `ḍh`, see above, 226 c.

550\. Third person. a. The full primary ending is `anti` in the active,
with `ante` as corresponding middle. The middle secondary ending is
`anta`, to which should correspond an active `ant`; but of the `t` only
altogether questionable traces are left, in the euphonic treatment of a
final `n` (207); the ending is `an`. In the imperative, `antu` and
`antām` take the place of `anti` and `ante`. The initial `a` of all
these endings is like that of `am` in the 1st sing., disappearing after
the final `a` of a tense-stem.

b\. Moreover, `anti`, `antu`, `ante`, `antām`, `anta` are all liable to
be weakened by the loss of their nasal, becoming `ati` etc. In the
active, this weakening takes place only after reduplicated non-`a`-stems
(and after a few roots which are treated as if reduplicated: 639 ff.);
in the middle, it occurs after all tense-stems save those ending in `a`.

c\. Further, for the secondary active ending `an` there is a substitute
`us` (or `ur`: 169 b; the evidence of the Zend favors the latter form),
which is used in the same reduplicating verbs that change `anti` to
`ati` etc., and which accordingly appears as a weaker correlative of
`an`. The same `us` is also used universally in the perfect, in the
optative (not in the subjunctive), in those forms of the aorist whose
stem does not end in `a`, and in the imperfect of root-stems ending in
`ā`, and a few others (621).

d\. The perfect middle has in all periods of the language the peculiar
ending `re`, and the optative has the allied `ran`, in this person. In
the Veda, a variety of other endings containing a `r` as distinctive
consonant are met with: namely, `re` (and `ire`) and `rate` in the
present; `rata` in the optative (both of present and of aorist); `rire`
in the perfect; `ranta, ran`, and `ram` in aorists (and in an imperfect
or two); `rām` and `ratām` in the imperative; `ra` in the imperfect of
`duh` (MS.). The three `rate`, `ratam`, and `rata` are found even in the
later language in one or two verbs (629). 

551\. Below are given, for convenience, in tabular form, the schemes of
endings as accepted in the classical or later language: namely, a. the
regular primary endings, used in the present indicative and the future
(and the subjunctive in part); and b. the regular secondary endings,
used in the imperfect, the conditional, the aorist, the optative (and
the subjunctive in part); and further, of special schemes, c. the
perfect endings (chiefly primary, especially in the middle); and d. the
imperative endings (chiefly secondary). To the so-called imperative
endings of the first person is prefixed the `ā` which is practically a
part of them, though really containing the mode-sign of the subjunctive
from which they are derived.

552\. Further, a part of the endings are marked with an accent, and a
part are left unaccented. The latter are those which never, under any
circumstances, receive the accent; the former are accented in
considerable classes of verbs, though by no means in all. It will be
noticed that, in general, the unaccented endings are those of the
singular active; but the 2d sing. imkerative has an accented ending;
and, on the other hand, the whole series of 1st persons imperative,
active and middle, have unaccented endings (this being a characteristic
of the subjunctive formation which they represent).

553\. The schemes of normal endings, then, are as follows:

  

a\. Primary Endings.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`mi`

`vás`

`más`

`é`

`váhe`

`máhe`

2

`si`

`thás`

`thá`

`sé`

`ā́the`

`dhvé`

3

`ti`

`tás`

`ánti, áti`

`té`

`ā́te`

`ánte, áte`

b\. Secondary Endings.

1

`am`

`vá`

`má`

`í, á`

`váhi`

`máhi`

2

`s`

`tám`

`tá`

`thā́s`

`ā́thām`

`dhvám`

3

`t`

`tā́m`

`án, ús`

`tá`

`ā́tām`

`ánta, áta, rán`

c\. Perfect Endings.

1

`a`

`vá`

`má`

`é`

`váhe`

`máhe`

2

`tha`

`áthus`

`á`

`sé`

`ā́the`

`dhvé`

3

`a`

`átus`

`ús`

`é`

`ā́te`

`ré`

d\. Imperative Endings.

1

`āni`

`āva`

`āma`

`āi`

`āvahāi`

`āmahāi`

2

`dhí, hí`, —

`tám`

`tá`

`svá`

`ā́thām`

`dhvám`

3

`tu`

`tā́m`

`ántu, átu`

`tā́m`

`ā́tām`

`ántām, átām`

554\. In general, the rule is followed that an accented ending, if
dissyllabic, is accented on its first syllable — and the constant
union-vowels are regarded, in this respect, as integral parts of the
endings. But the 3d pl. ending `ate` of the pres. indic. middle has in
RV. the accent `até` in a number of verbs (see 613, 685, 699, 719); and
an occasional instance is met with in other endings: thus, `mahé` (see
719, 735).

555\. The secondary endings of the second and third persons singular, as
consisting of an added consonant without vowel, should regularly (150)
be lost whenever the root or stem to which they are to be added itself
ends in a consonant. And this rule is in general followed; yet not
without exceptions. Thus:

a\. A root ending in a dental mute sometimes drops this final mute
instead of the added `s` in the second person; and, on the other hand, a
root or stem ending in `s` sometimes drops this `s` instead of the added
`t` in the third person – in either case, establishing the ordinary
relation of `s` and `t` in these persons, instead of `s` and `s`, or `t`
and `t`. The examples noted are: 2d sing. `aves` (to 3d sing. `avet`),
√`vid`, AB.; 3d sing. `akat`, √`kṛ`, ÇB. `aghat`, √`ghas`, JB. AÇS.;
`acakāt`, √`cakās`, RT.; `açāt`, √`çās`, AB. MBh. R.; `asrat`, √`sras`,
VS.; `ahinat`, √`hiṅs`, ÇB. TB. GB. Compare also the `s`-aorist forms
`ayās` and `srās` (146 a), in which the same influence is to be seen;
and further, `ajāit` etc. (889 a), and precative `yāt` for `yās` (837).
A similar loss of any other final consonant is excessively rare; AV. has
once `abhanas`, for `-nak`, √`bhañj`. There are also a few cases where a
1st sing. is irregularly modeled after a 3d sing.: thus, `atṛṇam` (to
`atṛṇat`), √`tṛd`, KU., `acchinam` (to `acchinat`), √`chid`, MBh.:
compare urther the 1st sing. in `m` instead of `am`, 543 a.

b\. Again, a union-vowel is sometimes introduced before the ending,
either `a` or `i` or `ī`: see below, 621 b, 631, 819, 880, 1004 a, 1068
a.

c\. In a few isolated cases in the older language, this `ī` is changed
to `āi`: see below, 904 b, 936, 1068 a.

556\. The changes of form which roots and stems undergo in their
combinations with these endings will be pointed out in detail below,
under the various formations. Here may be simply mentioned in advance,
as by far the most important among them, a distinction of stronger and
weaker form of stem in large classes of verbs, standing in relation with
the accent – the stem being of stronger form when the accent falls upon
it, or before an accentless ending, and of weaker form when the accent
is on the ending.

a\. Of the endings marked as accented in the scheme, the `ta` of 2d pl.
is not infrequently in the Veda treated as unaccented, the tone resting
on the stem, which is strengthened. Much less often, the `tam` of 2d du.
is treated in the same way; other endings, only sporadically. Details
are given under the various formations below.

Subjunctive Mode.

557\. Of the subjunctive mode (as was pointed out above) only fragments
are left in the later or classical language: namely, in the so-called
first persons imperative, and in the use (579) of the imperfect and
aorist persons without augment after `mā́` prohibitive. In the oldest
period, however, it was a very frequent formation, being three or four
times as common as the optative in the Rig-Veda, and nearly the same in
the Atharvan; but already in the Brāhmaṇas it becomes comparatively
rare. Its varieties of form are considerable, and sometimes perplexing.

558\. In its normal and regular formation, a special mode-stem is made
for the subjunctive by adding to the tense-stem an `a` – which combines
with a final `a` of the tense-stem to `ā`. The accent rests upon the
tense-stem, which accordingly has the strong form. Thus, from the strong
present-stem `doh` (√`duh`) is made the subjunctive-stem `dóha`; from
`juhó` (√`hu`), `juháva`; from `yunáj` (√`yuj`), `yunája`; from `sunó`
(√`su`), `sunáva`; from `bháva` (√`bhū`), `bhávā`; from `tudá` (√`tud`),
`tudā́`; from `ucyá` (pass., √`vac`), `ucyā́`; and so on.

559\. The stem thus formed is inflected in general as an `a`-stem would
be inflected in the indicative, with constant accent, and `ā` for `a`
before the endings of the first person (733 i) – but with the following
peculiarities as to ending etc.:

560\. a. In the active, the 1st sing. has `ni` as ending: thus,
`dóhāni`, `yunájāni`, `bhávāni`. But in the Rig-Veda sometimes `ā`
simply: thus, `áyā`, `brávā`.

b\. In 1st du., 1st pl., and 3d pl., the endings are the secondary:
thus, `dóhāva`, `dóhāma`, `dóhan`; `bhávāva`, `bhávāma`, `bhávān`.

c\. In 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl., the endings are primary: thus,
`dóhathas`, `dóhatas`, `dóhatha`; `bhávāthas`, `bhávātas`, `bhávātha`.

d\. In 2d and 3d sing., the endings are either primary or secondary:
thus, `dóhasi` or `dóhas`, `dóhati` or `dóhat`; `bhávāsi` or `bhávās`,
`bhávāti` or `bhávāt`.

e\. Occasionally, forms with double mode-sign `ā` (by assimilation to
the more numerous subjunctives from tense-stems in `a`) are met with
from non-`a`-stems: thus, `ásātha` from `as`; `áyās`, `áyāt`, `áyān`
from `e` (√`i`).

561\. In the middle, forms with secondary instead of primary endings are
very rare, being found only in the 3d pl. (where they are more frequent
than the primary), and in a case or two of the 3d sing. (and AB. has
once asyāthās).

a\. The striking peculiarity of subjunctive middle inflection is the
frequent strengthening of `e` to `āi` in the endings. This is less
general in the very earliest language than later. In 1st sing., `āi`
alone is found as ending, even in RV.; and in 1st du. also (of rare
occurrence), only `āvahāi` is met with. In 1st pl., `āmahāi` prevails in
RV. and AV. (`āmahe` is found a few times), and is alone known later. In
2d sing., `sāi` for `se` does not occur in RV., but is the only form in
AV. and the Brāhmaṇas. In 3d sing., `tāi` for `te` occurs once in RV.,
and is the predominant form in AV., and the only one later. In 2d pl.,
`dhvāi` for `dhve` is found in one word in RV., and a few times in the
`Brāhmaṇas`. In 3d pl., `ntāi` for `nte` is the Brāhmaṇa form (of far
from frequent occurrence); it occurs neither in RV. nor AV. No such dual
endings as `thāi` and `tāi`, for `the` and `te`, are anywhere found; but
RV. has in a few words (nine: above, 547 c) `āithe` and `āite`, which
appear to be a like subjunctive strengthening of `ethe` and `ete`
(although found in one indicative form, `kṛṇvāite`). Before the
`āi`-endings, the vowel is regularly long `ā`; but `antāi` instead of
`āntāi` is two or three times met with, and once or twice (TS. AB.)
`atāi` for `ātāi`.

562\. The subjunctive endings, then, in combination with the subjunctive
mode-sign, are as follows:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`āni`

`āva`

`āma`

`āi`

`āvahāiāvahe`

`āmahāiāmahe`

2

`asias`

`athas`

`atha`

`aseāsāi`

`āithe`

`adhve ādhvāi`

3

`atiat`

`atas`

`an`

`ateātāi`

`āite`

`ante, antaāntāi`

  
a. And in further combination with final `a` of a tense-stem, the
initial `a` of all these endings becomes `ā`: thus, for example, in 2d
pers., `āsi` or `ās, āthas, ātha, āse, ādhve`.

563\. Besides this proper subjunctive, with mode-sign, In its triple
form — with primary, with strengthened primary, and with secondary
endings — the name of subjunctive, in the forms "imperfect subjunctive"
and "improper subjunctive", has been also given to the indicative forms
of imperfect and aorist when used, with the augment omitted, in a modal
sense (below, 587): such use being quite common in RV., but rapidly
dying out, so that in the `Brāhmaṇa` language and later it is hardly met
with except after `mā` prohibitive.

a\. As to the general uses of the subjunctive, see below, 574 ff.

Optative Mode.

564\. a. As has been already pointed out, the optative is of
comparatively rare occurrence in the language of the Vedas; but it gains
rapidly in frequency, and already in the `Brāhmaṇas` greatly outnumbers
the subjunctive, and still later comes almost entirely to take its
place.

b\. Its mode of formation is the same in all periods of the language.

565\. a. The optative mode-sign is in the active voice a different one,
according as it is added to a tense-stem ending in `a`, or to one
ending in some other final. In the latter case, it is `yā́`, accented;
this `yā` is appended to the weaker form of the tense-stem, and takes
the regular series of secondary endings, with, in 3d plur., `us` instead
of `an`, and loss of the `ā` before it. After an `a`-stem, it is `ī`,
unaccented; this `ī` blends with the final `a` to `e` (which then is
accented or not according to the accent of the a); and the `e` is
maintained unchanged before a vowel-ending (`am, us`), by means of an
interposed euphonic `y`.

b\. In the middle voice, the mode-sign is `ī` throughout, and takes the
secondary endings, with `a` in 1st sing., and `ran` in 3d pl. After an
`a`-stem, the rules as to its combination to `e`, the accent of the
latter, and its retention before a vowel-ending with interposition of a
`y`, are the same as in the active. After any other final, the weaker
form of stem is taken, and the accent is on the ending (except in one
class of verbs, where it falls upon the tense-stem: see 645); and the
`ī` (as when combined to `e`) takes an inserted `y` before the
vowel-endings (`a, āthām, ātām`).

c\. It is, of course, impossible to tell from the form whether `i` or
`ī` is combined with the final of an `a`-stem to `e`; but no good reason
appears to exist for assuming `i`, rather than the `ī` which shows
itself in the other class of stems in the middle voice.

566\. The combined mode-sign and endings of the optative, then, are as
follows, in their double form, for `a`-stems and for others:

a\. for non-`a`-stems.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`yā́m`

`yā́va`

`yā́ma`

`īyá`

`īváhi`

`īmáhi`

2

`yā́s`

`yā́tam`

`yā́ta`

`īthā́s`

`īyā́thām`

`īdhvám`

3

`yā́t`

`yā́tām`

`yús`

`ītá`

`īyā́tām`

`īrán`

b\. combined with the final of a-stems.

1

`eyam`

`eva`

`ema`

`eya`

`evahi`

`emahi`

2

`es`

`etam`

`eta`

`ethās`

`eyāthām`

`edhvam`

3

`et`

`etām`

`eyus`

`eta`

`eyātām`

`eran`

c\. The `yā` is in the Veda not seldom resolved into `iā`.

d\. The contracted `sanem`, for `saneyam`, is found in TB. and Āpast.
Certain Vedic 3d pl. middle forms in `rata` will be mentioned below,
under the various formations.

567\. Precative. Precative forms are such as have a sibilant inserted
between the optative-sign and the ending. They are made almost only from
the aorist stems, and, though allowed by the grammarians to be formed
from every root — the active precative from the simple aorist, the
middle from the sibilant aorist — are practically of rare occurrence at
every period of the language, and especially later.

a\. The inserted `s` runs in the active through the whole series of
persons; in the middle, it is allowed only in the 2d and 3d persons
sing. and du. and the 2d pl., and is quotable only for the 2d and 3d
sing. In the 2d sing. act., the precative form, by reason of the
necessary loss of the added `s`, is not distinguishable from the simple
optative; in the 3d sing. act., the same is the case in the later
language, which (compare 555 a) saves the personal ending `t` instead of
the precative-sign `s`; but the RV. usually, and the other Vedic texts
to some extent, have the proper ending `yās` (for `yāst`). As to `ḍh` in
the 2d pl. mid., see 226 c.

b\. The accent is as in the simple optative.

568\. The precative endings, then, accepted in the later language
(including, in brackets, those which are identical with the simple
optative), are as follows:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`yā́sam`

`yā́sva`

`yā́sma`

\[`īyá`\]

\[`īváhi`\]

\[`īmáhi`\]

2

\[`yā́s`\]

`yā́stam`

`yā́sta`

`īṣṭhā́s`

`īyā́sthām`

`īḍhvam`

3

\[`yā́t`\]

`yā́stām`

`yā́sus`

`īṣṭá`

`īyā́stām`

\[`īrán`\]

a\. Respecting the precative, see further 921 ff.

b\. As to the general uses of the optative, see below, 573 ff.

Imperative Mode.

569\. The imperative has no mode-sign; it is made by adding its own
endings directly to the tense-stem, just as the other endings are added
to form the indicative tenses.

a\. Hence, in 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl., its forms are indistinguishable
from those of the augment-preterit from the same stem with its augment
omitted.

b\. The rules as to the use of the different endings — especially in 2d
sing., where the variety is considerable — will be given below, in
connection with the various tense-systems. The ending `tāt`, however,
has so much that is peculiar in its use that it calls for a little
explanation here.

570\. The Imperative in `tāt`. An imperative form, usually having the
value of a 2d pers. sing., but sometimes also of other persons and
numbers, is made by adding `tāt` to a present tense-stem — in its weak
form, if it have a distinction of strong and weak form.

a\. Examples are:
`brūtāt, hatāt, vittā́t; pipṛtāt, jahītāt, dhattā́t; kṛṇutāt, kurutāt; gṛhṇītāt, jānītā́t; ávatāt, rákṣatāt, vasatāt; viçatāt, sṛjatāt; asyatāt, naçyatāt, chyatāt; kriyatāt`;
`gamayatāt, cyāvayatāt, vārayatāt`; `īpsatāt; jāgṛtāt`. No examples
have been found from a nasal-class verb (690), nor any other than those
here given from a passive, intensive, or desiderative. The few accented
cases indicate that the formation follows the general rule for one made
with an accented ending (552).

b\. The imperative in `tāt` is not a very rare formation in the older
language, being made (in V., B., and S.) from about fifty roots, and in
toward a hundred and fifty occurrences. Later, it is very unusual: thus,
only a single example has been noted in MBh., and one in R.; and
correspondingly few in yet more modern texts.

571\. As regards its meaning, this form appears to have prevailingly in
the Brāhmaṇas, and traceably but much less distinctly in the Vedic
texts, a specific tense-value added to its mode-value — as signifying,
namely, an injunction to be carried out at a later time than the
present: it is (like the Latin forms in `to` and `tote`) a posterior or
future imperative.

a\. Examples are:
`ihāi ’vá mā tíṣṭhantam abhyèhī́ ’ti brūhi tā́ṁ tú na ā́gatām pratiprábrūtāt`
(ÇB.) *say to her "come to me as I stand just here," and \[afterward\]
announce her to us as having come*;
`yád ūrdhvás tíṣṭhā dráviṇe ’há dhattāt` (RV.) *when thou shalt stand
upright, \[then\] bestow riches here* (and similarly in many cases);
`utkū́lam udvahó bhavo ’dúhya práti dhāvatāt` (AV.) *be a carrier up the
ascent; after having carried up, run back again*;
`vánaspátir ádhi tvā sthāsyati tásya vittāt` (TS.) *the tree will ascend
thee, \[then\] take note of it*.

b\. Examples of its use as other than 2d sing. are as follows: 1st
sing., `āvyuṣáṁ jāgṛtād ahám` (AV.; only case) *let me watch till
daybreak*; as 3d sing., `púnar mā́ ”viçatād rayíḥ` (TS.) *let wealth come
again to me*, `ayáṁ tyásya rā́jā mūrdhā́naṁ ví pātayatāt` (ÇB.) *the king
here shall make his head fly off*; as 2d du.,
`nā́satyāv abruvan devā́ḥ púnar ā́ vahatād íti` (RV.) *the gods said to the
two Açvins "bring them back again"*; as 2d pl.,
`ā́paḥ ... devéṣu naḥ sukṛ́to brūtāt` (TS.) *ye waters, announce us to the
gods as well-doers*. In the later language, the prevailing value appears
to be that of a 3d sing.: thus, `bhavān prasādaṁ kurutāt` (MBh.) *may
your worship do the favor*, `enam bhavān abhirakṣatāt` (DKC.) *let your
excellency protect him*.

c\. According to the native grammarians, the imperative in `tāt` is to
be used with a benedictive implication. No instance of such use appears
to be quotable.

d\. In a certain passage repeated several times in different Brāhmaṇas
and Sūtras, and containing a number of forms in `tāt` used as 2d pl.,
`vārayadhvāt` is read instead of `vārayatāt` in some of the texts (K.
AB. AÇS. ÇÇS.). No other occurrence of the ending `dhvāt` has been
anywhere noted. 

Uses of the Modes.

572\. Of the three modes, the imperative is the one most distinct and
limited in office, and most unchanged in use throughout the whole
history of the language. It signifies a command or injunction — an
attempt at the exercise of the speaker's will upon some one or something
outside of himself.

a\. This, however (in Sanskrit as in other languages), is by no means
always of the same force; the command shades off into a demand, an
exhortation, an entreaty, an expression of earnest desire. The
imperative also sometimes signifies an assumption or concession; and
occasionally, by pregnant construction, it becomes the expression of
something conditional or contingent; but it does not acquire any regular
use in dependent-clause-making.

b\. The imperative is now and then used in an interrogative sentence:
thus, `bravīhi ko ‘dyāi ’va mayā viyujyatām` (R.) *speak! who shall now
be separated by me*? `katham ete guṇavantaḥ kriyantām` (H.) *how are
they to be made virtuous?* `kasmāi piṇḍaḥ pradīyatām` (Vet.) *to whom
shall the offering be given?*

573\. The optative appears to have as its primary office the expression
of wish or desire; in the oldest language, its prevailing use in
independent clauses is that to which the name "optative" properly
belongs.

a\. But the expression of desire, on the one hand, passes naturally over
into that of request or entreaty, so that the optative becomes a
softened imperative; and, on the other hand, it comes to signify what is
generally desirable or proper, what should or ought to be, and so
becomes the mode of prescription; or, yet again, it is weakened into
signifying what may or can be, what is likely or usual, and so becomes
at last a softened statement of what is.

b\. Further, the optative in dependent clauses, with relative pronouns
and conjunctions, becomes a regular means of expression of the
conditional and contingent, in a wide and increasing variety of uses.

c\. The so-called precative forms (567) are ordinarily used in the
proper optative sense. But in the later language they are occasionally
met with in the other uses of the optative: thus,
`na hi prapaçyāmi mamā ’panudyād yac chokam` (Bh G.) *for I do not
perceive what should dispel my grief*; `yad bhūyāsur vibhūtayaḥ` (BhP.)
*that there should be changes*. Also rarely with `mā`: see 579 b. 

574\. The subjunctive, as has been pointed out, becomes nearly extinct
at an early period in the history of the language; there are left of it
in classical usage only two relics: the use of its first persons in an
imperative sense, or to signify a necessity or obligation resting on the
speaker, or a peremptory intention on his part; and the use of
unaugmented forms (579), with the negative particle मा `mā́,` in a
prohibitive or negative imperative sense.

a\. And the general value of the subjunctive from the beginning was what
these relics would seem to indicate; its fundamental meaning is perhaps
that of requisition, less peremptory than the imperative, more so than
the optative. But this meaning is liable to the same modifications and
transitions with that of the optative; and subjunctive and optative run
closely parallel with one another in the oldest language in their use in
independent clauses, and are hardly distinguishable in dependent. And
instead of their being (as in Greek) both maintained in use, and endowed
with nicer and more distinctive values, the subjunctive gradually
disappears, and the optative assumes alone the offices formerly shared
by both.

575\. The difference, then, between imperative and subjunctive and
optative, in their fundamental and most characteristic uses, is one of
degree: command, requisition, wish; and no sharp line of division exists
between them; they are more or less exchangeable with one another, and
combinable in coördinate clauses.

a\. Thus, in AV., we have in impv.: `çatáṁ jīva çarádaḥ ` *do thou live
a hundred autumns*; `ubhāú tāú jīvatāṁ jarádaṣṭī` *let them both live to
attain old age*; — in subj., `adyá jīvāni` *let me live this day*;
`çatáṁ jīvāti çarádaḥ` *he shall live a hundred autumns;* — in opt.,
`jī́vema çarádāṁ çatā́ni` *may we live hundreds of autumns*;
`sárvam ā́yur jīvyāsam` (prec.) *I would fain live out my whole term of
life*. Here the modes would be interchangeable with a hardly perceptible
change of meaning.

b\. Examples, again, of different modes in coördinate construction are:
`iyám agne nā́rī pátiṁ videṣṭa ... súvānā putrā́n máhiṣī bhavāti gatvā́ pátiṁ subhágā ví rājatu`
(AV.) *may this woman, O Agni! find a spouse; giving birth to sons she
shall become a chieftainess; having attained a spouse let her rule in
happiness;* `gopāyá naḥ svastáye prabúdhe naḥ púnar dadaḥ` (TS.) *watch
over us for* *our welfare; grant unto us to wake again*;
`syā́n naḥ sūnúḥ ... sā́ te sumatír bhūtv asmé` (RV.) *may there be to us
a son; let that favor of thine be ours*. It is not very seldom the case
that versions of the same passage in different texts show different
modes as various readings.

c\. There is, in fact, nothing in the earliest employment of these modes
to prove that they might not all be specialized uses of forms originally
equivalent — having, for instance, a general future meaning.

576\. As examples of the less characteristic use of subjunctive and
optative in the older language, in independent clauses, may be quoted
the following: `ā́ ghā tā́ gacchān úttarā yugā́ni` (RV.) *those later ages
will doubtless come*; `yád ... na marā íti mányase` (RV.) *if thou
thinkest "I shall not die"*; `ná tā́ naçanti ná dabhāti táskaraḥ` (RV.)
*they do not become lost; no thief can harm them*;
`kásmāi devā́ya havíṣā vidhema` (RV.) *to what god shall we offer
oblation?* `agnínā rayím açnavat ... divé-dive` (RV.) *by Agni one may
gain wealth every day*;
`utāí ’nām brahmáṇe dadyāt táthā syonā́ çivā́ syāt` (AV.) *one should give
her, however, to a Brahman; in that case she will be propitious and
favorable*; `áhar-ahar dadyāt` (ÇB.) *one should give every day*.

577\. The uses of the optative in the later language are of the utmost
variety, covering the whole field occupied jointly by the two modes in
earlier time. A few examples from a single text (MBh.) will be enough to
illustrate them: `ucchiṣṭaṁ nāi ’va bhuñjīyaṁ na kuryām pādadhāvanam` *I
will not eat of the remnant of the sacrifice, I will not perform the
foot-lavation*; `jñātīn vrajet` *let her go to her relatives*;
`nāi ’vaṁ sā karhicit kuryāt` *she should not act thus at any time*;
`kathaṁ vidyāṁ nalaṁ nṛpam` *how can I know king Nala?*
`utsarge saṁçayaḥ syāt tu vindetā ’pi sukhaṁ kvacit` *but in case of her
abandonment there may be a chance; she may also find happiness
somewhere*; `kathaṁ vāso vikarteyaṁ na ca budhyeta me priyā` *how can I
cut off the garment and my beloved not wake?*

578\. The later use of the first persons subjunctive as so-called
imperative involves no change of construction from former time, but only
restriction to a single kind of use: thus, `dīvyāva` *let us two play*;
`kiṁ karavāṇi te` *what shall I do for thee?*

579\. The imperative negative, or prohibitive, is from the earliest
period of the language regularly and usually expressed by the particle
mā́ with an augmentless past form, prevailingly aorist.

a\. Thus, `prá pata mé ’há raṁsthāḥ` (AV.) *fly away, do not stay here*;
`dviṣáṅç ca máhyaṁ radhyatu mā́ cā ’háṁ dviṣaté radham` (AV.) *both let
my foe be subject to me, and let me not be subject to my foe*;
`urv àçyām ábhayaṁ jyótir indra mā́ no dīrghā́ abhí naçan tamisrā́ḥ` (RV.)
*I would win broad fearless light, O Indra; let not the long darknesses
come upon us*; `mā́ na ā́yuḥ prá moṣīḥ` (RV.) *do not* *steal away our
life*; `samāçvasihi mā çucaḥ` (MBh.) *be comforted; do not grieve;*
`mā bhāiṣīḥ` or `bhāiḥ` (MBh. R.) *do not be afraid;*
`mā bhūt kālasya paryayaḥ` (R.) *let not a change of time take place.*
Examples with the imperfect are: `mā́ bibher ná mariṣyasi` (RV.) *do not
fear; thou wilt not die;* `mā́ smāi ’tā́nt sákhīn kuruthāḥ` (AV.) *do not
make friends of them;* `mā putram anutapyathāḥ` (MBh.) *do not sorrow
for thy son.* The relation of the imperfect to the aorist construction,
in point of frequency, is in RV. about as one to five, in AV. still
less, or about one to six; and though instances of the imperfect are
quotable from all the older texts, they are exceptional and infrequent;
while in the epics and later they become extremely rare.

b\. A single optative, `bhujema`, is used prohibitively with `mā́` in
RV.; the older language presents no other example, and the construction
is very rare also later. In an example or two, also, the precative
(`bhūyāt`, R. Pañc.) follows `mā`.

c\. The RV. has once apparently `mā́` with an imperative; but the passage
is probably corrupt. No other such case is met with in the older
language (unless `sṛpa`. TA. i. 14; doubtless a bad reading for
`sṛpas`); but in the epics and later the construction begins to appear,
and becomes an ordinary form of prohibition: thus,
`mā prayacche ”çvare dhanam` (H.) *do not bestow wealth on a lord;*
`sakhi māi ’vaṁ vada` (Vet.) *friend, do not speak thus.*

d\. The ÇB. (xi. 5. 1 ¹) appears to offer a single example of a true
subjunctive with `mā, ní padyāsāi`; there is perhaps something wrong
about the reading.

e\. In the epics and later, an aorist form not deprived of augment is
occasionally met with after `mā`: thus, `mā tvāṁ kālo ‘tyagāt` (MBh.)
*let not the time pass thee;* `mā vālipatham anv agāḥ` (R.) *do not
follow Vāli's road.* But the same anomaly occurs also two or three times
in the older language: thus, `vyàpaptat` (ÇB.), `agās` (TA.), `anaçat`
(KS.).

580\. But the use also of the optative with `ná` *not* in a prohibitive
sense appears in the Veda, and becomes later a familiar construction:
thus, `ná riṣyema kadā́ caná` (RV.) *may we suffer no harm at any time;*
`ná cā ’tisṛjén ná juhuyāt` (AV.) *and if he do not grant permission,
let him not sacrifice;* `tád u táthā ná kuryāt` (ÇB.) *but he must not
do that so;* `na divā çayīta` (ÇGS.) *let him not sleep by day;*
`na tvāṁ vidyur janāḥ` (MBh.) *let not people know thee.* This in the
later language is the correlative of the prescriptive optative, and both
are extremely common; so that in a text of prescriptive character the
optative forms may come to outnumber the indicative and imperative
together (as is the case, for example, in Manu).

581\. In all dependent constructions, it is still harder even in the
oldest language to establish a definite distinction between subjunctive
and optative; a method of use of either is scarcely to be found to which
the other does not furnish a practical equivalent — and then, in the
later language, such uses are represented by the optative alone. A few
examples will be sufficient to illustrate this:

a\. After relative pronouns and conjunctions in general:
`yā́ vyūṣúr yā́ç ca nūnáṁ vyucchā́n` (RV.) *which have shone forth
\[hitherto\], and which shall hereafter shine forth*;
`yó ‘to jā́yātā asmā́kaṁ sá éko ‘sat` (TS.) *whoever shall be born of her,
let him be one of us*;
`yó vāí tā́n vidyā́t pratyákṣaṁ sá brahmā́ véditā syāt` (AV.) *whoever
shall know them face to face, he may pass for a knowing priest*;
`putrā́ṇāṁ ... jātā́nāṁ janáyāç ca yā́n` (AV.) *of sons born and whom thou
mayest bear*; `yásya ... átithir gṛhā́n āgácchet` (AV.) *to whosesoever
house he may come as guest*; `yatamáthā kāmáyeta táthā kuryāt` (ÇB.) *in
whatever way he may choose, so may he do it*;
`yárhi hótā yájamānasya nā́ma gṛhṇīyā́t tárhi brūyāt` (TS.) *when the
sacrificing priest shall name the name of the offerer, then he may
speak*; `svarūpaṁ yadā draṣṭum icchethāḥ` (MBh.) *when thou shalt desire
to see thine own form*.

b\. In more distinctly conditional constructions:
`yájāma devā́n yádi çaknávāma` (RV.) *we will offer to the gods if we
shall be able*;
`yád agne syā́m aháṁ tváṁ tváṁ vā ghā syā́ aháṁ syúṣ ṭe satyā́ ihā́ ”çíṣaḥ`
(RV.) *if I were thou, Agni, or if thou wert I, thy wishes should be
realized on the spot*;
`yó dyā́m atisárpāt parástān ná sá mucyātāi váruṇasya rā́jñaḥ` (AV.)
*though one steal far away beyond the sky, he shall not escape king
Varuna*;
`yád ánāçvān upaváset kṣódhukaḥ syād yád açnīyā́d rudrò ‘sya paçū́n abhí manyeta`
(TS.) *if he should continue without eating, he would starve; if he
should eat, Rudra would attack his cattle*;
`prārthayed yadi māṁ kaçcid daṇḍyaḥ sa me pumān bhavet` (MBh.) *if any
man soever should desire me, he should suffer punishment*. These and the
like constructions, with the optative, are very common in the
`Brāhmaṇas` and later.

c\. In final clauses: `yáthā ’háṁ çatruhó ‘sāni` (AV.) *that I may be a
slayer of my enemies*; `gṛṇānā́ yáthā píbātho ándhaḥ` (RV.) *that being
praised with song ye may drink the draught*;
`urāú yáthā táva çárman mádema` (RV.) *in order that we rejoice in thy
wide protection*; `úpa jānīta yáthe ‘yám púnar āgácchet` (ÇB.) *contrive
that she come back again*; `kṛpāṁ kuryād yathā mayi` (MBh.) *so that he
may take pity on me*. This is in the Veda one of the most frequent uses
of the subjunctive; and in its correlative negative form, with `néd` *in
order that not* or *lest* (always followed by an accented verb), it
continues not rare in the Brāhmaṇas.

d\. The indicative is also very commonly used in final clauses after
`yathā`: thus, `yáthā ’yáṁ púruṣo ‘ntárikṣam anucárati` (ÇB.) *in order
that this man may traverse the atmosphere*; `yathā na vighnaḥ kriyate`
(R.) *so that no hindrance may arise*;
`yathā ’yaṁ naçyati tathā vidheyam` (H.) *it must be so managed that he
perish*. 

e\. With the conditional use of subjunctive and optative is farther to
be compared that of the so-called conditional tense: see below, 950.

f\. As is indicated by many of the examples given above, it is usual in
a conditional sentence, containing protasis and apodosis, to employ
always the same mode, whether subjunctive or optative (or conditional),
in each of the two clauses. For the older language, this is a rule
well-nigh or quite without exception.

582\. No distinction of meaning has been established between the modes
of the present-system and those (in the older language) of the perfect
and aorist-systems.

Participles.

583\. Participles, active and middle, are made from all the tense-stems
— except the periphrastic future, and, in the later language, the aorist
(and aorist participles are rare from the beginning).

a\. The participles unconnected with the tense-systems are treated in
chap. XIII. (952 ff.).

584\. The general participial endings are अन्त् `ant` (weak form अत्
`at`; fem. अन्ती `antī` or अती `atī`: see above, 449) for the active,
and आन `āna` (fem. आना `ānā`) for the middle. But —

a\. After a tense-stem ending in `a`, the active participial suffix is
virtually `nt`, one of the two `a`'s being lost in the combination of
stem-final and suffix.

b\. After a tense-stem ending in `a`, the middle participial suffix is
`māna` instead of `āna`. But there are occasional exceptions to the rule
as to the use of `māna` and `āna` respectively, which will be pointed
out in connection with the various formations below. Such exceptions are
especially frequent in the causative: see 1043 f.

c\. The perfect has in the active the peculiar suffix `vāṅs` (weakest
form `uṣ`, middle form `vat`; fem, `uṣī`: see, for the inflection of
this participle, above, 458 ff.).

d\. For details, as to form of stem etc., and for special exceptions,
see the following chapters.

Augment.

585\. The augment is a short अ `a`, prefixed to a tense-stem — and, if
the latter begin with a vowel, combining with that vowel irregularly
into the heavier or `vṛddhi` diphthong (136 a). It is always (without
any exception) the accented element in the verbal form of which it makes
a part.

a\. In the Veda, the augment is in a few forms long `ā`: thus, `ā́naṭ`,
`ā́var`, `āvṛṇi`, `ā́vṛṇak`, `āvidhyat`, `āyunak`, `ā́yukta`, `ā́yukṣātām`,
`ā́riṇak`, `ā́rāik` and `yás ta ā́vidhat`, RV. ii. 1. 7, 9?).

586\. The augment is a sign of past time. And an augment-preterit is
made from each of the tense-stems from which the system of conjugation
is derived: namely, the imperfect, from the present-stem; the pluperfect
(in the Veda only), from the perfect-stem; the conditional, from the
future-stem; while in the aorist such a preterit stands without any
corresponding present indicative.

587\. In the early language, especially in the RV., the occurrence of
forms identical with those of augment-tenses save for the lack of an
augment is quite frequent. Such forms lose in general, along with the
augment, the specific character of the tenses to which they belong; and
they are then employed in part non-modally, with either a present or a
past sense; and in part modally, with either a subjunctive or an
optative sense — especially often and regularly after `mā` prohibitive
(579); and this last mentioned use comes down also into the later
language.

a\. In RV., the augmentless forms are more than half as common as the
augmented (about 2000 and 3300), and are made from the present, perfect,
and aorist-systems, but considerably over half from the aorist. Their
non-modal and modal uses are of nearly equal frequency. The tense value
of the non-modally used forms is more often past than present. Of the
modally used forms, nearly a third are construed with `mā` prohibitive;
the rest have twice as often an optative as a proper subjunctive value.

b\. In AV., the numerical relations are very different. The augmentless
forms are less than a third as many as the augmented (about 475 to
1450), and are prevailingly (more than four fifths) aoristic. The
non-modal uses are only a tenth of the modal. Of the modally used forms,
about four fifths are construed with `mā` prohibitive; the rest are
chiefly optative in value. Then, in the language of the Brāhmaṇas (not
including the `mantra`-material which they contain), the loss of augment
is, save in occasional sporadic cases, restricted to the prohibitive
construction with `mā`; and the same continues to be the case later.

c\. The accentuation of the augmentless forms is throughout in
accordance with that of unaugmented tenses of similar formation.
Examples will be given below, under the various tenses.

d\. Besides the augmentless aorist-forms with `mā` prohibitive, there
are also found occasionally in the later language augmentless
imperfect-forms (very rarely aorist-forms), which have the same value as
if they were augmented, and are for the most part examples of metrical
license. They are especially frequent in the epics (whence some scores
of them are quotable). 

Reduplication.

588\. The derivation of conjugational and declensional stems from roots
by reduplication, either alone or along with other formative elements,
has been already spoken of (259), and the formations in which
reduplication appears have been specified: they are, in primary
verb-inflection, the present (of a certain class of verbs), the perfect
(of nearly all), and the aorist (of a large number); and the intensive
and desiderative secondary conjugations contain in their stems the same
element.

589\. The general principle of reduplication is the prefixion to a root
of a part of itself repeated — if it begin with consonants, the initial
consonant and the vowel; if it begin with a vowel, that vowel, either
alone or with a following consonant. The varieties of detail, however,
are very considerable. Thus, especially, as regards the vowel, which in
present and perfect and desiderative is regularly shorter and lighter in
the reduplication than in the root-syllable, in aorist is longer, and in
intensive is strengthened. The differences as regards an initial
consonant are less, and chiefly confined to the intensive; for the
others, certain general rules may be here stated, all further details
being left to be given in connection with the account of the separate
formations.

590\. The consonant of the reduplicating syllable is in general the
first consonant of the root: thus, पप्रछ् `paprach` from √प्रछ् `prach`;
शिश्रि `çiçri` from √श्रि `çri`; बुबुध् `bubudh` from √बुध्. But —

a\. A non-aspirate is substituted in reduplication for an aspirate:
thus, दधा `dadhā` from √धा; बिभृ `bibhṛ` from √भृ `bhṛ`.

b\. A palatal is substituted for a guttural or for ह् `h`: thus, चकृ
`cakṛ` from √कृ `kṛ`; चिखिद् `cikhid` from √खिद् `khid`; जग्रभ्
`jagrabh` from √ग्रभ् `grabh`; जहृ `jahṛ` from √हृ `hṛ`.

c\. The occasional reversion, on the other hand, of a palatal in the
radical syllable to guttural form has been noticed above (216 l).

d\. Of two initial consonants, the second, if it be a non-nasal mute
preceded by a sibilant, is repeated instead of the first: thus, तस्तृ
`tasṭr` from √स्तृ `stṛ`; तस्था `tasthā` from √स्था `sthā`; चस्कन्द्
`caskand` from √स्कन्द् `skand`; चस्खल् `caskhal` from √स्खल् `skhal`;
चुश्चुत् `cuçcut` from √श्चुत् `çcut`; पस्पृध् `paspṛdh` from √स्पृध्
`spṛdh`; पुस्फुट् `pusphuṭ` from √स्फुट् `sphuṭ`: — but सस्ना `sasnā`
from √स्ना `snā`; सस्मृ `sasmṛ` from √स्मृ `smṛ`; सुस्रु `susru` from
√स्रु `sru`; शिश्लिष् `çiçliṣ` from √श्लिष् `çliṣ`.

Accent of the Verb.

591\. The statements which have been made above, and those which will be
made below, as to the accent of verbal forms, apply to those cases in
which the verb is actually accented.

a\. But, according to the grammarians, and according to the invariable
practice in accentuated texts, the verb is in the majority of its
occurrences unaccented or toneless.

b\. That is to say, of course, the verb in its proper forms, its
personal or so-called finite forms. The verbal nouns and adjectives, or
the infinitives and participles, are subject to precisely the same laws
of accent as other nouns and adjectives.

592\. The general rule, covering most of the cases, is this: The verb in
an independent clause is unaccented, unless it stand at the beginning of
the clause — or also, in metrical text, at the beginning of a `pāda`.

a\. For the accent of the verb, as well as for that of the vocative case
(above, 314 c), the beginning of a `pāda` counts as that of a sentence,
whatever be the logical connection of the `pāda` with what precedes it.

b\. Examples of the unaccented verb are: `agním īḍe puróhitam` *Agni I
praise, the house-priest;* `sá íd devéṣu gacchati` *that, truly, goes to
the gods;* `ágne sūpāyanó bhava` *O Agni, be easy of access;*
`idám indra çṛṇuhi somapa` *this, O Indra, soma-drinker, hear;*
`námas te rudra kṛṇmaḥ` *homage to thee, Rudra, we offer;*
`yájamānasya paçū́n pāhi` *the sacrificer's cattle protect thou.*

c\. Hence, there are two principal situations in which the verb retains
its accent: 

593\. First, the verb is accented when it stands at the beginning of a
clause — or, in verse, of a `pāda`.

a\. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the sentence are, in
prose, `çúndhadhvaṁ dāívyāya kármaṇe` *be pure for the divine ceremony*;
`āpnótī ’máṁ lokám` *he wins this world*; in verse, where the head of
the sentence is also that of the `pāda`, `syā́mé ’d índrasya çármaṇi`
*may we be in Indra's protection*; `darçáya mā yātudhā́nān` *show me the
sorcerers*; `gámad vā́jebhir ā́ sá naḥ` *may he come with good things to
us*; — in verse, where the head of the clause is within the `pāda`,
`téṣām pāhi çrudhī́ hávam` *drink of them, hear our call*;
`sástu mātā́ sástu pitā́ sástu çvā́ sástu viçpátiḥ` *let the mother sleep,
let the father sleep, let the dog sleep, let the master sleep*;
`víçvakarman námas te pāhy àsmā́n` *Viçvakarman, homage to thee; protect
us!* `yuvā́m ... rā́jña ūce duhitā́ pṛcché vāṁ narā` *the king's daughter
said to you "I pray you, ye men"*;
`vayáṁ te váya indra viddhí ṣu ṇaḥ prá bharāmahe` *we offer thee, Indra,
strengthening; take note of us.*

b\. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the `pāda` when this is
not the head of the sentence are: `áthā te ántamānāṁ vidyā́ma sumatīnā́m`
*so may we enjoy thy most intimate favors*;
`dhātā́ ’syā́ agrúvāi pátiṁ dádhātu pratikāmyàm` *Dhātar bestow upon this
girl a husband according to her wish*; `yātudhānasya somapa jahí prajā́m`
*slay, Soma-drinker, the progeny of the sorcerer.*

594\. Certain special cases under this head are as follows:

a\. As a vocative forms no syntactical part of the sentence to which it
is attached, but is only an external appendage to it, a verb following
an initial vocative, or more than one, is accented, as if it were itself
initial in the clause or `pāda`: thus, `ā́çrutkarṇa çrudhī́ hávam` *O thou
of listening ears, hear our call!* `sī́te vándāmahe tvā` *O Sītā, we
reverence thee;* `víçve devā vásavo rákṣate ’mám` *all ye gods, ye
Vasus, protect this man;* `utā́ ”gaç cakrúṣaṁ devā dévā jīváyathā púnaḥ`
*likewise him, O gods, who has committed crime, ye gods, ye make to live
again.*

b\. If more than one verb follow a word or words syntactically connected
with them all, only the first loses its accent, the others being treated
as if they were initial verbs in separate clauses, with the same
adjuncts understood: thus, `taráṇir íj jayati kṣéti púṣyati` *successful
he conquers, rules, thrives;*
`amítrān ... párāca indra prá mṛṇā jahī́ ca` *our foes, Indra, drive far
away and slay;* `asmábhyaṁ jeṣi yótsi ca` *for us conquer and fight;*
`ágnīṣomā havíṣaḥ prásthitasya vītáṁ háryataṁ vṛṣaṇā juṣéthām` *O Agni
and Soma, of the oblation set forth partake, enjoy, ye mighty ones, take
pleasure.*

c\. In like manner (but much less often), an adjunct, as subject or
object, standing between two verbs and logically belonging to both, is
reckoned to the first alone, and the second has the initial accent:
thus, `jahí prajā́ṁ náyasva ca` *slay the progeny, and bring \[it\]
hither*; `çṛṇótu naḥ subhágā bódhatu tmánā` *may the blessed one hear
us, \[and may she\] kindly regard \[us\].* 

d\. It has even come to be a formal rule that a verb immediately
following another verb is accented: thus,
`sá yá etám evám upā́ste pūryáte prajáyā paçúbhiḥ` (ÇB.) *whoever
worships him thus is filled with offspring and cattle*.

595\. Second, the verb is accented, whatever its position, in a
dependent clause.

a\. The dependency of a clause is in the very great majority of cases
conditioned by the relative pronoun `ya`, or one of its derivatives or
compounds. Thus: `yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási` *what offering thou
protectest*; `ó té yanti yé aparī́ṣu páçyān` *they are coming who shall
behold her hereafter;* `sahá yán me ásti téna` *along with that which is
mine;* `yátra naḥ pū́rve pitáraḥ pareyúḥ` *whither our fathers of old
departed*; `adyā́ murīya yádi yātudhā́no ásmi` *let me die on the spot, if
I am a sorcerer;* `yáthā́ ’hāny anupūrvám bhávanti` *as days follow one
another in order;* `yā́vad idám bhúvanaṁ víçvam ásti` *how great this
whole creation is;* `yátkāmās te juhumás tán no astu` *what desiring we
sacrifice to thee, let that become ours;* `yatamás títṛpsāt` *whichever
one desires to enjoy.*

b\. The presence of a relative word in the sentence does not, of course,
accent the verb, unless this is really the predicate of a dependent
clause: thus, `ápa tyé tāyávo yathā yanti` *they make off like thieves
(as thieves do);* `yát sthā́ jágac ca rejate` *whatever \[is\] immovable
and movable trembles;* `yathākā́maṁ ní padyate` *he lies down at his
pleasure.*

c\. The particle `ca` when it means *if*, and `céd (ca+id)` *if*, give
an accent to the verb: thus, `brahmā́ céd dhástam ágrahīt` *if a Brahman
has grasped her hand;* `tváṁ ca soma no váço jīvā́tuṁ ná marāmahe` *if
thou, Soma, willest us to live, we shall not die;*
`ā́ ca gácchān mitrám enā dadhāma` *if he will come here, we will make
friends with him.*

d\. There are a very few passages in which the logical dependence of a
clause containing no subordinating word appears to give the verb its
accent: thus,
`sám áçvaparṇāç cáranti no náro ‘smā́kam indra rathíno jayantu` *when our
men, horse-winged, come into conflict, let the chariot-fighters of our
side, O Indra, win the victory*. Rarely, too, an imperative so following
another imperative that its action may seem a consequence of the
latter's is accented: thus, `tū́yam ā́ gahi káṇveṣu sú sácā píba` *come
hither quickly; drink along with the Kanvas* (i. e. *in order to
drink*).

e\. A few other particles give the verb an accent, in virtue of a slight
subordinating force belonging to them: thus, especially `hí` (with its
negation `nahí`), which in its fullest value means *for*, but shades off
from that into a mere asseverative sense; the verb or verbs connected
with it are always accented: thus, `ví té muñcantāṁ vimúco hí sánti`
*let them release him, for they are releasers;*
`yác cid dhí ... anāçastā́ iva smási` *if we, forsooth, are as it were
unrenowned;* — also `néd (ná+íd)`, meaning *lest, that not:* thus,
`nét tvā tápāti sū́ro arcíṣā` *that the sun may not burn thee with his
beam;* `virā́jaṁ néd vicchinádānī́ ’ti` *saying to himself,* *"lest I cut
off the virāj"* (such cases are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas); — and the
interrogative `kuvíd` *whether?* thus, `ukthébhiḥ kuvíd āgamát` *will he
come hither for our praises?*

596\. But further, the verb of a prior clause is not infrequently
accented in antithetical construction.

a\. Sometimes, the relation of the two clauses is readily capable of
being regarded as that of protasis and apodosis; but often, also, such a
relation is very indistinct; and the cases of antithesis shade off into
those of ordinary coördination, the line between them appearing to be
rather arbitrarily drawn.

b\. In many cases, the antithesis is made distincter by the presence in
the two clauses of correlative words, especially `anya`—`anya`,
`eka`—`eka`, `vā`—`vā`, `ca`—`ca`: thus,
`prá-prā ’nyé yánti páry anyá āsate` *some go on and on, others sit
about* (as if it were *while some go* etc.);
`úd vā siñcádhvam úpa vā pṛṇadhvam` *either pour out, or fill up;*
`sáṁ ce ’dhyásvā ’gne prá ca vardhaye ’mám` *both do thou thyself become
kindled, Agni, and do thou increase this person.* But it is also made
without such help: thus,
`prā́ ’jātāḥ prajā́ janáyati pári prájātā gṛhṇāti` *the unborn progeny he
generates, the born he embraces;*
`ápa yusmád ákramīn nā́ ’smā́n upā́vartate` *\[though\] she has gone away
from you, she does not come to us;*
`nā́ ’ndhò ‘dhvaryúr bhávati ná yajñáṁ rákṣāṅsi ghnanti` *the priest does
not become blind, the demons do not destroy the sacrifice;*
`kéna sómā gṛhyánte kéna hūyante` *by whom \[on the one hand\] are the
somas dipped out? by whom \[on the other hand\] are they offered?*

597\. Where the verb would be the same in the two antithetical clauses,
it is not infrequently omitted in the second: thus, beside complete
expressions like `urvī́ cā́ ’si vásvī cā ’si` *both thou art broad and
thou art good*, occur, much oftener, incomplete ones like
`agnír amúṣmiṅ loká ā́sīd yamò ‘smín` *Agni was in yonder world, Yama
\[was\] in this;* `asthnā́ ’nyā́ḥ prajā́ḥ pratitíṣṭhanti māṅsénā ’nyāḥ` *by
bone some creatures stand firm, by flesh others;*
`dvipā́c ca sárvaṁ no rákṣa cátuṣpād yác ca naḥ svám` *both protect
everything of ours that is biped, and also whatever that is quadruped
belongs to us.*

a\. Accentuation of the verb in the former of two antithetical clauses
is a rule more strictly followed in the `Brāhmaṇas` than in the Veda,
and least strictly in the RV.: thus, in RV., `abhí dyā́m mahinā́ bhuvam`
(not `bhúvam`) `abhī̀ ’mām pṛthivī́m mahī́m` *I am superior to the sky in
greatness, also to this great earth;* and even
`índro vidur án̄girasaç ca ghorā́ḥ` *Indra knows, and the terrible
Angirases.*

598\. There are certain more or less doubtful cases in which a verb-form
is perhaps accented for emphasis.

a\. Thus, sporadically before `caná` *in any wise*, and in connection
with asseverative particles, as `kíla, an̄gá, evá,` and (in ÇB.,
regularly) `hánta`: thus, `hánte ’mā́m pṛthivī́ṁ vibhájāmahāi` *come on!
let us share up this earth.*
