+++
title = "13 Chapter IX PRESENT-SYSTEM"

+++




## CHAPTER IX.

  

THE PRESENT-SYSTEM.

599\. THE present-system, or system of forms coming from the
present-stem, is composed (as was pointed out above) of a present
indicative tense, together with a subjunctive (mostly lost in the
classical language), an optative, an imperative, and a participle, and
also a past tense, an augment-preterit, to which we give (by analogy
with the Greek) the name of imperfect.

a\. These forms often go in Sanskrit grammars by the name of "special
tenses", while the other tense-systems are styled "general tenses" — as
if the former were made from a special tense-stem or modified root,
while the latter came, all alike, from the root itself. There is no
reason why such a distinction and nomenclature should be retained;
since, on the one hand, the "special tenses" come in one set of verbs
directly from the root, and, on the other hand, the other tense-systems
are mostly made from stems — and, in the case of the aorist, from stems
having a variety of form comparable with that of present-stems.

600\. Practically, the present-system is the most prominent and
important part of the whole conjugation, since, from the earliest period
of the language, its forms are very much more frequent than those of all
the other systems together.

a\. Thus, in the Veda, the occurrences of personal forms of this system
are to those of all others about as three to one; in the Aitareya
Brāhmaṇa, as five to one; in the Hitopadeça, as six to one; in the
Çakuntalā, as eight to one; in Manu, as thirty to one.

601\. And, as there is also great variety in the manner in which
different roots form their present-stem, this, as being their most
conspicuous difference, is made the basis of their principal
classification; and a verb is said to be of this or of that conjugation,
or class, according to the way in which its present-stem is made and
inflected. 

602\. In a small minority of verbs, the present-stem is identical with
the root. Then there are besides (excluding the passive and causative)
seven more or less different methods of forming a present-stem from the
root, each method being followed by a larger or smaller number of verbs.
These are the "classes" or "conjugation-classes", as laid down by the
native Hindu grammarians. They are arranged by the latter in a certain
wholly artificial and unsystematic order (the ground of which has never
been discovered); and they are wont to be designated in European works
according to this order, or else, after Hindu example, by the root
standing at the head of each class in the Hindu lists. A different
arrangement and nomenclature will be followed here, namely as below —
the classes being divided (as is usual in European grammars) into two
more general classes or conjugations, distinguished from one another by
wider differences than those which separate the special classes.

603\. The classes of the FIRST or NON-`a`-CONJUGATION are as follows:

I. The root-class (second class, or `ad`-class, of the Hindu
grammarians); its present-stem is coincident with the root itself: thus,
अद् `ad` *eat*; इ `i` *go*; आस् `ās` *sit*; या `yā` *go*; द्विष् `dviṣ`
*hate*; दुह् `duh` *milk*.

II\. The reduplicating class (third or `hu`-class); the root is
reduplicated to form the present-stem: thus, जुहु `juhu` from √हु `hu`
*sacrifice*; ददा `dadā` from √दा `dā` *give*; बिभृ `bibhṛ` from √भृ
`bhṛ` *bear*.

III\. The nasal class (seventh or `rudh`-class); a nasal, extended to
the syllable न `na` in strong forms, is inserted before the final
consonant of the root: thus, रुन्ध् `rundh` (or रुणध् `ruṇadh`) from
√रुध् `rudh` *obstruct*; युञ्ज् `yuñj` (or युनज् `yunaj`) from √युज्
`yuj` *join*. 

IV\. a. The `nu`-class (fifth or `su`-class); the syllable नु `nu` is
added to the root: thus, सुनु `sunu` from √सु `su` *press out;* आप्नु
`āpnu` from √आप् āp *obtain*.

b\. A very small number (only half-a-dozen) of roots ending already in
न् `n`, and also one very common and quite irregularly inflected root
not so ending (कृ `kṛ` *make*), add उ `u` alone to form the
present-stem. This is the eighth or `tan`-class of the Hindu
grammarians; it may be best ranked by us as a sub-class, the `u`-class:
thus, तनु `tanu` from √तन् `tan` *stretch*.

V. The `nā`-class (ninth or `krī`-class); the syllable ना `nā` (or, in
weak forms, नी `nī`) is added to the root: thus, क्रीणा `krīṇā` (or
क्रीणी `krīṇī`) from √क्री `krī` *buy*; स्तभ्ना `stabhnā` (or स्तभ्नी
`stabhnī`) from √स्तभ् `stabh` *establish*.

604\. These classes have in common, as their most fundamental
characteristic, a shift of accent: the tone being now upon the ending,
and now upon the root or the class-sign. Along with this goes a
variatior in the stem itself, which has a stronger or fuller form when
the accent rests upon it, and a weaker or briefer form when the accent
is on the ending these: forms are to be distinguished as the strong stem
and the weak stem respectively (in part, both have been given above).
The classes also form their optative active, their 2d sing. imperative,
their 3d pl. middle, and their middle participle, in a different manner
from the others.

605\. In the classes of the SECOND or `a`-CONJUGATION, the present-stem
ends in `a`, and the accent has a fixed place, remaining always upon the
same syllable of the stem, and never shifted to the endings. Also, the
optative, the 2d sing. impv., the 3d pl. middle, and the middle
participle, are (as just stated) unlike those of the other conjugation.

606\. The classes of this conjugation are as follows:

VI\. The `a`-class, or unaccented `a`-class (first or `bhū`-class); the
added class-sign is `a` simply; and the root, which has the accent, is
(if capable of it) strengthened by `guṇa` throughout: thus, भव `bháva`
from √भू `bhū` *be*; नय `náya` from √नी `nī` *lead*; बोध `bódha` from
√बुध् `budh` *wake*; वद `váda` from √वद् `vad` *speak*.

VII\. The `á`-class, or accented `a`-class (sixth or `tud`-class); the
added class-sign is `a`, as in the preceding class; but it has the
accent, and the unaccented root remains unstrengthened: thus, तुद `tudá`
from √तुद् `tud` *thrust*; सृज `sṛjá` from √सृज् `sṛj` *let loose*; सुव
`suvá` from √सू `sū` *give birth*.

VIII\. The `ya`-class (fourth or `div`-class); `ya` is added to the
root, which has the accent: thus, दीव्य `dī́vya` from √दिव् `div` (more
properly दीव् `dīv`: see 765) *play*; नह्य `náhya` from √नह् `nah`
*bind*; क्रुध्य `krúdhya` from √क्रुध् krudh *be angry*.

IX\. The passive conjugation is also properly a present-system only,
having a class-sign which is not extended into the other systems; though
it differs markedly from the remaining classes in having a specific
meaning, and in being formable in the middle voice from all transitive
verbs. Its inflection may therefore best be treated next to that of the
`ya`-class, with which it is most nearly connected, differing from it as
the `á`-class from the `a`-class. It forms its stem, namely, by adding
an accented `yá` to the root: thus, अद्य `adyá` from √अद् `ad` *eat*;
रुध्य `rudhyá` from √रुध् `rudh` *obstruct*; बुध्य `budhyá` from √बुध्
`budh` *wake*; तुद्य `tudyá` from √तुद् `tud` *thrust*. 

607\. The Hindu grammarians reckon a tenth class or `cur`-class, having
a class-sign `áya` added to a strengthened root (thus, `coráya` from
√`cur`), and an inflection like that of the other `a`-stems. Since,
however, this stem is not limited to the present-system, but extends
also into the rest of the conjugation — while it also has to a great
extent a causative value, and may be formed in that value from a large
number of roots — it will be best treated in full along with the
derivative conjugations (chap. XIV., 1041 ff.).

608\. A small number of roots add in the present-system a `ch`, or
substitute a `ch` for their final consonant, and form a stem ending in
`cha` or `chá`, which is then inflected like any `a`-stem. This is
historically, doubtless, a true class-sign, analogous with the rest; but
the verbs showing it are so few, and in formation so irregular, that
they are not well to be put together into a class, but may best be
treated as special cases falling under the other classes.

a\. Roots adding `ch` are `ṛ` and `yu`, which make the stems `ṛcchá` and
`yúccha`.

b\. Roots substituting `ch` for their final are `iṣ`, `uṣ` (or `vas`
*shine*), `gam`, `yam`, which make the stems `icchá`, `ucchá`, `gáccha`,
`yáccha`.

c\. Of the so-called roots ending in `ch`, several are more or less
clearly stems, whose use has been extended from the present to other
systems of tenses.

609\. Roots are not wholly limited, even in the later language, to one
mode of formation of their present-stem, but are sometimes reckoned as
belonging to two or more different conjugation-classes. And such variety
of formation is especially frequent in the Veda, being exhibited by a
considerable proportion of the roots there occurring; already in the
Brāhmaṇas, however, a condition is reached nearly agreeing in this
respect with the classical language. The different present-formations
sometimes have differences of meaning; yet not more important ones than
are often found belonging to the same formation, nor of a kind to show
clearly a difference of value as originally belonging to the separate
classes of presents. If anything of this kind is to be established, it
must be from the derivative conjugations, which are separated by no
fixed line from the present-systems.

610\. We take up now the different classes, in the order in which they
have been arranged above, to describe more in detail, and with
illustration, the formation of their present-systems, and to notice the
irregularities belonging under each class.

I. Root-class (second, `ad`-class).

611\. In this class there is no class-sign; the root itself is also
present-stem, and to it are added directly the personal endings — but
combined in subjunctive and optative with the respective mode-signs; and
in the imperfect the augment is prefixed to the root.

a\. The accented endings (552) regularly take the accent — except in the
imperfect, where it falls on the augment — and before them the root
remains unchanged; before the unaccented endings, the root takes the
`guṇa`-strengthening.

b\. It is only in the first three classes that the endings come
immediately in contact with a final consonant of the root, and that the
roles for consonant combination have to be noted and applied. In these
classes, then, additional paradigms will be given, to illustrate the
modes of combination.

1\. Present Indicative.

612\. The endings are the primary (with अते `áte` in 3d pl. mid.), added
to the bare root. The root takes the accent, and has `guṇa`, if capable
of it, in the three persons sing. act.

Examples of inflection: a. active, root इ `i` *go*: strong form of
root-stem, ए `é`; weak form, इ `i`; middle, root `ās` *sit*, stem `ā́s`
(irregularly accented throughout: 628).

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

एमि  
`émi`

इवस्  
`ivás`

इमस्  
`imás`

आसे  
`ā́se`

आस्वहे  
`ā́svahe`

आस्महे  
`ā́smahe`

2

एषि  
`éṣi`

इथस्  
`ithás`

इथ  
`ithá`

आस्से  
`ā́sse`

आसाथे  
`ā́sāthe`

आद्ध्वे  
`ā́ddhve`

3

एति  
`éti`

इतस्  
`itás`

यन्ति  
`yánti`

आस्ते  
`ā́ste`

आसाते  
`ā́sāte`

आसते  
`ā́sate`

b\. root `dviṣ`. *hate*: strong stem-form, `dvéṣ`; weak, `dviṣ`. For
rules of combination for the final `ṣ`, see 226.

  

1

`dvéṣmi`

`dviṣvás`

`dviṣmás`

`dviṣé`

`dviṣváhe`

`dviṣmáhe`

2

`dvékṣi`

`dviṣṭhás`

`dviṣṭhá`

`dvikṣé`

`dviṣā́the`

`dviḍḍhvé`

3

`dvéṣṭi`

`dviṣṭás`

`dviṣánti`

`dviṣṭé`

`dviṣā́te`

`dviṣáte`

c\. root `duh` *milk*: strong stem-form, `dóh`; weak, `duh`. For rules
of combination for the final `h`, and for the conversion of the initial
to `dh`, see 222 a, 155, 160.

1

`dóhmi`

`duhvás`

`duhmás`

`duhé`

`duhváhe`

`duhmáhe`

2

`dhókṣi`

`dugdhás`

`dugdhá`

`dhukṣé`

`duhā́the`

`dhugdhvé`

3

`dógdhi`

`dugdhás`

`duhánti`

`dugdhé`

`duhā́te`

`duháte`



d\. root `lih` *lick*: strong stem, `léh`; weak, `lih`. For rules of
combination of the final `h`, see 222 b.

1

`léhmi`

`lihvás`

`lihmás`

`lihé`

`lihváhe`

`lihmáhe`

2

`lékṣi`

`līḍhás`

`līḍhá`

`likṣé`

`lihā́the`

`līḍhvé`

3

`léḍhi`

`līḍhás`

`lihánti`

`līḍhé`

`lihā́te`

`liháte`

613\. Examples of the 3d sing. mid. coincident in form with the 1st
sing. are not rare in the older language (both V. and B.): the most
frequent examples are `ī́çe, duhé, vidé, çáye`; more sporadic are
`cité, bruve, huvé`. To `tha` of the 2d pl. is added `na` in
`sthána, pāthánā, yāthána.` The irregular accent of the 3d pl. mid. is
found in RV. in `rihaté, duhaté`. Examples of the same person in `re`
and `rate` also occur: thus (besides those mentioned below, 629–30,
635), `vidré`, and, with auxiliary vowel, `arhire` (unless these are to
be ranked, rather, as perfect forms without reduplication: 790 b).

2\. Present Subjunctive.

614\. Subjunctive forms of this class are not uncommon in the older
language, and nearly all those which the formation anywhere admits are
quotable, from Veda or from Brāhmaṇa. A complete paradigm, accordingly,
is given below, with the few forms not actually quotable for this class
enclosed in brackets. We may take as models (as above), for the active
the root `i` *go*, and for the middle the root `ās` *sit*, from both of
which numerous forms are met with (although neither for these nor for
any others can the whole series be found in actual use).

a\. The mode-stems are `áya (é+a)` and `ā́sa (ā́s+a)` respectively.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`áyāni`  
`áyā`

`áyāva`

`áyāma`

`ā́sāi`

`ā́sāvahāi`  
\[`ā́sāvahe`\]

`ā́sāmahāi`  
\[`ā́sāmahe`\]

2

`áyasi`  
`áyas`

`áyathas`

`áyatha`

`ā́sase`  
`ā́sāsāi`

\[`ā́sāithe`\]

\[`ā́sadhve`\]  
`ā́sādhvāi`

3

`áyati`  
`áyat`

`áyatas`

`áyan`

`ā́sate`  
`ā́sātāi`

`ā́sāite`

\[`ā́sante`\] -`nta`  
`ā́sāntāi`

615\. The RV. has no middle forms in `āi` except those of the first
person. The 1st. sing. act. in `ā` occurs only in RV., in
`ayā, bravā, stávā`. The 2d and 3d sing. act. with primary endings are
very unusual in the Brāhmaṇas. Forms irregularly made with long `ā`,
like those from present-stems in `a`, are not rare in AV. and B.: thus,
`ayās, ayāt, áyān; ásāt, brávāt; bravāthas; asātha, ayātha, bravātha, hanātha; ádān, dohān`.
Of middle forms with secondary endings are found `hánanta`, 3d pl., and
`īçata`, 3d sing. (after `mā́` prohibitive), which is an isolated
example. The only dual person in `āite` is `brávāite`. 

3\. Present Optative.

616\. The personal endings combined with the mode-signs of this mode (या
`yā` in act., ई `ī` in mid.) have been given in full above (566). The
stem-form is the unaccented and unstrengthened root.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

इयाम्  
`iyā́m`

इयाव  
`iyā́va`

इयाम  
`iyā́ma`

आसीय  
`ā́sīya`

आसीवहि  
`ā́sīvahi`

आसीमहि  
`ā́sīmahi`

2

इयास्  
`iyā́s`

इयातम्  
`iyā́tam`

इयात  
`iyā́ta`

आसीथास्  
`ā́sīthās`

आसीयाथाम्  
`ā́sīyāthām`

आसीध्वम्  
`ā́sīdhvam`

3

इयात्  
`iyā́t`

इयाताम्  
`iyā́tām`

इयुस्  
`iyús`

आसीत  
`ā́sīta`

आसीयाताम्  
`ā́sīyātām`

आसीरन्  
`ā́sīran`

a\. In the same manner, from √`dviṣ, dviṣyā́m` and `dviṣīyá`; from
√`duh, duhyā́m` and `duhīyá`; from √`lih, lihyā́m` and `lihīyá`. The
inflection is so regular that the example above given is enough, with
the addition of `dviṣīyá`, to show the normal accentuation in the
middle: thus, sing. `dviṣīyá, dviṣīthā́s, dviṣītá`; du.
`dviṣīváhi, dviṣīyā́thām, dviṣīyā́tām`; pl.
`dviṣīmáhi, dviṣīdhvám, dviṣīrán`.

b\. The RV. has once `tana` in 2d pl. act. (in `syātana`).

4\. Present Imperative.

617\. The imperative adds, in second and third persons, its own endings
(with अताम् `atām` in 3d pl. mid.) directly to the root-stem. The stem
is accented and strengthened in 3d sing. act.; elsewhere, the accent is
on the ending and the root remains unchanged. The first persons, so
called, of the later language are from the old subjunctive, and have its
strengthened stem and accent; they are repeated here from where they
were given above (614 a). In the 2d sing. act., the ending is regularly
(as in the two following classes) धि `dhi` if the root end with a
consonant, and हि `hi` if it end with a vowel. As examples we take the
roots already used for the purpose. 

a\. Thus, from the roots इ `i` and आस् `ās`:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अयानि  
`áyāni`

अयाव  
`áyāva`

अयाम  
`áyāma`

आसै  
`ā́sāi`

आसावहै  
`ā́sāvahāi`

आसामहै  
`ā́sāmahāi`

2

इहि  
`ihí`

इतम्  
`itám`

इत  
`itá`

आस्स्व  
`ā́ssva`

आसाथाम्  
`ā́sāthām`

आद्ध्वम्  
`ā́ddhvam`

3

एतु  
`étu`

इताम्  
`itā́m`

यन्तु  
`yántu`

आस्ताम्  
`ā́stām`

आसाताम्  
`ā́sātām`

आसताम्  
`ā́satām`

b\. From the roots `dviṣ` and `duh` and `lih`:

1

`dvéṣāṇi`

`dvéṣāva`

`dvéṣāma`

`dvéṣāi`

`dvéṣāvahāi`

`dvéṣāmahāi`

2

`dviḍḍhí`

`dviṣṭám`

`dviṣṭá`

`dvikṣvá`

`dviṣā́thām`

`dviḍḍhvám`

3

`dvéṣṭu`

`dviṣṭā́m`

`dviṣántu`

`dviṣṭā́m`

`dviṣā́tām`

`dviṣátām`

1

`dóhāni`

`dóhāva`

`dóhāma`

`dóhāi`

`dóhāvahāi`

`dóhāmahāi`

2

`dugdhí`

`dugdhám`

`dugdhá`

`dhukṣvá`

`duhā́thām`

`dhugdhvám`

3

`dógdhu`

`dugdhā́m`

`duhántu`

`dugdhā́m`

`duhā́tām`

`duhátām`

1

`léhāni`

`léhāva`

`léhāma`

`léhāi`

`léhāvahāi`

`léhāmahāi`

2

`līḍhí`

`līḍhám`

`līḍhá`

`likṣvá`

`lihā́thām`

`līḍhvám`

3

`léḍhu`

`līḍhā́m`

`lihántu`

`līḍhā́m`

`lihā́tām`

`lihátām`

  
618. The 2d sing. act. ending `tāt` is found in the older language in a
few verbs of this class: namely,
`vittā́t, vītāt, brūtā́t, hatāt, yātāt, stutāt`. In 3d sing. mid., two or
three verbs have in the older language the ending `ām`: thus, `duhā́m`
(only RV. case), `vidām, çayām`; and in 3d pl. mid. AV. has `duhrā́m` and
`duhratām`. The use of `tana` for `ta` in 2d pl. act. is quite frequent
in the Veda: thus, `itana, yātána, attana`, etc. And in
`stota, éta étana, bravītana, çāstána, hantana`, we have examples in the
same person of a strong (and accented) stem.

5\. Present Participle.

619\. a. The active participle has the ending अन्त् `ánt` (weak
stem-form अत् `at`) added to the unstrengthened root. Mechanically, it
may be formed from the 3d pl. by dropping the final इ `i`. Thus, for the
verbs inflected above, the active participles are यन्त् `yánt`, दुहन्त्
`duhánt`, द्विषन्त् `dviṣánt`, लिहन्त् `lihánt`. The feminine stem ends
usually in अती `atī́`: thus, यती `yatī́`, दुहती `duhatī́`, द्विषती
`dviṣatī́`, लिहती `lihatī́`: but, from roots in `ā`, in आन्ती `ā́ntī` or
आती `ātī́` (449 g). 

b\. The middle participle has the ending आन `āná`, added to the
unstrengthened root: thus, इयान `iyāná`, दुहान `duhāná`, द्विषाण
`dviṣāṇá`, लिहान `lihāná`.

c\. The root `ās` forms the anomalous and isolated `ā́sīna` (in RV. also
`āsāná`).

d\. But a number of these participles in the older language have a
double accent, either on the ending or on the radical syllable: thus,
`īçāná` and `ī́çāna, ohāná` and `óhāna, duhāná` and `dúhāna` (also
`dúghāna`), `rihāṇá` and `ríhāṇa, vidāná` and `vídāna, suvāná` and
`súvāna, stuvāná` and `stavāná` and `stávāna` — the last having in part
also a strong form of the root.

6\. Imperfect.

620\. This tense adds the secondary endings to the root as increased by
prefixion of the augment. The root has the `guṇa`-strengthening (if
capable of it) in the three persons of the singular active, although the
accent is always upon the augment. Examples of inflection are:

a\. From the roots इ `i` and आस् `ās`:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

आयम्  
`ā́yam`

ऐव  
`āíva`

ऐम  
`āíma`

आसि  
`ā́si`

आस्वहि  
`ā́svahi`

आस्महि  
`ā́smahi`

2

ऐस्  
`āís`

ऐतम्  
`āítam`

ऐत  
`āíta`

आस्थास्  
`ā́sthās`

आसाथाम्  
`ā́sāthām`

आद्ध्वम्  
`ā́ddhvam`

3

ऐत्  
`āít`

ऐताम्  
`āítām`

आयन्  
`ā́yan`

आस्त  
`ā́sta`

आसाताम्  
`ā́sātām`

आसत  
`ā́sata`

b\. From the roots `dviṣ` and `duh` and `lih`:

1

`ádveṣam`

`ádviṣva`

`ádviṣma`

`ádviṣi`

`ádviṣvahi`

`ádviṣmahi`

2

`ádveṭ`

`ádviṣṭam`

`ádviṣṭa`

`ádviṣṭhās`

`ádviṣāthām`

`ádviḍḍhvam`

3

`ádveṭ`

`ádviṣṭām`

`ádviṣan`

`ádviṣṭa`

`ádviṣātām`

`ádviṣata`

1

`ádoham`

`áduhva`

`áduhma`

`áduhi`

`áduhvahi`

`áduhmahi`

2

`ádhok`

`ádugdham`

`ádugdha`

`ádugdhās`

`áduhāthām`

`ádhugdhvam`

3

`ádhok`

`ádugdhām`

`áduhan`

`ádugdha`

`áduhātām`

`áduhata`

1

`áleham`

`álihva`

`álihma`

`álihi`

`álihvahi`

`álihmahi`

2

`áleṭ`

`álīḍham`

`álīḍha`

`álīḍhās`

`álihāthām`

`álīḍhvam`

3

`áleṭ`

`álīḍhām`

`álihan`

`álīḍha`

`álihātām`

`álihata`

621\. a. Roots ending in `ā` may in the later language optionally take
`us` instead of `an` in 3d pl. act. (the `ā` being lost before it); and
in the older they always do so: thus, `áyus` from √`yā`, `ápus` from
√`pā` *protect*, `abhus` from √`bhā`. The same ending is also allowed
and met with in the case of a few roots ending in consonants: namely
`vid` *know*, `cakṣ`, `dviṣ`, `duh`, `mṛj`. RV. has `atviṣus`.

b\. The ending `tana`, 2d pl. act., is found in the Veda in
`áyātana, ásastana, āítana, ábravītana`. A strong stem is seen in the
1st pl. `homa`, and the 2d pl. `abravīta` and `ábravītana`.

c\. To save the characteristic endings in 2d and 3d sing. act., the root
`ad` inserts `a`: thus, `ā́das, ā́dat`; the root `as` inserts `ī`: thus,
`ā́sīs`, `ā́sīt` (see below, 636); compare also 631–4.

622\. The use of the persons of this tense, without augment, in the
older language, has been noticed above (587). Augmentless imperfects of
this class are rather uncommon in the Veda: thus, `hán, vés`, 2d sing.;
`han, vet, stāut, dán` (?), 3d sing.; `bruvan, duhús, cakṣus`, 3d pl.;
`vasta, sūta`, 3d sing. mid.

623\. The first or root-form of aorist is identical in its formation
with this imperfect: see below, 829 ff.

624\. In the Veda (but hardly outside of the RV.) are found certain 2d
sing. forms, having an imperative value, made by adding the ending `si`
to the (accented and strengthened) root. In part, they are the only
root-forms belonging to the roots from which they come: thus, `jóṣi`
(for `jóṣṣi`, from √`juṣ`), `dhákṣi, párṣi` (√`pṛ` *pass*),
`prā́si, bhakṣi, ratsi, sátsi, hoṣi`; but the majority of them have forms
(one or more) of a root-present, or sometimes of a root-aorist, beside
them: thus, `kṣéṣi` (√`kṣi` *rule*), `jéṣi, dárṣi, nakṣi` (√`naç`.
*attain*), `néṣi, mátsi, māsi` (√`mā` *measure*),
`yákṣi, yáṁsi, yāsi, yótsi, rā́si, vákṣi` (√`vah`), `véṣi, çróṣi, sakṣi`.
Their formal character is somewhat disputed; but they are probably
indicative persons of the root-class, used imperatively.

625\. Forms of this class are made from nearly 150 roots, either in the
earlier language, or in the later, or in both: namely, from about 50
through the whole life of the language, from 80 in the older period (of
Veda, Brāhmaṇa, and Sūtra) alone, and from a few (about 15) in the later
period (epic and classical) only^([\[1\]](#cite_note-1)). Not a few of
these roots, however, show only sporadic root-forms, beside a more usual
conjugation of some other class; nor is it in all cases possible to
separate clearly root-present from root-aorist forms.

a\. Many roots of this class, as of the other classes of the first
conjugation, show transfers to the second or `a`-conjugation, forming a
conjugation-stem by adding a to their strong or weak stem, or even to
both: thus, from √`mṛj`, both `mārja` (627) and `mṛja`. Such transfers
are met with even in the oldest language; but they usually become more
frequent later, often establishing a new mode of present inflection by
the side of, or in substitution for, the earlier mode.

b\. A number of roots offer irregularities of inflection; these are, in
the main, pointed out in the following paragraphs.

Irregularities of the Root-class.

626\. The roots of the class ending in `u` have in their strong forms
the `vṛddhi` instead of the `guṇa`-strengthening before an ending
beginning with a consonant: thus, from √`stu`, `stāúmi`, `ástāut`, and
the like: but `ástavam`, `stávāni`, etc.

a\. Roots found to exhibit this peculiarity in actual use are `kṣṇu`,
`yu` *unite*, `su` (or `sū`) *impel*, `sku, stu, snu` (these in the
earlier language), `nu, ru`, and `hnu`. RV. has once `stoṣi`, and
`anāvan`. Compare also 633.

627\. The root `mṛj` also has the `vṛddhi`-vowel in its strong forms:
thus, `mā́rjmi`, `ámārjam`, `ámārṭ` (150 b); and the same strengthening
is said to be allowed in weak forms before endings beginning with a
vowel: thus, `mārjantu`, `amārjan`; but the only quotable case is
`mārjīta` (LÇS.). Forms from `a`-stems begin to appear already in AV.

a In the other tense-systems, also, and in derivation, `mṛj` shows often
the `vṛddhi` instead of the `guṇa`-strengthening.

628\. A number of roots accent the radical syllable throughout, both in
strong and in weak forms: thus, all those beginning with a long vowel,
`ās, īḍ, īr, īç`; and also `cakṣ, takṣ, trā, nīṅs, vas` *clothe*,
`çiñj, çī` *lie*, and `sū`. All these, except `takṣ` and `trā` (and
`trā` also in the Vedic forms), are ordinarily conjugated in middle
voice only. Forms with the same irregular accent occur now and then in
the Veda from other verbs: thus, `mátsva`, `yákṣva`, `sákṣva`, `sā́kṣva`,
`ṛ́dhat`. Middle participles so accented have been noticed above (619 d).

629\. Of the roots mentioned in the last paragraph, `çī` *lie* has the
`guṇa`-strengthening throughout: thus, `çáye, çéṣe, çáyīya, çáyāna`, and
so on. Other irregularities in its inflection (in part already noticed)
are the 3d pl. persons `çérate` (AV. etc. have also `çére`), `çératām`,
`áçerata` (RV. has also `áçeran`), the 3d sing. pres. `çáye` (R.) and
impv. `çáyām`. The isolated active form `áçayat` is common in the older
language; other `a`-forms, active and middle, occur later.

630\. Of the same roots, `īḍ` and `īç` insert a union-vowel `i` before
certain endings: thus, `ī́çiṣe`, `ī́çidhve`, `ī́ḍiṣva` (these three being
the only forms noted in the older language); but RV. has `ī́kṣe` beside
`ī́çiṣe`; the ÇvU. has once `īçite` for `īṣṭe`. The 3d pl. `ī́çire` (on
account of its accent) is also apparently present rather than perfect.
The MS. has once the 3d sing. impf. `āiça` (like `aduha`: 635). 

631\. The roots `rud` *weep*, `svap` *sleep*, `an` *breathe*, and `çvas`
*blow* insert a union-vowel `i` before all the endings beginning with a
consonant, except the `s` and `t` of 2d and 3d sing. impf., where they
insert instead either `a` or `ī`: thus, `svápimi, çvásiṣi, ániti`, and
`ā́nat` or `ā́nīt`. And in the other forms, the last three are allowed to
accent either root or ending: thus, `svápantu` and `çvásantu` (AV.), or
`svapántu` etc. The AV. has `sváptu` instead of `svápitu`.

a\. In the older language, √`vam` makes the same insertions: thus,
`vamiti, avamīt`; and other cases occasionally occur: thus,
`jániṣva, vasiṣva` (√`vas` *clothe*), `çnathihi, stanihi` (all RV.),
`yamiti` (JB.), `çocimi` (MBh.). On the other hand, √`an` early makes
forms from an `a`-stem: thus, `ánati` (AV.); pple `ánant` (ÇB.); opt.
`anet` (AB.).

632\. The root `brū` *speak, say* (of very frequent use) takes the
union-vowel `ī` after the root when strengthened, before the initial
consonant of an ending: thus,
`brávīmi, brávīṣi, brávīti, ábravīs, ábravīt`; but
`brūmás, brūyā́m, ábravam, ábruvan`, etc. Special occasional
irregularities are `brūmi, bravīhi, abruvam, abrūvan, bruyāt`, and
sporadic forms from an `a`-stem. The subj. dual `brávāite` has been
noticed above (616); also the strong forms `abravīta, ábravītana` (621
a).

633\. Some of the roots in `u` are allowed to be inflected like `brū`:
namely, `ku, tu, ru,` and `stu`; and an occasional instance is met with
of a form so made (in the older language, only `tavīti` noted; in the
later, only `stavīmi`, once).

634\. The root `am` (hardly found in the later language) takes `ī` as
union-vowel: thus, `amīṣi` (RV.), `amīti` and `āmīt` and `amīṣva` (TS).
From √`çam` occur `çamīṣva` (VS.; TS. `çamiṣva`) and `çamīdhvam` (TB.
etc.).

635\. The irregularities of √`duh` in the older language have been
already in part noted: the 3d pl. indic. mid. `duhaté, duhré`, and
`duhráte`; 3d sing. impv. `duhā́m`, pl. `duhrā́m` and `duhratām`; impf.
act. 3d sing. `áduhat` (which is found also in the later language), 3d
pl. `aduhran` (beside `áduhan` and `duhús`); the mid. pple `dúghāna`;
and (quite unexampled elsewhere) the opt. forms `duhīyát` and `duhīyán`
(RV. only). The MS. has `aduha` 3d sing. and `aduhra` 3d pl. impf. mid.,
apparently formed to correspond to the pres. `duhe` (613) and `duhre` as
`adugdha` and `aduhata` correspond to `dugdhe` and `duhate`: compare
`āiça` (630), related in like manner to the 3d sing. `īçe`.

Some of the roots of this class are abbreviated or otherwise weakened in
their weak forms: thus: —

636\. The root अस् `as` *be* loses its vowel in weak forms (except where
protected by combination with the augment). Its 2d sing. indic. is असि
`ási` (instead of `assi`); its 2d sing. impv. is एधि `edhí` (irregularly
from `asdhi`). The insertion of ई `ī` in 2d and 3d sing. impf. has been
noticed already above.

a\. The forms of this extremely common verb are, then, as follows:

Indicative.

Optative.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अस्मि  
`ásmi`

स्वस्  
`svás`

स्मस्  
`smás`

स्याम्  
`syā́m`

स्याव  
`syā́va`

स्याम  
`syā́ma`

2

असि  
`ási`

स्थस्  
`sthás`

स्थ  
`sthá`

स्यास्  
`syā́s`

स्यातम्  
`syā́tam`

स्यात  
`syā́ta`

3

अस्ति  
`ásti`

स्तस्  
`stás`

सन्ति  
`sánti`

स्यात्  
`syā́t`

स्याताम्  
`syā́tām`

स्युस्  
`syús`

Imperative.

Imperfect.

1

असानि  
`ásāni`

असाव  
`ásāva`

असाम  
`ásāma`

आसम्  
`ā́sam`

आस्व  
`ā́sva`

आस्म  
`ā́sma`

2

एधि  
`edhí`

स्तम्  
`stám`

स्त  
`stá`

आसीस्  
`ā́sīs`

आस्तम्  
`ā́stam`

आस्त  
`ā́sta`

3

अस्तु  
`ástu`

स्ताम्  
`stā́m`

सन्तु  
`sántu`

आसीत्  
`ā́sīt`

आस्ताम्  
`ā́stām`

आसन्  
`ā́san`

Participle सन्त् `sánt` (fem. सती `satī́`).

b\. Besides the forms of the present-system, there is made from this
root only a perfect, `ā́sa` etc. (800), of wholly regular inflection.

c\. The Vedic subjunctive forms are the usual ones, made upon the stem
`ása`. They are in frequent use, and appear (`asat` especially) even in
late texts where the subjunctive is almost lost. The resolution `siā́m`
etc. (opt.) is common in Vedic verse. As 2d and 3d sing. impf. is a few
times met with the more normal `ās` (for `ās-s, ās-t`). `Sthána`, 2d
pl., was noted above (613).

d\. Middle forms from √`as` are also given by the grammarians as allowed
with certain prepositions (`vi+ati`), but they are not quotable; `smahe`
and `syāmahe` (!) occur in the epics, but are merely instances of the
ordinary epic confusion of voices (529 a). Confusions of primary and
secondary endings — namely, `sva` and `sma` (not rare), and, on the
other hand, `syāvas` and `syāmas` — are also epic. A middle present
indicative is said to be compounded (in 1st and 2d persons) with the
*nomen agentis* in `tṛ` (`tar`) to form a periphrastic future in the
middle voice (but see below, 947). The 1st sing. indic. is `he`; the
rest is in the usual relation of middle to active forms (in 2d pers.,
`se, dhve, sva, dhvam`, with total loss of the root itself). 

637\. The root `han` *smite, slay* is treated somewhat after the manner
of noun-stems in `an` in declension (421): in weak forms, it loses its
`n` before an initial consonant (except `m` and `v`) of a personal
ending (not in the optative), and its `a` before an initial vowel — and
in the latter case its `h`, in contact with the `n`, is changed to `gh`
(compare 402). Thus, for example:

Present Indicative.

Imperfect.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`hánmi`

`hanvás`

`hanmás`

`áhanam`

`áhanva`

`áhanma`

2

`háṅsi`

`hathás`

`hathá`

`áhan`

`áhatam`

`áhata`

3

`hánti`

`hatás`

`ghnánti`

`áhan`

`áhatām`

`ághnan`

a\. Its participle is `ghnánt` (fem. `ghnatī́`). Its 2d sing. impv. is
`jahí` (by anomalous dissimilation, on the model of reduplicating
forms).

b\. Middle forms from this root are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, and those
that occur are formed in general according to the same rules: thus,
`hate, hanmahe, ghnate; ahata, aghnātām, aghnata` (in AB., also
`ahata`); `ghnīta` (but also `hanīta`). Forms from transfer-stems,
`hana` and `ghna`, are met with from an early period.

638\. The root `vaç` *be eager* is in the weak forms regularly and
usually contracted to `uç` (as in the perfect: 794 b): thus, `uçmási`
(V.: once apparently abbreviated in RV. to `çmasi`), `uçánti`; pple
`uçánt, uçāná`. Middle forms (except the pple) do not occur; nor do the
weak forms of the imperfect, which are given as `āuçva, āuṣṭam`, etc.

a\. RV. has in like, manner the participle `uṣāṇá` from the root `vas`
*clothe*.

639\. The root `çās` *order* shows some of the peculiarities of a
reduplicated verb, lacking (646) the `n` before `t` in all 3d persons
pl. and in the active participle. A part of its active forms — namely,
the weak forms having endings beginning with consonants (including the
optative) — are said to come from a stem with weakened vowel, `çiṣ` (as
do the aorist, 854, and some of the derivatives); but, excepting the
optative (`çiṣyām` etc., U. S. and later), no such forms are quotable.

a\. The 3d sing. impf. is `açāt` (555 a), and the same form is said to
be allowed also as 2d sing. The 2d sing. impv. is `çādhí` (with total
loss of the `s`); and RV. has the strong 2d pl. `çāstána` (with
anomalous accent); and `a`-forms, from stem (`çāsa`, occasionally occur.

b\. The middle inflection is regular, and the accent (apparently) always
upon the radical syllable (`çā́ste, (çā́sate, çā́sāna`).

c\. The root `dāç` *worship* has in like manner (RV.) the pple `dā́çat`
(not `dā́çant`).

640\. The double so-called root `jakṣ` *eat, laugh* is an evident
reduplication of `ghas` and `has` respectively. It has the absence of
`n` in act. 3d persons pl. and pple, and the accent on the root before
vowel-endings, which belong to reduplicated verbs; and it also takes the
union-vowel `i` in the manner of `rud` etc. (above, 631). For its forms
and derivatives made with utter loss of the final sibilant, see 233 f.

641\. Certain other obviously reduplicated verbs are treated by the
native grammarians as if simple, and referred to this conjugation: such
are the intensively reduplicated `jāgṛ` (1020 a), `daridrā` (1024 a),
and `vevī` (1024 a), `dīdhī` etc. (676), and `cakās` (677).

II\. Reduplicating Class (third, `hu`-class).

642\. This class forms its present-stem by prefixing a reduplication to
the root.

643\. a. As regards the consonant of the reduplication, the general
rules which have already been given above (590) are followed.

b\. A long vowel is shortened in the reduplicating syllable: thus,

ददा `dadā` from √दा `dā`; बिभी `bibhī` from √भी `bhī`; जुहू `juhū` from
√हू `hū`. The vowel ऋ `ṛ` never appears in the reduplication, but is
replaced by इ `i`: thus, बिभृ `bibhṛ` from √भृ `bhṛ`; पिपृच् `pipṛc`
from √पृच् `pṛc`.

c\. For verbs in which `a` and `ā` also are irregularly represented in
the reduplication by `i`, see below, 660. The root `vṛt` (V. B.) makes
`vavartti` etc.; `cakránt` (RV.) is very doubtful.

d\. The only root of this class with initial vowel is `ṛ` (or `ar`); it
takes as reduplication `i`, which is held apart from the root by an
interposed `y`: thus, `iyar` and `iyṛ` (the latter has not been found in
actual use).

644\. The present-stem of this class (as of the other classes belonging
to the first or non-`a`-conjugation) has a double form: a stronger form,
with gunated root-vowel; and a weaker form, without `guṇa`: thus, from
√हु `hu`, the two forms are जुहो `juho` and जुहु `juhu`; from √भी `bhī`,
they are बिभे `bibhe` and बिभी `bibhī`. And the rule for their use is
the same as in the other classes of this conjugation: the strong stem is
found before the unaccented endings (552), and the weak stem before the
accented. 

645\. According to all the analogies of the first general conjugation,
we should expect to find the accent upon the root-syllable when this is
strengthened. That is actually the case, however, only in a small
minority of the roots composing the class: namely, in `hu, bhī` (no
test-forms in the older language), `hrī` (no test-forms found in the
older language), `mad` (very rare), `jan` (no forms of this class found
to occur) , `ci` *notice* (in V.), `yu` *separate* (in older language
only), and in `bhṛ` in the later language (in V. it goes with the
majority: but RV. has `bibhárti` once, and AV. twice; and this, the
later accentuation, is found also in the Brāhmaṇas); and RV. has once
`iyárṣi`. In all the rest — apparently, by a recent transfer — it rests
upon the reduplicating instead of upon the radical syllable. And in both
classes alike, the accent is anomalously thrown back upon the
reduplication in those weak forms of which the ending begins with a
vowel; while in the other weak forms it is upon the ending (but compare
666 a).

a\. Apparently (the cases with written accent are too few to determine
the point satisfactorily) the middle optative endings, `īya` etc. (566),
are reckoned throughout as endings with initial vowel, and throw back
the accent upon the reduplication.

646\. The verbs of this class lose the न् `n` in the 3d pl. endings in
active as well as middle, and in the imperfect have उस् `us` instead of
अन् `an` — and before this a final radical vowel has `guṇa`.

1\. Present Indicative.

647\. The combination of stem and endings is as in the preceding class.

Examples of inflection: a. √हु `hu` *sacrifice*: strong stem-form, जुहो
`juhó`; weak form,जुहु `juhu` (or `júhu`).

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

जुहोमि  
`juhómi`

जुहुवस्  
`juhuvás`

जुहुमस्  
`juhumás`

जुह्वे  
`júhve`

जुहुवहे  
`juhuváhe`

जुहुमहे  
`juhumáhe`

2

जुहोषि  
`juhóṣi`

जुहुथस्  
`juhuthás`

जुहुथ  
`juhuthá`

जुहुषे  
`juhuṣé`

जुह्वाथे  
`júhvāthe`

जुहुध्वे  
`juhudhvé`

3

जुहोति  
`juhóti`

जुहुतस्  
`juhutás`

जुह्वति  
`júhvati`

जुहुते  
`juhuté`

जुह्वाते  
`júhvāte`

जुह्वते  
`júhvate`



b\. Root भृ bhṛ *bear* (given with Vedic accentuation): strong
stem-form, बिभर् bíbhar; weak, बिभृ bibhṛ (or bíbhṛ).

1

बिभर्मि  
bíbharmi

बिभृवस्  
bibhṛvás

बिभृमस्  
bibhṛmás

बिभ्रे  
bíbhre

बिभृवहे  
bibhṛváhe

बिभृमहे  
bibhṛmáhe

2

बिभर्षि  
bíbharṣi

बिभृथस्  
bibhṛthás

बिभृथ  
bibhṛthá

बिभृषे  
bibhṛṣé

बिभ्राथे  
bíbhrāthe

बिभृध्वे  
bibhṛdhvé

3

बिभर्ति  
bíbharti

बिभृतस्  
bibhṛtás

बिभ्रति  
bíbhrati

बिभृते  
bibhṛté

बिभ्राते  
bíbhrāte

बिभ्रते  
bíbhrate

c\. The u of hu (like that of the class-signs nu and u: see below, 697
a) is said to be omissible before v and m of the endings of 1st du. and
pl.: thus, juhvás, juhváhe, etc.; but no such forms are quotable.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

648\. It is not possible at present to draw a distinct line between
those subjunctive forms of the older language which should be reckoned
as belonging to the present-system and those which should be assigned to
the perfect — or even, in some cases, to the reduplicated aorist and
intensive. Here will be noticed only those which most clearly belong to
this class; the more doubtful cases will be treated under the
perfect-system. Except in first persons (which continue in use as
"imperatives" down to the later language), subjunctives from roots
having unmistakably a reduplicated present-system are of far from
frequent occurrence.

649\. The subjunctive mode-stem is formed in the usual manner, with the
mode-sign a and guṇa of the root-vowel, if this is capable of such
strengthening. The evidence of the few accented forms met with indicates
that the accent is laid in accordance with that of the strong indicative
forms: thus, from √hu, the stem would be juháva; from √bhṛ, it would be
bíbhara (but bibhára later). Before the mode-sign, final radical ā would
be, in accordance with analogies elsewhere, dropped: thus, dáda from
√dā, dádha from √dhā (all the forms actually occurring would be
derivable from the secondary roots dad and dadh).

650\. Instead of giving a theoretically complete scheme of inflection,
it will be better to note all the examples quotable from the older
language (accented when found so occurring).

a\. Thus, of 1st persons, we have in the active juhávāni, bibharāṇi,
dadāni, dadhāni, jahāni; juhavāma, dádhāma, jáhāma; — in the middle,
dadhāi, mimāi; dadhāvahāi; juhavāmahāi, dadāmahe, dadāmahāi, dadhāmahāi.

b\. Of other persons, we have with primary endings in the active
bibharāsi (with double mode-sign: 560 e), dádhathas, juhavātha (do.)
and `juhavatha`; in the middle,
`dádhase; dádhate, rárate, dádhātāi, dadātāi;` — with secondary endings,
`dádhas, víveṣas, juhavat, bibharat, yuyávat, dádhat, dadhánat, babhasat; dadhan, yuyavan, juhavan`.

3\. Present Optative.

651\. To form this mode, the optative endings given above (566 a), as
made up of mode-sign and personal endings, are added to the
unstrengthened stem. The accent is as already stated (645 a). The
inflection is so regular that it is unnecessary to give here more than
the first persons of a single verb: thus,

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

जुहुयाम्  
`juhuyā́m`

जुहुयाव  
`juhuyā́va`

जुहुयाम  
`juhuyā́ma`

जुह्वीय  
`júhvīya`

जुह्वीवहि  
`júhvīvahi`

जुह्वीमहि  
`júhvīmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

4\. Present Imperative.

652\. The endings, and the mode of their combination with the root, have
been already given. In 2d sing. act., the ending is हि `hi` after a
vowel, but धि `dhi` after a consonant: हु `hu`, however, forms जुहुधि
`juhudhí` (apparently, in order to avoid the recurrence of ह् `h` in two
successive syllables): and other examples of धि `dhi` after a vowel are
found in the Veda.

653\. a. Example of inflection:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

जुहवानि  
`juhávāni`

जुहवाव  
`juhávāva`

जुहवाम  
`juhávāma`

जुहवै  
`juhávāi`

जुहवावहै  
`juhávāvahāi`

जुहवामहै  
`juhávāmahāi`

2

जुहुधि  
`juhudhí`

जुहुतम्  
`juhutám`

जुहुत  
`juhutá`

जुहुष्व  
`juhuṣvá`

जुह्वाथाम्  
`júhvāthām`

जुहुध्वम्  
`juhudhvám`

3

जुहोतु  
`juhótu`

जुहुताम्  
`juhutā́m`

जुह्वतु  
`júhvatu`

जुहुताम्  
`juhutā́m`

जुह्वाताम्  
`júhvātām`

जुह्वताम्  
`júhvatām`

b\. The verbs of the other division differ here, as in the indicative,
in the accentuation of their strong forms only: namely, in all the
first persons (borrowed subjunctives), and in the 3d sing. act.: thus,
(in the older language) `bíbharāṇi` etc., `bíbhartu, bíbharāi` etc.

654\. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the occasional use of
strong forms in 2d persons: thus, `yuyodhí, çiçādhi` (beside `çiçīhí`);
`yuyotam` (beside `yuyutám`); `íyarta, dádāta` and `dadātana, dádhāta`
and `dádhātana` (see below, 668), `pipartana, juhóta` and
`juhótana, yuyota` and `yuyotana; rarāsva` (666); 2. the use of `dhi`
instead of `hi` after a vowel (only in the two instances just quoted);
3. the ending `tana` in 2d pl. act.: namely, besides those just given,
in
`jigātana, dhattana, mamáttana, vivaktana, didiṣṭana, bibhītana, jujuṣṭana, juhutana, vavṛttana`:
the cases are proportionally much more numerous in this than in any
other class; 4. the ending `tāt` in 2d sing. act., in
`dattāt, dhattā́t, pipṛtāt, jahītāt`.

5\. Present Participle.

655\. As elsewhere, the active participle-stem may be made mechanically
from the 3d pl. indic. by dropping इ `i`: thus, जुह्वत् `júhvat`,
बिभ्रत् `bíbhrat`. In inflection, it has no distinction of strong and
weak forms (444). The feminine stem ends in अती `atī`. The middle
participles are regularly made: thus, जुह्वान `júhvāna`, बिभ्राण
`bíbhrāṇa`.

a\. RV. shows an irregular accent in `pipāná` (√`pā` *drink*).

6\. Imperfect.

656\. As already pointed out, the 3d pl. act. of this class takes the
ending उस् `us`, and a final radical vowel has `guṇa` before it. The
strong forms are, as in present indicative, the three singular active
persons.

657\. Examples of inflection:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अजुहवम्  
`ájuhavam`

अजुहुव  
`ájuhuva`

अजुहुम  
`ájuhuma`

अजुह्वि  
`ájuhvi`

अजुहुवहि  
`ájuhuvahi`

अजुहुमहि  
`ájuhumahi`

2

अजुहोस्  
`ájuhos`

अजुहुतम्  
`ájuhutam`

अजुहुत  
`ájuhuta`

अजुहुथास्  
`ájuhuthās`

अजुह्वाथाम्  
`ájuhvāthām`

अजुहुध्वम्  
`ájuhudhvam`

3

अजुहोत्  
`ájuhot`

अजुहुताम्  
`ájuhutām`

अजुहवुस्  
`ájuhavus`

अजुहुत  
`ájuhuta`

अजुह्वाताम्  
`ájuhvātām`

अजुह्वत  
`ájuhvata`



a\. From √भृ `bhṛ`, the 2d and 3d sing. act. are अबिभर् `ábibhar` (for
`abibhar-s` and `abibhar-t`) — and so in all other cases where the
strong stem ends in a consonant. The 3d pl. act. is अबिभरुस्
`ábibharus`; and other like cases are `ábibhayus`, `acikayus`,
`asuṣavus`.

b\. In MS., once, `abibhrus` is doubtless a false reading.

658\. The usual Vedic irregularities in 2d pl. act. — strong forms, and
the ending `tana` — occur in this tense also: thus, `ádadāta`,
`ádadhāta`; `ádattana`, `ájahātana`. The RV. has also once `apiprata`
for `apipṛta` in 3d sing. mid., and `abibhran` for `abibharus` in 3d pl.
act. Examples of augmentless forms are `çiçās`, `vivés`, `jígāt`;
`jíhīta`, `çíçīta`, `jihata`; and, with irregular strengthening,
`yuyoma` (AV.), `yuyothās`, `yuyota`.

659\. The roots that form their present-stem by reduplication are a very
small class, especially in the modern language; they are only 50, all
told, and of these only a third (16) are met with later. It is, however,
very difficult to determine the precise limits of the class, because of
the impossibility (referred to above, under subjunctive: 648) of always
distinguishing its forms from those of other reduplicating conjugations
and parts of conjugations.

a\. Besides the irregularities in tense-inflection already pointed out,
others may be noticed as follows.

Irregularities of the Reduplicating Class.

660\. Besides the roots in `ṛ` or `ar` — namely, `ṛ`, `ghṛ` (usually
written `ghar`), `tṛ, pṛ, bhṛ, sṛ, hṛ, pṛc` — the following roots having
`a` or `ā` as radical vowel take `i` instead of `a` in the reduplicating
syllable: `gā` *go*, `mā` *measure*, `mā` *bellow*, `çā`, `hā` *remove*
(mid.), `vac, sac; vaç`. has both `i` and `a`; `rā` has `i` once in RV.;
for `sthā`, `pā` *drink* `ghrā`, `han`, `hi`, see below (670–4).

661\. Several roots of this class in final `ā` change the `ā` in weak
forms to `ī` (occasionally even to `i`), and then drop it altogether
before endings beginning with a vowel.

a\. This is in close analogy with the treatment of the vowel of the
class-sign of the `nā`-class: below, 717.

These roots are:

662\. `çā` *sharpen*, act. and mid.: thus, `çiçāti`, `çiçīmasi`,
`çiçīhí` (also `çiçādhi`: above, 654), `çiçātu`, `açiçāt`, `çíçīte`,
`çíçīta`.

663\. `mā` *bellow*, act., and `mā` *measure*, mid. (rarely also act.):
thus, `mimāti`, `mimīyāt`; `mímīte`, `mimate`, `ámimīta`; `mimīhi`,
`mímātu`. RV. has once mimanti 3d pl. (for `mimati`). 

664\. `hā` *remove*, mid.: thus,
`jíhīte, jihīdhve, jíhate; jihīṣva, jihatām; ájihīta, ajihata`. ÇB. has
`jihīthām` (for `jihāthām`).

665\. `hā` *quit*, act. (originally identical with the former), may
further shorten the `ī` to `i`: thus, `jahāti, jahīta, jahītāt` (AV.);
`jahimas` (AV.), `jahitas` (TB.), `jahitam` (TA.), ajahitām (TS. AB.).
In the optative, the radical vowel is lost altogether; thus,
`jahyām, jahyus` (AV.). The 2d sing. impv., according to the
grammarians, is `jahīhi` or `jahihi` or `jahāhi`; only the first appears
quotable.

a\. Forms from an `a`-stem, `jaha`, are made for this root, and even
derivatives from a quasi-root `jah`.

666\. `rā` *give*, mid.: thus, `rarīdhvam, rarīthās` (impf. without
augment); and, with `i` in reduplication, `rirīhi`. But AV. has
`rarāsva`.

a\. In these verbs, the accent is generally constant on the
reduplicating syllable.

667\. The two roots `dā` and `dhā` (the commonest of the class) lose
their radical vowel altogether in the weak forms, being shortened to
`dad` and `dadh`. In 2d sing. impv. act., they form respectively `dehí`
and `dhehí`. In combination with a following `t` or `th`, the final `dh`
of `dadh` does not follow the special rule of combination of a final
sonant aspirate (becoming `ddh` with the `t` or `th`: 160), but — as
also before `s` and `dhv` — the more general rules of aspirate and of
surd and sonant combination; and its lost aspiration is thrown back upon
the initial of the root (155).

668\. The inflection of √`dhā` is, then, as follows:

  

Present Indicative

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`dádhāmi`

`dadhvás`

`dadhmás`

`dadhé`

`dádhvahe`

`dádhmahe`

2

`dádhāsi`

`dhatthás`

`dhatthá`

`dhatsé`

`dadhāthe`

`dhaddhve`

3

`dádhāti`

`dhattás`

`dádhati`

`dhatté`

`dadhā́te`

`dádhate`

Present Optative.

1

`dadhyā́m`

`dadhyā́va`

`dadhyā́ma`

`dádhīya`

`dádhīvahi`

`dádhīmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

Present Imperative.

1

`dádhāni`

`dádhāva`

`dádhāma`

`dádhāi`

`dádhāvahāi`

`dádhāmahāi`

2

`dhehí`

`dhattám`

`dhattá`

`dhatsva`

`dadhāthām`

`dhaddhvam`

3

`dádhātu`

`dhattā́m`

`dádhatu`

`dhattām`

`dadhātām`

`dadhatām`

Imperfect.

1

`ádadhām`

`ádadhva`

`ádadhma`

`ádadhi`

`ádadhvahi`

`ádadhmahi`

2

`ádadhās`

`ádhattam`

`ádhatta`

`ádhatthās`

`ádadhāthām`

`ádhaddhvam`

3

`ádadhāt`

`ádhattām`

`ádadhus`

`ádhatta`

`ádadhātām`

`ádadhata`



Participles: act. `dádhat`; mid. `dádhāna`.

a\. In the middle (except impf.), only those forms are here accented for
which there is authority in the accentuated texts, as there is
discordance between the actual accent and that which the analogies of
the class would lead us to expect. RV. has once `dhátse`: `dadhé` and
`dadhā́te` might be perfects, so far as the form is concerned. RV.
accents `dadhītá` once (`dádhīta` thrice); several other texts have
`dádhīta`, `dádhīran`, dádīta.

b\. The root `dā` is inflected in precisely the same way, with change
everywhere of (radical) `dh` to `d`.

669\. The older language has irregularities as follows: 1. the usual
strong forms in 2d pl., `dádhāta` and `ádadhāta`, `dádāta` and
`ádadāta`; 2. the usual `tana` endings in the same person, `dhattana`,
`dádātana`, etc. (654, 658); 3. the 3d sing. indic. act. `dadhé` (like
1st sing.); 4. the 2d sing. impv. act. `daddhí` (for both `dehi` and
`dhehi`). And R. has `dadmi`.

670\. A number of roots have been transferred from this to the `a`- or
`bhū`-class (below, 749), their reduplicated root becoming a stereotyped
stem inflected after the manner of `a`-stems. These roots are as
follows:

671\. In all periods of the language, from the roots `sthā` *stand*,
`pā` *drink*, and `ghrā` *smell*, are made the presents `tíṣṭhāmi`,
`píbāmi` (with irregular sonantizing of the second `p`), and `jíghrāmi`
— which then are inflected not like `mímāmi`, but like `bhávāmi`, as if
from the present-stems `tíṣṭha`, `píba`, `jíghra`.

672\. In the Veda (especially; also later), the reduplicated roots `dā`
and `dhā` are sometimes turned into the `a`-stems `dáda` and `dádha`, or
inflected as if roots `dad` and `dadh` of the `a`-class; and single
forms of the same character are made from other roots: thus, `mimanti`
(√`mā` *bellow*), `rárate` (√`rā` *give*: 3d sing. mid.).

673\. In the Veda, also, a like secondary stem, `jighna`, is made from
√`han` (with omission of the radical vowel, and conversion, usual in
this root, of `h` to `gh` when in contact with `n`: 637); and some of
the forms of `saçc`, from √`sac`, show the same conversion to an
`a`-stem, `saçca`.

674\. In AB. (viii. 28), a similar secondary form, `jighya`, is given to
√`hi` or `hā`: thus, `jighyati`, `jighyatu`.

675\. A few so-called roots of the first or root-class are the products
of reduplication, more or less obvious: thus, `jakṣ` (640), and probably
`çās` (from √`ças`) and `cakṣ` (from √`kāç` or a lost root `kas` *see*).
In the Veda is found also `saçc`, from √`sac`.

676\. The grammarians reckon (as already noticed, 641) several roots of
the most evidently reduplicate character as simple, and belonging to the
root-class. Some of these (`jāgṛ`, `daridrā`, `vevī`) are regular
intensive stems, and will be described below under Intensives (1020 a,
1024 a); `dīdhī` *shine*, together with Vedic `dīdī` *shine* and `pīpī`
*swell*, are sometimes also classed as intensives; but they have not the
proper reduplication of such, and may perhaps be best noticed here, as
reduplicated present-stems with irregularly long reduplicating vowel.

a\. Of pres. indic. occurs in the older language only `dīdyati`, 3d pl.,
with the pples `dī́dyat` and `dī́dhyat`, and mid. `dīdye`, `dīdhye`,
`dīdhyāthām`, with the pples `dī́dyāna`, `dī́dhyāna`, `pī́pyāna`. The subj.
stems are `dīdáya`, `dīdhaya`, `pīpáya`, and from them are made forms
with both primary (from `dīdáya`) and secondary endings (and the
irregularly accented `dī́dayat` and `dīdāyat` and `dī́dhayan`). No opt.
occurs. In impv. we have `dīdihí` (and `didīhí`) and `pīpihí`, and
`pipyatam`, `pipyatām`, `pipyata`. In impf., `adīdes` and `pīpes`,
`ádīdet` and `ádīdhet` and `apīpet` (with augmentless forms), `apīpema`
(with strong form of root), and `adīdhayus` and (irregular) `apīpyan`.

b\. A few forms from all the three show transfer to an `a`-inflection:
thus, `dīdhaya` and `pīpaya` (impv.), `ápīpayat`, etc.

c\. Similar forms from √`mī` *bellow* are `amīmet` and `mīmayat`.

677\. The stem `cakās` *shine* (sometimes `cakāç`) is also regarded by
the grammarians as a root, and supplied as such with tenses outside the
present-system — which, however, hardly occur in genuine use. It is not
known in the older language.

678\. The root `bhas` *chew* loses its radical vowel in weak forms,
taking the form `baps`: thus, `bábhasti`, but `bápsati` (3d pl.),
`bápsat` (pple). For `babdhām`, see 233 f.

679\. The root `bhī` *fear* is allowed by the grammarians to shorten its
vowel in weak forms: thus, `bibhīmas` or `bibhimas`, `bibhīyām` or
`bibhiyām`; and `bibhiyāt` etc. are met with in the later language.

680\. Forms of this class from √`jan` *give birth*, with added `i` —
thus, `jajñiṣe`, `jajñidhve` — are given by the grammarians, but have
never been found in use.

681\. The roots `ci` and `cit` have in the Veda reversion of `c` to `k`
in the root-syllable after the reduplication: thus, `cikéṣi`, `cikéthe`
(anomalous, for `cikyā́the`), `cikitām`, `aciket`, `cíkyat` (pple);
`cikiddhi`.

682\. The root `vyac` has `i` in the reduplication (from the `y`), and
is contracted to `vic` in weak forms: thus, `viviktás`, `áviviktām`. So
the root `hvar` (if its forms are to be reckoned here) has `u` in
reduplication, and contracts to `hur`: thus, `juhūrthās`.

III\. Nasal Class (seventh, `rudh`-class).

683\. The roots of this class all end in consonants. And their
class-sign is a nasal preceding the final consonant: in the weak forms,
a nasal simply, adapted in character to the consonant; but in the strong
forms expanded to the syllable न `ná`, which has the accent. 

a\. In a few of the verbs of the class, the nasal extends also into
other tense-systems: they are `añj, bhañj, hiṅs`: see below, 694.

1\. Present Indicative.

684\. Examples of inflection: a. the root युज् `yuj` *join*: strong
stem-form, युनज् `yunáj`; weak, युञ्ज् `yuñj`.

For the rules of combination of final `j`, see 219.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

युनज्मि  
`yunájmi`

युञ्ज्वस्  
`yuñjvás`

युञ्ज्मस्  
`yuñjmás`

युञ्जे  
`yuñjé`

युञ्ज्वहे  
`yuñjváhe`

युञ्ज्महे  
`yuñjmáhe`

2

युनक्षि  
`yunákṣi`

युङ्क्थस्  
`yun̄kthás`

युङ्क्थ  
`yun̄kthá`

युङ्क्षे  
`yun̄kṣé`

युञ्जाथे  
`yuñjā́the`

युङ्ग्ध्वे  
`yun̄gdhvé`

3

युनक्ति  
`yunákti`

युङ्क्तस्  
`yun̄ktás`

युञ्जन्ति  
`yuñjánti`

युङ्क्ते  
`yun̄kté`

युञ्जाते  
`yuñjā́te`

युञ्जते  
`yuñjáte`

b\. the root रुध् `rudh` *obstruct*; bases रुणध् `ruṇadh` and रुन्ध्
`rundh`.

For rules of combination of final `dh`, see 153, 160.

1

रुणध्मि  
`ruṇádhmi`

रुन्ध्वस्  
`rundhvás`

रुन्ध्मस्  
`rundhmás`

रुन्धे  
`rundhé`

रुन्ध्वहे  
`rundhváhe`

रुन्ध्महे  
`rundhmáhe`

2

रुणत्सि  
`ruṇátsi`

रुन्द्धस्  
`runddhás`

रुन्द्ध  
`runddhá`

रुन्त्से  
`runtsé`

रुन्धाथे  
`rundhā́the`

रुन्द्ध्वे  
`runddhvé`

3

रुणद्धि  
`ruṇáddhi`

रुन्द्धस्  
`runddhás`

रुन्धन्ति  
`rundhánti`

रुन्द्धे  
`runddhé`

रुन्धाते  
`rundhā́te`

रुन्धते  
`rundháte`

c\. Instead of `yun̄kthas, yun̄gdhve`, and the like (here and in the impv.
and impf.), it is allowed and more usual (231) to write
`yun̄thas, yun̄dhve`, etc.; and, in like manner, `rundhas, rundhe,` for
`runddhas, runddhe`; and so in other like cases.

685\. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the ordinary use of a
3d sing. mid. like the 1st sing., as `vṛñje`; 2. the accent on `té` of
3d pl. mid. in `añjaté, indhaté, bhuñjaté`.

a\. `Yunañkṣi`, in BhP., is doubtless a false reading.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

686\. The stem is made, as usual, by adding `a` to the strong
present-stem: thus, `yunája, ruṇádha`. Below are given as if made from
√`yuj` all the forms for which examples have been noted as actually
occurring in the older language.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`yunájāni`

`yunájāva`

`yunájāma`

`yunajāi`

`yunájāmahāi`

2

`yunájas`

`yunajādhvāi`

3

`yunájat`

`yunájatas`

`yunájan`

`yunájate`

687\. The RV. has once `añjatas`, which is anomalous as being made from
the weak tense-stem. Forms with double mode-sign are met with: thus,
`tṛṇáhān` (AV.), `rādhnávāt` and `yunajān` (ÇB.); and the only quotable
example of 3d du. act. (besides `añjatás`) is `hinásātas` (ÇB.). ÇB. has
also `hinasāvas` as 1st du. act.: an elsewhere unexampled form.

3\. Present Optative.

688\. The optative is made, as elsewhere, by adding the compounded
mode-endings to the weak form of present-stem. Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

युञ्ज्याम्  
`yuñjyā́m`

युञ्ज्याव  
`yuñjyā́va`

युञ्ज्याम  
`yuñjyā́ma`

युञ्जीय  
`yuñjīyá`

युञ्जीवहि  
`yuñjīváhi`

युञ्जीमहि  
`yuñjīmáhi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. AB. has once the anomalous 1st sing. act. `vṛñjīyam`. And forms like
`bhuñjīyām -yāt, yuñjīyāt`, are here and there met with in the epics
(`bhuñjīyātām` once in GGS.). MBh., too, has once `bhuñjītam`.

4\. Present Imperative.

689\. In this class (as the roots all end in consonants) the ending of
the 2d sing. act. is always धि `dhi`.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

युनजानि  
`yunájāni`

युनजाव  
`yunájāva`

युनजाम  
`yunájāma`

युनजै  
`yunájāi`

युनजावहै  
`yunájāvahāi`

युनजामहै  
`yunájāmahāi`

2

युङ्ग्धि  
`yun̄gdhí`

युङ्क्तम्  
`yun̄ktám`

युङ्क्त  
`yun̄ktá`

युङ्क्ष्व  
`yun̄kṣvá`

युञ्जाथाम्  
`yuñjā́thām`

युङ्ग्ध्वम्  
`yun̄gdhvám`

3

युनक्त्तु  
`yunáktu`

युङ्क्ताम्  
`yun̄ktā́m`

युञ्जन्तु  
`yuñjántu`

युङ्क्ताम्  
`yun̄ktā́m`

युञ्जाताम्  
`yuñjā́tām`

युञ्जताम्  
`yuñjátām`



690\. There is no occurrence, so far as noted, of the ending `tāt` in
verbs of this class. The Veda has, as usual, sometimes strong forms, and
sometimes the ending `tana`, in the 2d pl. act.: thus,
`unátta, yunákta, anaktana, pinaṣṭana`.

5\. Present Participle.

691\. The participles are made in this class as in the preceding ones:
thus, act. युञ्जन्त् `yuñjánt` (fem. युञ्जती `yuñjatī́`); mid. युञ्जान
`yuñjāná` (but RV. has índhāna).

6\. Imperfect.

692\. The example of the regular inflection of this tense needs no
introduction:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अयुनजम्  
`áyunajam`

अयुञ्ज्व  
`áyuñjva`

अयुञ्ज्म  
`áyuñjma`

अयुञ्जि  
`áyuñji`

अयुञ्ज्वहि  
`áyuñjvahi`

अयुञ्ज्महि  
`áyuñjmahi`

2

अयुनक्  
`áyunak`

अयुङ्क्तम्  
`áyun̄ktam`

अयुङ्क्त  
`áyun̄kta`

अयुङ्क्थास्  
`áyun̄kthās`

अयुञ्जाथाम्  
`áyuñjāthām`

अयुङ्ग्ध्वम्  
`áyun̄gdhvam`

3

अयुनक्  
`áyunak`

अयुङ्क्ताम्  
`áyun̄ktām`

अयुञ्जन्  
`áyuñjan`

अयुङ्क्त  
`áyun̄kta`

अयुञ्जाताम्  
`áyuñjātām`

अयुञ्जत  
`áyuñjata`

a\. The endings `s` and `t` are necessarily lost in the nasal class
throughout in 2d and 3d sing. act., unless saved at the expense of the
final radical consonant: which is a case of very rare occurrence (the
only quotable examples were given at 555 a).

693\. The Veda shows no irregularities in this tense. Occurrences of
augmentless forms are found, especially in 2d and 3d sing. act., showing
an accent like that of the present: for example,
`bhinát, pṛṇák, vṛṇák, piṇák, riṇák`.

a\. The 1st sing. act. `atṛṇam` and `acchinam` (for `atṛṇadam` and
`acchinadam`) were noted above, at 555 a.

694\. The roots of this class number about thirty, more than half of
them being found only in the earlier language; no new ones make their
first appearance later. Three of them, `añj` and `bhañj` and `hiṅs`,
carry their nasal also into other tense-systems than the present. Two,
`ṛdh` and `ubh`, make present-systems also of other classes having a
nasal in the class-sign: thus, `ṛdhnoti` (`nu`-class) and `ubhnāti`
(`nā`-class). 

a\. Many of the roots make forms from secondary `a`-stems: thus, from
`añja, unda, umbhá, chinda, tṛṅhá, piṅṣa, pṛñcá, bhuñja, rundha, çiṅṣá,`
etc.

Irregularities of the Nasal Class.

695\. The root `tṛh` combines `tṛṇah` with `ti, tu`, etc. into
`tṛṇeḍhi, tṛṇéḍhu`; and, according to the grammarians, has also such
forms as `tṛṇehmi`: see above, 224 b.

696\. The root `hiṅs` (by origin apparently a desiderative from √`han`)
accents irregularly the root-syllable in the weak forms: thus,
`híṅsanti, híṅste, híṅsāna` (but `hinásat` etc. and `hiṅsyā́t` ÇB.).

IV\. `Nu`- and `u`-classes (fifth and eighth, `su`- and `tan`-classes).

697\. A. The present-stem of the `nu`-class is made by adding to the
root the syllable नु `nu`, which then in the strong forms receives the
accent, and is strengthened to नो `nó`.

B. The few roots of the `u`-class (about half-a-dozen) end in न् `n`,
with the exception of the later irregular कृ `kṛ` (or `kar`) — for
which, see below, 714. The two classes, then, are closely correspondent
in form; and they are wholly accordant in inflection.

a\. The `u` of either class-sign is allowed to be dropped before `v` and
`m` of the 1st du. and 1st pl. endings, except when the root
(`nu`-class) ends in a consonant; and the `u` before a vowel-ending
becomes `v` or `uv`, according as it is preceded by one or by two
consonants (129 a).

1\. Present Indicative.

698\. Examples of inflection: A. `nu`-class; root सु `su` *press out*:
strong form of stem, सुनो `sunó`; weak form, सुनु `sunu`.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

सुनोमि  
`sunómi`

सुनुवस्  
`sunuvás`

सुनुमस्  
`sunumás`

सुन्वे  
`sunvé`

सुनुवहे  
`sunuváhe`

सुनुमहे  
`sunumáhe`

2

सुनोषि  
`sunóṣi`

सुनुथस्  
`sunuthás`

सुनुथ  
`sunuthá`

सुनुषे  
`sunuṣé`

सुन्वाथे  
`sunvā́the`

सुनुध्वे  
`sunudhvé`



3

सुनोति  
`sunóti`

सुनुतस्  
`sunutás`

सुन्वन्ति  
`sunvánti`

सुनुते  
`sunuté`

सुन्वाते  
`sunvā́te`

सुन्वते  
`sunváte`

a\. The forms `sunvás, sunmás, sunváhe, sunmáhe` are alternative with
those given here for 1st du. and pl., and in practice are more common.
From √`āp`, however (for example), only the forms with `u` can occur:
thus, `āpnuvás, āpnumáhe`; and also only `āpnuvánti, āpnuvé, āpnuváte`.

B. `u`-class; root तन् `tan` *stretch*: strong form of stem, तनो `tanó`;
weak, तनु `tanu`.

1

तनोमि  
`tanómi`

तन्वस्  
`tanvás`

तन्मस्  
`tanmás`

तन्वे  
`tanvé`

तन्वहे  
`tanváhe`

तन्महे  
`tanmáhe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

b\. The inflection is so precisely like that given above that it is not
worth writing out in full. The abbreviated forms in 1st du. and pl. are
presented here, instead of the fuller, which rarely occur (as no double
consonant ever precedes).

699\. a. In the older language, no strong 2d persons du. or pl., and no
`thana`-endings, chance to occur (but they are numerous in the impv. and
impf.: see below). The RV. has several cases of the irregular accent in
3d pl. mid.: thus, `kṛṇvaté, tanvaté, manvaté, vṛṇvaté, spṛṇvaté`.

b\. In RV. occur also several 3d pl. mid. in `ire` from present-stems of
this class: thus, `invire, ṛṇvire, pinvire, çṛṇviré, sunviré, hinviré`.
Of these, `pinvire` and `hinviré` might be perfects without
reduplication from the secondary roots `pinv` and `hinv` (below, 716).
The 2d sing. mid. (with passive value) `çṛṇviṣé` (RV.) is of anomalous
and questionable character.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

700\. The subjunctive mode-stem is made in the usual manner, by adding
`a` to the gunated and accented class-sign: thus, `sunáva, tanáva`. In
the following scheme are given all the forms of which examples have been
met with in actual use in the older language from either division of the
class; some of them are quite numerously represented there.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`sunávāni`

`sunávāva`

`sunávāma`

`sunávāi`

`sunávāvahāi`

`sunávāmahāi`

2

`sunávas`

`sunávatha`

`sunávase`

`sunávāithe`

3

`sunávat`

`sunávan`

`sunávate`  
`sunávātāi`

`sunávanta`



701\. Of the briefer 1st sing. act., RV. has `kṛṇavā` and `hinavā`.
Forms with double mode-sign occur (not in RV.): thus, `kṛṇávāt` and
`karavāt` (AV.); `açnavātha` (K.), `kṛṇavātha` (VS.; but `-vatha` in
Kāṇva-text), `karavātha` (ÇB.). On the other hand, `açnavatāi` is found
once (in TS.). Forms like `āpnuvāni, ardhnúvat, açnuvat`, met with now
and then in the older texts, are doubtless to be regarded as false
readings. RV. has in a single passage `kṛṇvāíte` (instead of
`kṛṇávāite`); the only form in `āithe` is `açnávāithe`.

3\. Present Optative.

702\. The combined endings (566) are added, as usual, to the weak
tense-stem: thus,

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

सुनुयाम्  
`sunuyā́m`

सुनुयाव  
`sunuyā́va`

सुनुयाम  
`sunuyā́ma`

सुन्वीय  
`sunvīyá`

सुन्वीवहि  
`sunvīváhi`

सुन्वीमहि  
`sunvīmáhi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. From √`āp`, the middle optative would be `āpnuvīyá` — and so in
other like cases.

4\. Present Imperative.

703\. The inflection of the imperative is in general like that in the
preceding classes. As regards the 2d sing. act., the rule of the later
language is that the ending हि `hi` is taken whenever the root itself
ends in a consonant; otherwise, the tense- (or mode-) stem stands by
itself as 2d person (for the earlier usage, see below, 704). An example
of inflection is:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

सुनवानि  
`sunávāni`

सुनवाव  
`sunávāva`

सुनवाम  
`sunávāma`

सुनवै  
`sunávāi`

सुनवावहै  
`sunávāvahāi`

सुनवामहै  
`sunávāmahāi`

2

सुनु  
`sunú`

सुनुतम्  
`sunutám`

सुनुत  
`sunutá`

सुनुष्व  
`sunuṣvá`

सुन्वाथाम्  
`sunvā́thām`

सुनुध्वम्  
`sunudhvám`

3

सुनोतु  
`sunótu`

सुनुताम्  
`sunutā́m`

सुन्वन्तु  
`sunvántu`

सुनुताम्  
`sunutā́m`

सुन्वाताम्  
`sunvā́tām`

सुन्वताम्  
`sunvátām`



a\. From √`āp`, the 2d sing. act. would be `āpnuhí`; from √`aç`
`açnuhí`; from √`dhṛṣ`, `dhṛṣṇuhí`; and so on. From √`āp`, too, would be
made `āpnuvántu, āpnuvā́thām, āpnuvā́tām, āpnuvátām`.

704\. In the earliest language, the rule as to the omission of `hi`
after a root with final vowel does not hold good: in RV., such forms as
`inuhi, kṛṇuhí, cinuhí, dhūnuhi, çṛṇuhí, spṛṇuhi, hinuhi`, and
`tanuhi, sanuhi`, are nearly thrice as frequent in use as
`inú, çṛṇu, sunú, tanu`, and their like; in AV., however, they are only
one sixth as frequent; and in the Brāhmaṇas they appear only
sporadically: even `çṛṇudhí` (with `dhi`) occurs several times in RV.
RV. has the 1st sing. act. `hinavā`. The ending `tāt` is found in
`kṛṇutāt` and `hinutāt`, and `kurutāt`. The strong stem-form is found in
2d du. act. in `hinotam` and `kṛṇotam`; and in 2d pl. act. in `kṛṇóta`
and `kṛṇótana, çṛṇóta` and `çṛṇotana, sunóta` and `sunótana, hinóta` and
`hinotana`, and `tanota, karóta`. The ending `tana` occurs only in the
forms just quoted.

5\. Present Participle.

705\. The endings अन्त् `ánt` and आन `āná` are added to the weak form of
tense stem: thus, from √सु `su` come act. सुन्वन्त् `sunvánt` (fem.
सुन्वती `sunvatī́`), mid. सुन्वान `sunvāná`; from √तन् `tan`, तन्वन्त्
`tanvánt` (fem. तन्वती `tanvatī́`), तन्वान `tanvāná`. From √आप् `āp`,
they are आप्नुवन्त् `āpnuvánt` and आप्नुवान `āpnuvāná`.

6\. Imperfect.

706\. The combination of augmented stem and endings is according to the
rules already stated: thus,

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

असुनवम्  
`ásunavam`

असुनुव  
`ásunuva`

असुनुम  
`ásunuma`

असुन्वि  
`ásunvi`

असुनुवहि  
`ásunuvahi`

असुनुमहि  
`ásunumahi`

2

असुनोस्  
`ásunos`

असुनुतम्  
`ásunutam`

असुनुत  
`ásunuta`

असुनुथास्  
`ásunuthās`

असुन्वाथाम्  
`ásunvāthām`

असुनुध्वम्  
`ásunudhvam`

3

असुनोत्  
`ásunot`

असुनुताम्  
`ásunutām`

असुन्वन्  
`ásunvan`

असुनुत  
`ásunuta`

असुन्वाताम्  
`ásunvātām`

असुन्वत  
`ásunvata`

a\. Here, as elsewhere, the briefer forms
`ásunva, ásunma, ásunvahi, ásunmahi` are allowed, and more usual, except
from roots with final consonant, as `dhṛṣ`: which makes, for example,
always `ádhṛṣṇuma` etc., and also
`ádhṛṣṇuvan, ádhṛṣṇuvi, ádhṛṣṇuvāthām, ádhṛṣṇuvātām, ádhṛṣṇuvata`. 

707\. Strong stem-forms and `tana`-ending are found only in RV., In
`akṛṇota`, `akṛṇotana`. Augmentless forms with accent are `minván`,
`ṛṇutá`.

708\. About fifty roots make, either exclusively or in part, their
present-forms after the manner of the `nu`-class: half of them do so
only in the older language; three or four, only in the later.

a\. As to transfers to the `a`-conjugation, see below, 716.

709\. The roots of the other division, or of the `u`-class, are
extremely few, not exceeding eight, even including `tṛ` on account of
`taruté` RV., and `han` on account of the occurrence of `hanomi` once in
a Sūtra (PGS. i. 3. 27). BR. refer the stem `inu` to `in` of the
`u`-class instead of `i` of the `nu`-class.

Irregularities of the `nu` and `u`-classes.

710\. The root `tṛp` *be pleased* is said by the grammarians to retain
the `n` of its class-sign unlingualized in the later language — where,
however, forms of conjugation of this class are very rare; while in the
Veda the regular change is made: thus, `tṛpṇu`.

711\. The root `çru` *hear* is contracted to `çṛ` before the class-sign,
forming `çṛṇó` and `çṛṇu` as stem. Its forms `çṛṇviṣé` and `çṛṇviré`
have been noted above (699 b).

712\. The root `dhū` *shake* in the later language (and rarely in B. and
S.) shortens its vowel, making the stem-forms `dhunó` and `dhunu`
(earlier `dhūnó`, `dhūnu`).

713\. The so-called root `ūrṇu`, treated by the native grammarians as
dissyllabic and belonging to the root-class (I.), is properly a
present-stem of this class, with anomalous contraction, from the root
`vṛ` (or `var`). In the Veda, it has no forms which are not regularly
made according to the `nu`-class; but in the Brāhmaṇa language are found
sometimes such forms as `ūrṇāuti`, as if from an `u`-root of the root
class (626); and the grammarians make for it a perfect, aorist, future,
etc. Its 2d sing. impv. act. is `ūrṇu` or `ūrṇuhi`; its impf., `āúrṇos`,
`āurṇot`; its opt. mid., `ūrṇuvīta` (K.) or `ūrṇvītá` (TS.).

714\. The extremely common root कृ `kṛ` (or `kar`) *make* is in the
later language inflected in the present-system exclusively according to
the `u`-class (being the only root of that class not ending in न् `n`).
It has the irregularity that in the strong form of stem it (as well as
the class-sign) has the `guṇa`-strengthening, and that in the weak form
it is changed to `kur`, so that the two forms of stem are करो `karó`
and कुरु `kuru`. The class-sign उ `u` is always dropped before of व् `v`
and म् `m` of the 1st du. and pl., and also before य् `y` of the opt.
act. Thus:

1\. Present Indicative.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

करोमि  
`karómi`

कुर्वस्  
`kurvás`

कुर्मस्  
`kurmás`

कुर्वे  
`kurvé`

कुर्वहे  
`kurváhe`

कुर्महे  
`kurmáhe`

2

करोषि  
`karóṣi`

कुरुथस्  
`kuruthás`

कुरुथ  
`kuruthá`

कुरुषे  
`kuruṣé`

कुर्वाथे  
`kurvā́the`

कुरुध्वे  
`kurudhvé`

3

करोति  
`karóti`

कुरुतस्  
`kurutás`

कुर्वन्ति  
`kurvánti`

कुरुते  
`kuruté`

कुर्वाते  
`kurvā́te`

कुर्वते  
`kurváte`

2\. Present Optative.

1

कुर्याम्  
`kuryā́m`

कुर्याव  
`kuryā́va`

कुर्याम  
`kuryā́ma`

कुर्वीय  
`kurvīyá`

कुर्वीवहि  
`kurvīváhi`

कुर्वीमहि  
`kurvīmáhi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

3\. Present Imperative.

1

करवाणि  
`karávāṇi`

करवाव  
`karávāva`

करवाम  
`karávāma`

करवै  
`karávāi`

करवावहै  
`karávāvahāi`

करवामहै  
`karávāmahāi`

2

कुरु  
`kurú`

कुरुतम्  
`kurutám`

कुरुत  
`kurutá`

कुरुष्व  
`kuruṣvá`

कुर्वाथाम्  
`kurvā́thām`

कुरुध्वम्  
`kurudhvám`

3

करोतु  
`karótu`

कुरुताम्  
`kurutā́m`

कुर्वन्तु  
`kurvántu`

कुरुताम्  
`kurutā́m`

कुर्वाताम्  
`kurvā́tām`

कुर्वताम्  
`kurvátām`

4\. Present Participle.

कुर्वन्त् `kurvánt` (fem. कुर्वती `kurvatī́`) कुर्वाण `kurvāṇá`

5\. Imperfect.

1

अकरवम्  
`ákaravam`

अकुर्व  
`ákurva`

अकुर्म  
`ákurma`

अकुर्वि  
`ákurvi`

अकुर्वहि  
`ákurvahi`

अकुर्महि  
`ákurmahi`

2

अकरोस्  
`ákaros`

अकुरुतम्  
`ákurutam`

अकुरुत  
`ákuruta`

अकुरुथास्  
`ákuruthās`

अकुर्वाथाम्  
`ákurvāthām`

अकुरुध्वम्  
`ákurudhvam`

3

अकरोत्  
`ákarot`

अकुरुताम्  
`ákurutām`

अकुर्वन्  
`ákurvan`

अकुरुत  
`ákuruta`

अकुर्वाताम्  
`ákurvātām`

अकुर्वत  
`ákurvata`



715\. In RV., this root is regularly inflected in the present-system
according to the `nu`-class, making the stem-forms `kṛṇó` and `kṛṇu`;
the only exceptions are `kurmas` once and `kuru` twice (all in the tenth
book); in AV., the `nu`-forms are still more than six times as frequent
as the `u`-forms (nearly half of which, moreover, are in prose
passages); but in the Brāhmaṇa language and later, the `u`-forms are
used to the exclusion of the others.

a\. As 1st sing. pres. act. is found `kurmi` in the epos.

b\. What irregular forms from `kṛ` as a verb of the `nu`-class occur in
the older language have been already noticed above.

c\. The isolated form `taruté`, from √`tṛ`, shows an apparent analogy
with these `u`-forms from `kṛ`.

716\. A few verbs belonging originally to these classes have been
shifted, in part or altogether, to the `a`-class, their proper
class-sign having been stereotyped as a part of the root.

a\. Thus, in RV. we find forms both from the stem `inu` (√`i` or `in`),
and also from `ínva`, representing a derivative quasi-root `inv` (and
these latter alone occur in AV.). So likewise forms from a stem `ṛṇva`
beside those from `ṛṇu` (√`ṛ`); and from `hinva` beside those from
`hinu` (√`hi`). The so-called roots `jinv` and `pinv` are doubtless of
the same origin, although no forms from the stem `pinu` are met with at
any period — unless `pinvire` (above, 699 b) be so regarded; and AV. has
the participle `pinvánt`, f. `pinvatī́`. The grammarians set up a root
`dhinv`, but only forms from `dhi` (stem `dhinu`) appear to occur in the
present-system (the aorist `adhinvīt` is found in PB.).

b\. Occasional `a`-forms are met with also from other roots: thus,
`cinvata` etc., `dunvasva`.

V. `Nā`-class (ninth or `krī`-class).

717\. The class-sign of this class is in the strong forms the syllable
ना `nā́`, accented, which is added to the root; in the weak forms, or
where the accent falls upon the ending, it is नी `nī`; but before the
initial vowel of an ending the ई `ī` of नी `nī` disappears altogether.

1\. Present Indicative.

718\. Example of inflection: root क्री `krī` *buy*: strong form of stem,
क्रीणा `krīṇā́`; weak form, क्रीणी `krīṇī` (before a vowel, क्रीण्
`krīṇ`). 

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

क्रीणामि  
`krīṇā́mi`

क्रीणीवस्  
`krīṇīvás`

क्रीणीमस्  
`krīṇīmás`

क्रीणे  
`krīṇé`

क्रीणीवहे  
`krīṇīváhe`

क्रीणीमहे  
`krīṇīmáhe`

2

क्रीणासि  
`krīṇā́si`

क्रीणीथस्  
`krīṇīthás`

क्रीणीथ  
`krīṇīthá`

क्रीणीषे  
`krīṇīṣe`

क्रीणाथे  
`krīṇā́the`

क्रीणीध्वे  
`krīṇīdhvé`

3

क्रीणाति  
`krīṇā́ti`

क्रीणीतस्  
`krīṇītás`

क्रीणन्ति  
`krīṇánti`

क्रीणीते  
`krīṇīté`

क्रीणाते  
`krīṇā́te`

क्रीणते  
`krīṇáte`

719\. In the Veda, the 3d sing. mid. has the same form with the 1st in
`gṛṇé`; the peculiar accent of 3d pl. mid. is seen in `punaté` and
`riṇaté`; and `vṛṇīmahé` (beside `vṛṇīmáhe`) occurs once in RV.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

720\. The subjunctive forms which have been found exemplified in Veda
and Brāhmaṇa are given below. The subjunctive mode-stem is, of course,
indistinguishable in form from the strong tense-stem. And the 2d and 3d
sing. act. (with secondary endings) are indistinguishable from
augmentless imperfects.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`krīṇāni`

`krīṇā́ma`

`krīṇāí`

`krīṇāvahāi`

`krīṇāmahāi`

2

`krīṇā́s`

`krīṇātha`

`krīṇāsāi`

3

`krīṇā́t`

`krīṇā́n`

`krīṇātāi`

`krīṇāntāi`

3\. Present Optative.

721\. This mode is formed and inflected with entire regularity; owing to
the fusion of tense-sign and mode-sign in the middle, some of its
persons are indistinguishable from augmentless imperfects. Its first
persons are as follows:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

क्रीणीयाम्  
`krīṇīyā́m`

क्रीणीयाव  
`krīṇīyā́va`

क्रीणीयाम  
`krīṇīyā́ma`

क्रीणीय  
`krīṇīyá`

क्रीणीवहि  
`krīṇīváhi`

क्रीणीमहि  
`krīṇīmáhi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

4\. Present Imperative.

722\. The ending in 2d sing. act., as being always preceded by a vowel,
is हि `hi` (never धि `dhi`); and there are no examples of an omission of
it. But this person is forbidden to be formed in the classical language
from roots ending in a consonant; for both class-sign and ending is
substituted the peculiar ending आन `āná`.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

क्रीणानि  
`krīṇā́ni`

क्रीणाव  
`krīṇā́va`

क्रीणाम  
`krīṇā́ma`

क्रीणै  
`krīṇāí`

क्रीणावहै  
`krīṇā́vahāi`

क्रीणामहै  
`krīṇā́mahāi`

2

क्रीणीहि  
`krīṇīhí`

क्रीणीतम्  
`krīṇītám`

क्रीणीत  
`krīṇītá`

क्रीणीष्व  
`krīṇīṣvá`

क्रीणाथाम्  
`krīṇā́thām`

क्रीणीध्वम्  
`krīṇīdhvám`

3

क्रीणातु  
`krīṇā́tu`

क्रीणीताम्  
`krīṇītā́m`

क्रीणन्तु  
`krīṇántu`

क्रीणीताम्  
`krīṇītā́m`

क्रीणाताम्  
`krīṇā́tām`

क्रीणताम्  
`krīṇátām`

a\. Examples of the ending `āná` in 2d sing. act. are
`açāna,  gṛhāṇá, badhāná, stabhāná`.

723\. The ending `āna` is known also to the earliest language; of the
examples just given, all are found in AV., and the first two in RV.;
others are `iṣāṇa, muṣāṇa, skabhāna`. But AV. has also `gṛbhṇīhi` (also
AB.), and even `gṛhṇāhi`, with strong stem; BhP. has `badhnīhi`. Strong
stems are farther found in `gṛṇāhi` and `stṛṇāhi` (TS.), `pṛṇāhi` (TB.),
and `çrīṇāhi` (Āpast.), and, with anomalous accent, `punāhí` and
`çṛṇāhí` (SV.); and, in 2d pl. act., in `punā́ta` (RV.). The ending `tāt`
of 2d sing. act. occurs in `gṛhṇītāt, jānītā́t, punītāt`. The ending
`tana` is found in `punītána, pṛṇītana, çrīṇītana`.

5\. Present Participle.

724\. The participles are regularly formed: thus, for example, act.
क्रीणन्त् `krīṇánt` (fem. क्रीणती `krīṇatī́`); mid. क्रीणान `krīṇāná`.

6\. Imperfect.

725\. There is nothing special to be noted as to the inflection of this
tense: an example is —

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अक्रीणाम्  
`ákrīṇām`

अक्रीणीव  
`ákrīṇīva`

अक्रीणीम  
`ákrīṇīma`

अक्रीणि  
`ákrīṇi`

अक्रीणीवहि  
`ákrīṇīvahi`

अक्रीणीमहि  
`ákrīṇīmahi`

2

अक्रीणास्  
`ákrīṇās`

अक्रीणीतम्  
`ákrīṇītam`

अक्रीणीत  
`ákrīṇīta`

अक्रीणीथास्  
`ákrīṇīthās`

अक्रीणाथाम्  
`ákrīṇāthām`

अक्रीणीध्वम्  
`ákrīṇīdhvam`

3

अक्रीणात्  
`ákrīṇāt`

अक्रीणीताम्  
`ákrīṇītām`

अक्रीणन्  
`ákrīṇan`

अक्रीणीत  
`ákrīṇīta`

अक्रीणाताम्  
`ákrīṇātām`

अक्रीणत  
`ákrīṇata`



726\. It has been pointed out above that augmentless persons of this
tense are in part indistinguishable in form from subjunctive and
optative persons. Such as certainly belong here are (in V.) `kṣiṇām`;
`açnan`, `riṇán`; `gṛbhṇata`, `vṛṇata`. The AV. has once `minīt` instead
of `mināt`. MBh. has `açnīs` after `mā`.

a\. AB. has the false form `ajānīmas`, and in AA. occurs `avṛṇīta` as 3d
plural.

727\. The roots which form their present-systems, wholly or in part,
after the manner of this class, are over fifty in number: but, for about
three fifths of them, the forms are quotable only from the older
language, and for half-a-dozen they make their first appearance later;
for less than twenty are they in use through the whole life of the
language, from the Veda down.

a\. As to secondary `a`-stems, see 731.

Irregularities of the `na`-class.

728\. a. The roots ending in `ū` shorten that vowel before the
class-sign: thus, from √`pū`, `punā́ti` and `punīté`; in like manner also
`jū`, `dhū`, `lū`.

b\. The root `vlī` (B.S.) forms either `vlīnā` or `vlinā`.

729\. The root `grabh` or `grah` (the former Vedic) is weakened to
`gṛbh` or `gṛh`.

a\. As the perfect also in weak forms has `gṛbh` or `gṛh`, it is not
easy to see why the grammarians should not have written `ṛ` instead of
`ra` in the root.

730\. a. A few of the roots have a more or less persistent nasal in
forms outside the present-system; such are without nasal before the
class-sign: thus, `grath` or `granth`, `badh` or `bandh`, `math` or
`manth`, `skabh` or `skambh`, `stabh` or `stambh`.

b\. The root `jñā` also loses its nasal before the class-sign: thus,
`jānā́ti`, `jānīté`.

731\. Not rarely, forms showing a transfer to the `a`-conjugation are
met with: thus, even in RV., `minati`, `minat`, `aminanta`, from √`mi`;
in AV., `çṛṇa` from √`çṛ`; later, `gṛhṇa`, `jāna`, `prīṇa`, `mathna`,
etc. And from roots `pṛ` and `mṛ` are formed the stems `pṛṇá` and
`mṛṇá`, which are inflected after the manner of the `á`-class, as if
from roots `pṛṇ` and `mṛṇ`.

732\. In the Veda, an apparently denominative inflection of a stem in
`āyá` is not infrequent beside the conjugation of roots of this class:
thus, `gṛbhāyá`, `mathāyáti`, `açrathāyas`, `skabhāyáta`, `astabhāyat`,
`pruṣāyánte`, `muṣāyát`, and so on. See below, 1066 b. 

Second or `a`-Conjugation.

733\. We come now to the classes which compose the Second or
`a`-Conjugation. These are more markedly similar in their mode of
inflection than the preceding classes; their common characteristics,
already stated, may be here repeated in summary. They are: 1. A final
`a` in the present-stem; 2. a constant accent, not changing between stem
and ending; 3. a briefer form of the optative mode-sign in the active,
namely `ī` instead of `yā` (combining in both voices alike with `a` to
`e`); 4. the absence of any ending (except when `tāt` is used) in 2d
sing. impv. act.; 5. the conversion of initial `ā` of the 2d and 3d du.
mid. endings to `e`; 6. the use of the full endings `ante`, `anta`,
`antām` in 3d pl. mid. forms; 7. the invariable use of `an` (not `us`)
in 3d pl. impf. act.; 8. and the use of `māna` instead of `āna` as
ending of the mid. pple. Moreover, 9. the stem-final `a` becomes `ā`
before `m` and `v` of 1st personal endings — but not before `am` of 1st
sing. impf.: here, as before the 3d pl. endings, the stem-final is lost,
and the short `a` of the ending remains (or the contrary): thus,
`bhávanti` (`bháva+anti`), `bhávante` (`bháva+ante`), `ábhavam`
(`ábhava+am`).

a\. All these characteristics belong not to the inflection of the
`a`-present-systems alone, but also to that of the `a`-, reduplicated,
and `sa`-aorists, the `s`-future, and the desiderative, causative, and
denominative present-systems. That is to say, wherever in conjugation an
`a`-stem is found, it is inflected in the same manner.

VI\. `A`-class (first, `bhū`-class).

734\. The present-stem of this class is made by adding अ `a` to the
root, which has the accent, and, when that is possible (235, 240), is
strengthened to `guṇa`. Thus, भव `bháva` from √भू `bhū`; जय `jáya` from
√जि `ji`; बोध `bódha` from √बुध् `budh`; सर्प `sárpa` from √सृप् `sṛp`;
— but वद `váda` from √वद् `vad`; क्रीड `krī́ḍa` from √क्रीड् `krīḍ`. 

1\. Present Indicative.

735\. The endings and the rules for their combination with the stem have
been already fully given, for this and the other parts of the
present-system; and it only remains to illustrate them by examples.

a\. Example of inflection: root भू `bhū` *be*; stem भव `bháva` (`bho+a`:
131).

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

भवामि  
`bhávāmi`

भवावस्  
`bhávāvas`

भवामस्  
`bhávāmas`

भवे  
`bháve`

भवावहे  
`bhávāvahe`

भवामहे  
`bhávāmahe`

2

भवसि  
`bhávasi`

भवथस्  
`bhávathas`

भवथ  
`bhávatha`

भवसे  
`bhávase`

भवेथे  
`bhávethe`

भवध्वे  
`bhávadhve`

3

भवति  
`bhávati`

भवतस्  
`bhávatas`

भवन्ति  
`bhávanti`

भवते  
`bhávate`

भवेते  
`bhávete`

भवन्ते  
`bhávante`

b\. The V. has but a single example of the `thana`-ending, namely
`vádathana` (and no other in any class of this conjugation). The 1st pl.
mid. `manāmahé` (RV., once) is probably an error. RV. has `çóbhe` once
as 3d singular.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

736\. The mode-stem is `bhávā` (`bháva+a`). Subjunctive forms of this
conjugation are very numerous in the older language; the following
scheme instances all that have been found to occur.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`bhávāni`

`bhávāva`

`bhávāma`

`bhávāi`

`bhávāvahāi`

`bhávāmahāi`

2

`bhávāsi`  
`bhávās`

`bhávāthas`

`bhávātha`

`bhávāse`  
`bhávāsāi`

`bhávādhvāi`

3

`bhávāti`  
`bhávāt`

`bhávātas`

`bhávān`

`bhávāte`  
`bhávātāi`

`bhávāite`

`bhávanta`  
`bhávāntāi`

737\. The 2d du. mid. (`bhávāithe`) does not chance to occur in this
class; and `yátāite` is the only example of the 3d person. No such pl.
mid. forms as `bhávādhve, bhávānte` are made from any class with
stem-final `a`; such as `bhávanta` (which are very common) are, of
course, properly augmentless imperfects. The Brāhmaṇas (especially ÇB.)
prefer the 2d sing. act. in `āsi` and the 3d in `āt`. AB. has the 3d
sing. mid. `haratāi`; and a 3d pl. in `antāi` (`vartantāi` KB.) has been
noted once. RV. has examples, `arcā` and `madā`, of the briefer 1st.
sing. act. 

3\. Present Optative.

738\. The scheme of optative endings as combined with the final of an
`a`-stem was given in full above (566).

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

भवेयम्  
bháveyam

भवेव  
bháveva

भवेम  
bhávema

भवेय  
bháveya

भवेवहि  
bhávevahi

भवेमहि  
bhávemahi

2

भवेस्  
bháves

भवेतम्  
bhávetam

भवेत  
bháveta

भवेथास्  
bhávethās

भवेयाथाम्  
bháveyāthām

भवेध्वम्  
bhávedhvam

3

भवेत्  
bhávet

भवेताम्  
bhávetām

भवेयुस्  
bháveyus

भवेत  
bháveta

भवेयाताम्  
bháveyātām

भवेरन्  
bháveran

a\. The RV. has once the 3d pl. mid. `bharerata` (for one other example,
see 752 b). AV. has `udeyam` from √`vad`.

b\. A few instances are met with of middle 3d persons from `a`-stems in
`īta` and (very rarely) `īran`, instead of `eta` and `eran`. For
convenience, they may be put together here (excepting the more numerous
causative forms, for which see 1043 c); they are (so far as noted)
these: `nayīta` S. and later, `çaṅsīta` S., `çrayīta` S.; `dhayīta` S.,
`dhyāyīta` U., `hvayīta` AB. S. and `hvayīran` S., `dhmāyīta` U. An
active form `çaṅsīyāt` C. is isolated and anomalous.

4\. Present Imperative.

739\. An example of the imperative inflection is:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

भवानि  
bhávāni

भवाव  
bhávāva

भवाम  
bhávāma

भवै  
bhávāi

भवावहै  
bhávāvahāi

भवामहै  
bhávāmahāi

2

भव  
bháva

भवतम्  
bhávatam

भवत  
bhávata

भवस्व  
bhávasva

भवेथाम्  
bhávethām

भवध्वम्  
bhávadhvam

3

भवतु  
bhávatu

भवताम्  
bhávatām

भवन्तु  
bhávantu

भवताम्  
bhávatām

भवेताम्  
bhávetām

भवन्ताम्  
bhávantām

740\. The ending `tana` in 2d pl. act. is as rare in this whole
conjugation as is `thana` in the present: the V. affords only
`bhajatana` in the `a`-class (and `nahyatana` in the `ya`-class: 760 c).
The ending `tāt` of 2d sing. act., on the other hand, is not rare; the
RV. has
`avatāt, oṣatāt, dahatāt, bhavatāt, yacchatāt, yācatāt, rákṣatāt, vahatāt`;
to which AV. adds `jinvatāt, dhāvatāt`; and the Brāhmanas bring other
examples. MS. has twice `svadātu` (parallel texts both times `svadāti`):
compare similar cases in the `á`-class: 752 c. 

5\. Present Participle

741\. The endings अन्त् `ant` and मान `māna` are added to the
present-stem, with loss, before the former, of the final stem-vowel:
thus, act. भवन्त् `bhávant` (fem. भवन्ती `bhávantī`); mid. भवमान
`bhávamāna`.

a\. A small number of middle participles appear to be made from stems of
this class (as of other `a`-classes: see 752 e, 1043 f) by the suffix
`āna` instead of `māna`: thus,
`namāna, pacāna, çikṣāṇa, svajāna, hvayāna` (all epic), `majjāna` and
`kaṣāṇa` (later); and there are Vedic examples (as
`cyávāna, prathāná, yátāna or yatāná, çúmbhāna`, all RV.) of which the
character, whether present or aorist, is doubtful: compare 840, 852.

6\. Imperfect.

742\. An example of the imperfect inflection is:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

अभवम्  
ábhavam

अभवाव  
ábhavāva

अभवाम  
ábhavāma

अभवे  
ábhave

अभवावहि  
ábhavāvahi

अभवामहि  
ábhavāmahi

अभवस्  
ábhavas

अभवतम्  
ábhavatam

अभवत  
ábhavata

अभवथास्  
ábhavathās

अभवेथाम्  
ábhavethām

अभवध्वम्  
ábhavadhvam

अभवत्  
ábhavat

अभवताम्  
ábhavatām

अभवन्  
ábhavan

अभवत  
ábhavata

अभवेताम्  
ábhavetām

अभवन्त  
ábhavanta

743\. No forms in `tana` are made in this tense from any `a`-class.
Examples of augmentless forms (which are not uncommon) are:
`cyávam, ávas, dáhas, bódhat, bhárat, cáran, náçan; bādhathās, várdhata, çócanta`.
The subjunctively used forms of 2d and 3d sing. act. are more frequent
than those of either of the proper subjunctive persons.

744\. A far larger number of roots form their present-system according
to the `a`-class than according to any of the other classes: in the RV.,
they are about two hundred and forty (nearly two fifths of the whole
body of roots); in the AV., about two hundred (nearly the same
proportion); for the whole language, the proportion is still larger, or
nearly one half the whole number of present-stems: namely, over two
hundred in both earlier and later language, one hundred and seventy-five
in the older alone, nearly a hundred and fifty in the later alone. Among
these are not a few transfers from the classes of the first conjugation:
see those classes above. There are no roots ending in long `ā` — except
a few which make an `a`-stem in some anomalous way: below, 749 a. 

Irregularities of the `a`-class.

745\. A few verbs have irregular vowel-changes in forming the
present-stem: thus,

a\. `ūh` *consider* has `guṇa`-strengthening (against 240): thus,
`óhate`.

b\. `kṛp` (or `krap`) *lament*, on the contrary, remains unchanged:
thus, `ḱṛ́pate`.

c\. `guh` *hide* has prolongation instead of `guṇa`: thus, `ǵū́hati`.

d\. `kram` *stride* regularly lengthens its vowel in the active, but not
in the middle: thus, `kŕā́mati, krámate`; but the vowel-quantities are
somewhat mixed up, even from the oldest language down; — `klam` *tire*
is said to form `klāmati` etc., but is not quotable; — `cam` with the
preposition `ā` *rinse the mouth* forms `́ā́cāmati`.

e\. In the later language are found occasional forms of this class from
`mṛj` *wipe*; and they show the same `vṛddhi` (instead of `guṇa`) which
belongs to the root in its more proper inflection (627): thus,
`mārjasva`.

f\. The grammarians give a number of roots in `urv`, which they declare
to lengthen the `u` in the present-stem. Only three are found in (quite
limited) use, and they show no forms anywhere with short `u`. All appear
to be of secondary formation from roots in `ṛ` or `ar`. The root `murch`
or `mūrch` *coagulate* has likewise only `ū` in quotable forms.

g\. The onomatopoetic root `ṣṭhīv` *spew* is written by the grammarians
as `ṣṭhiv`, and declared to lengthen its vowel in the present-system:
compare 240 b.

746\. The roots `daṅç` *bite*, `rañj` *color*, `sañj` *hang*, `svañj`
*embrace*, of which the nasal is in other parts of the conjugation not
constant, lose it in the present-system: thus, `dáçati` etc.; `sañj`
forms both `sajati` and `sajjati` (probably for `sajyati`, or for
`sasjati` from `sasajati`); `math` or `manth` has `mathati` later. In
general, as the present of this class is a strengthening formation, a
root that has such a nasal anywhere has it here also.

747\. The roots `gam` *go* and `yam` *reach* make the present-stems
`gáccha` and `yáccha`: thus, `gácchāmi` etc.: see 608.

748\. The root `sad` *sit* forms `śī́da` (conjectured to be contracted
from `sisda` for `sisada`: thus, `śī́dāmi` etc.

749\. Transfers to this class from other classes are not rare, as has
been already pointed out above, both throughout the present-system and
in occasional forms. The most important cases are the following:

a\. The roots in `ā, sthā` *stand*, `pā` *drink*, and `ghrā` *smell*,
form the present-stems `tíṣṭha` (`tíṣṭhāmi` etc.), `píba` (`píbāmi`
etc.), and `jíghra` (`jíghrāmi` etc.): for these and other similar
cases, see 671–4.

b\. Secondary root-forms like `inv, jinv, pinv`, from simpler roots of
the `nu`-class, are either found alongside their originals, or have
crowded these out of use: see 716.

750\. On the other hand, the root `dham` or `dhmā` *blow* forms its
present-stem from the more original form of the root: thus, `dhámati`
etc.

VII\. Accented `á`-class (sixth, `tud`-class).

751\. The present-stem of this class has the accent on the class-sign अ
`á`, and the root remains unstrengthened. In its whole inflection, it
follows so closely the model of the preceding class that to give the
paradigm in full will be unnecessary (only for the subjunctive, all the
forms found to occur will be instanced).

752\. Example of inflection: root विश् `viç` *enter*; stem विश `viçá`:

1\. Present Indicative.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

विशामि  
`viçā́mi`

विशावस्  
`viçā́vas`

विशामस्  
`viçā́mas`

विशे  
`viçé`

विशावहे  
`viçā́vahe`

विशामहे  
`viçā́mahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

1

`viçā́ni`

`viçā́va`

`viçā́ma`

`viçāí`

`viçā́vahāi`

`viçā́mahāi`

2

`viçā́si`  
`viçā́s`

`viçā́tha`

`viçā́se`  
`viçā́sāi`

`viçāíthe`

3

`viçā́ti`  
`viçā́t`

`viçā́tas`

`viçā́n`

`viçā́te`  
`viçā́tāi`

`viçāíte`

`viçā́ntāi`

a\. A single example of the briefer 1st sing. act. is `mṛkṣā́`. The only
forms in `āithe` and `āite` are `pṛṇāíthe` and `yuvāíte`.

3\. Present Optative.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

विशेयम्  
`viçéyam`

विशेव  
`viçéva`

विशेम  
`viçéma`

विशेय  
`viçéya`

विशेवहि  
`viçévahi`

विशेमहि  
`viçémahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

b\. The RV. has the ending `tana` once in `tiretana` 2d pl. act., and
`rata` in `juṣerata` 3d pl. mid. 

4\. Present Imperative.

The first persons having been given above as subjunctives, the second
are added here:

2

विश  
viçá

विशतम्  
viçátam

विशत  
viçáta

विशस्व  
viçásva

विशेथाम्  
viçéthām

विशध्वम्  
viçádhvam

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

c\. The ending `tāt` is found in RV. and AV. in
`mṛḍatāt, vṛhatāt, suvatāt`; other examples are not infrequent in the
Brāhmaṇa language: thus,
`khidatāt, chyatāt, pṛcchatāt, viçatāt, sṛjatāt`; and later, `spṛçatāt`.
The 3d sing. act `nudātu` and `muñcātu` occur in Sūtras (cf. 740).

5\. Present Participle.

The active participle is विशन्त् `viçánt`; the middle is विशमान
`viçámāna`.

d\. The feminine of the active participle is usually made from the
strong stem-form: thus, `viçántī`; but sometimes from the weak: thus,
siñcántī and `siñcatī́` (RV. and AV.), `tudántī` and `tudatī́` (AV.): see
above, 449 d, e.

e\. Middle participles in `āna` instead of `māna` are
`dhuvāná, dhṛṣāṇá, liçāna, çyāna`, in the older language;
`kṛçāna, muñcāna, spṛçāna` in the later (cf. 741 a).

6\. Imperfect.

1

अविशम्  
áviçam

अविशाव  
áviçāva

अविशाम  
áviçāma

अविशे  
áviçe

अविशावहि  
áviçāvahi

अविशामहि  
áviçāmahi

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

f\. Examples of augmentless forms accented are `sṛjás, sṛját, tiránta`.

g\. The `a`-aorist (846 ff.) is in general the equivalent, as regards
its forms, of an imperfect of this class.

753\. Stems of the `á`-class are made from nearly a hundred and fifty
roots: for about a third of these, in both the earlier and the later
language; for a half, in the earlier only; for the remainder, nearly
twenty, only in the later language. Among them are a number of transfers
from the classes of the non-`a`-conjugation.

a\. In some of these transfers, as `pṛṇ` and `mṛṇ` (731), there takes
place almost a setting-up of independent roots.

b\. The stems `icchá, ucchá`, and `ṛcchá` are reckoned as belonging
respectively to the roots `iṣ` *desire*, `vas` *shine*, and `ṛ` *go*.

c\. The roots written by the Hindu grammarians with final `o` — namely,
`cho, do, ço`, and `so` — and forming the present-stems `chyá`,
`dyá, çyá, syá`, are more properly (as having an accented `á` in the
stem) to be reckoned to this class than to the `ya`-class, where the
native classification puts them (see 761 g). They appear to be analogous
with the stems `kṣya, sva, hva`, noted below (755).

754\. The roots from which `á`-stems are made have certain noticeable
peculiarities of form. Hardly any of them have long vowels, and none
have long interior vowels; very few have final vowels; and none (save
two or three transfers, and √`lajj` *be ashamed*, which does not occur
in any accentuated text, and is perhaps to be referred rather to the
`a`-class) have `a` as radical vowel, except as this forms a combination
with `r`, which is then reduced with it to `ṛ` or some of the usual
substitutes of `ṛ`.

Irregularities of the `á`-class.

755\. The roots in `i` and `u` and `ū` change those vowels into `iy` and
`uv` before the class-sign: thus, `kṣiyá, yuvá, ruvá; suvá`, etc.; and
`sva, hva` occur, instead of `suva` and `huva`, in the older language,
while TS. has the participle `kṣyánt`. K. has `dhūva` from √`dhū`.

756\. The three roots in `ṛ` form the present-stems `kirá, girá` (also
`gila`), `tirá`, and are sometimes written as `kir` etc.; and
`gur, jur, tur` are really only varieties of `gṛ, jṛ, tṛ`; and `bhur`
and `sphur` are evidently related with other `ar` or `ṛ` root-forms.

a\. The common root `prach` *ask* makes the stem `pṛcchá`.

757\. As to the stems `-driyá` and `-priyá`, and `mriyá` and `dhriyá`,
sometimes reckoned as belonging to this class, see below, 773.

758\. Although the present-stem of this class shows in general a weak
form of the root, there are nevertheless a number of roots belonging to
it which are strengthened by a penultimate nasal. Thus, the stem `muñcá`
is made from √`muc` *release*; `siñcá` from √`sic` *sprinkle*; `vindá`
from √`vid` *find*; `kṛntá` from √`kṛt` *cut*; `piṅçá` from √`piç`
*adorn*; `tṛmpá` from √`tṛp` *enjoy*; `lumpá` from √`lup` *break*;
`limpá` from √`lip` *smear*; and occasional forms of the same kind are
met with from a few others, as `tunda` from √`tud` *thrust*; `bṛṅhá`
from √`bṛh` *strengthen*; `dṛṅhá` (beside `dṛ́ṅha`) from √`dṛh` *make
firm*; `çumbhá` (beside `çúmbha`) from √`çubh` *shine*; TS. has
`çṛnthati` from √`çrath` (instead of `çrathnāti`;
`uñcha, vindhá, sumbha`, are of doubtful character.

a\. Nasalized `á`-stems are also in several instances made by transfer
from the nasal class: thus,
`unda, umbha, ṛñjá, piṅṣá, yuñja, rundha, çiṅṣa`.

VIII\. `Ya`-class (fourth, `div`-class).

759\. The present-stem of this class adds य `ya` to the accented but
unstrengthened root. Its inflection is also precisely like that of the
`a`-class, and may be presented in the same abbreviated form as that of
the `á`-class.

760\. Example of inflection: root नह् `nah` *bind*; stem नह्य `náhya`.

1\. Present Indicative.

1\. Present Indicative.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

नह्यामि  
`náhyāmi`

नह्यावस्  
`náhyāvas`

नह्यामस्  
`náhyāmas`

नह्ये  
`náhye`

नह्यावहे  
`náhyāvahe`

नह्यामहे  
`náhyāmahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

1

`náhyāni`

`náhyāma`

`náhyāi`

`náhyāvahāi`

`náhyāmahāi`

2

`náhyāsináhyās`

`náhyāsāi`

`náhyādhvāi`

3

`náhyātináhyāt`

`náhyātas`

`náhyān`

`náhyātāi`

`náhyāntāi`

a\. A 3d pl. mid. in `antāi` (`jāyantāi`) occurs once in TS.

3\. Present Optative.

1

नह्येयम्  
`náhyeyam`

नह्येव  
`náhyeva`

नह्येम  
`náhyema`

नह्येय  
`náhyeya`

नह्येवहि  
`náhyevahi`

नह्येमहि  
`náhyemahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

b\. For two or three 3d sing. mid. forms in `īta` (for `eta`), see 738
b.

4\. Present Imperative.

2

नह्य  
`náhya`

नह्यतम्  
`náhyatam`

नह्यत  
`náhyata`

नह्यस्व  
`náhyasva`

नह्येथाम्  
`náhyethām`

नह्यध्वम्  
`náhyadhvam`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

c\. Of the ending `tana`, RV. has one example, `nahyatana`; the ending
`tāt` is found in `asyatāt, khyāyatāt, naçyatāt`.

5\. Present Participle.

The active participle is नह्यन्त् `náhyant` (fem. नह्यन्ती `náhyantī`);
the middle is नह्यमान `náhyamāna`.

6\. Imperfect.

1

अनह्यम्  
`ánahyam`

अनह्यव  
`ánahyava`

अनह्याम  
`ánahyāma`

अनह्ये  
`ánahye`

अनह्यावहि  
`ánahyāvahi`

अनह्यामहि  
`ánahyāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.



d\. Examples of augmentless forms showing the accent belonging to the
present-system are `gā́yat, páçyat, páçyan, jā́yathās`.

761\. The `ya`-class stems are more than a hundred and thirty in number,
and nearly half of them have forms in use in all periods of the
language, about forty occurring only in the earlier, and about thirty
only in the modern period.

a\. Of the roots making `ya`-stems, a very considerable part (over
fifty) signify a state of feeling, or a condition of mind or body: thus,
`kup` *be angry*, `klam` *be weary*, `kṣudh` *be hungry*, `muh` *be
confused*, `lubh` *be lustful*, `çuṣ` *be dry*, etc. etc.

b\. A further number have a more or less distinctly passive sense, and
are in part evident and in part presumable transfers from the passive or
`yá`-class, with change of accent, and sometimes also with assumption of
active endings. It is not possible to draw precisely the limits of the
division; but there are in the older language a number of clear cases,
in which the accent wavers and changes, and the others are to be judged
by analogy with them. Thus, √`muc` forms `múcyate` once or twice, beside
the usual `mucyáte`, in RV. and AV.; and in the Brāhmaṇas the former is
the regular accent. Similar changes are found also in `ya`-forms from
other roots: thus, from `kṣi` *destroy*, `jī` or `jyā` *injure*, `tap`
*heat*, `dṛh` *make firm*, `pac` *cook*, `pṛ` *fill*, `mī` *damage*,
`ric` *leave*, `lup` *break*, `hā` *leave*. Active forms are early made
from some of these, and they grow more common later. It is worthy of
special mention that, from the Veda down, `jā́yate` *is born* etc. is
found as altered passive or original `ya`-formation by the side of
√`jan` *give birth*.

c\. A considerable body of roots (about forty) differ from the above in
having an apparently original transitive or neuter meaning: examples are
`as` *throw*, `nah` *bind*, `paç` *see*, `pad` *go*, `çliṣ` *clasp*.

d\. A number of roots, of various meaning, and of somewhat doubtful
character and relations, having present-stems ending in `ya`, are by the
native grammarians written with final diphthongs, `āi` or `e` or `o`.
Thus:

e\. Roots reckoned as ending in `āi` and belonging to the `a`- (or
`bhū-`) class, as `gāi` *sing* (`gā́yati` etc.). As these show
abundantly, and for the most part exclusively, `ā`-forms outside the
present-system, there seems to be no good reason why they should not
rather be regarded as `ā`-roots of the `ya`-class. They are `kṣā`
*burn*, `gā` *sing*, `glā` *be weary*, `trā` *save*, `dhyā` *think*,
`pyā` *fill up*, `mlā` *relax*, `rā` *bark*, `vā` *be blown*, `çyā`
*coagulate*, `çrā` *boil*, `styā` *stiffen*. Some of them are evident
extensions of simpler roots by the addition of `ā`. The secondary roots
`tāy` *stretch* (beside `tan`), and `cāy` *observe* (beside `ci`) appear
to be of similar character.

f\. Roots reckoned as ending in `e` and belonging to the `a-` (or
`bhū-`) class, as `dhe` *suck* (`dháyati` etc.). These, too, have
`ā`-forms, and sometimes `ī`-forms, outside the present system, and are
best regarded as `ā`-roots, either with `ā` weakened to `a` before the
class-sign of this class, or with `ā` weakened to `ī` or `i` and
inflected according to the `a`-class. They are `dhā` *suck*, `mā`
*exchange*, `vā` *weave*, `vyā` *envelop*, `hvā` *call* (secondary, from
`hū`). As of kindred form may be mentioned `day` *share* and `vyay`
*expend* (probably denominative of `vyaya`).

g\. A few roots artificially written with final `o` and reckoned to the
`ya`-class, with radical vowel lost before the class-sign: thus, `do`
*cut*, *bind*, pres. `dyáti` etc. These, as having an accented `á` in
the sign, have plainly no right to be put in this class; and they are
better referred to the `á`-class (see above, 753 c). Outside the
present-system they show `ā-` and `i`-forms; and in that system the `ya`
is often resolved into `ia` in the oldest language.

762\. The `ya`-class is the only one thus far described which shows any
tendency toward a restriction to a certain variety of meaning. In this
tendency, as well as in the form of its sign, it appears related with
the class of distinctly defined meaning which is next to be taken up —
the passive, with `yá`-sign. Though very far from being as widely used
as the latter beside other present-systems, it is in some cases an
intransitive conjugation by the side of a transitive of some other
class.

Irregularities of the `ya`-class.

763\. The roots of this class ending in `am` lengthen their vowel in
forming the present-stem: they are `klam, tam, dam, bhram, çam` *be
quiet*, `çram`: for example, `tā́myati, çrā́myati`. From `kṣam`, however,
only `kṣamyate` occurs; and `çam` *labor* makes `çamyati` (B.).

764\. The root `mad` has the same lengthening: thus, `mā́dyati`.

765\. The roots in `īv` — namely, `dīv, sīv, srīv` or `çrīv`, and
`ṣṭhīv` (from which no forms of this class are quotable) — are written
by the grammarians with `iv`, and a similar lengthening in the
present-system is prescribed for them.

a\. They appear to be properly `dīū` etc., since their vocalized final
in other forms is always `ū`; `dīv` is by this proved to have nothing to
do with the assumed root `div` *shine*, which changes to `dyu` (361 d):
compare 240 b.

766\. From the roots `jṛ` and `tṛ` (also written as `jur` and `tir` or
`tur`) come the stems `jī́rya` and `tī́rya`, and `jū́rya` and `tūrya` (the
last two only in RV.); from `pṛ` comes `pū́rya`.

767\. The root `vyadh` is abbreviated to `vidh`: thus, `vídhyati`. And
any root which in other forms has a penultimate nasal loses it here:
thus, `dṛ́hya` from `dṛṅh` or `dṛh`; `bhraçya` from `bhraṅç` or `bhraç`;
`rajya` from `rañj` or `raj`. 

IX\. Accented `yá`-class: Passive conjugation.

768\. A certain form of present-stem, inflected with middle endings, is
used only in a passive sense, and is formed from all roots for which
there is occasion to make a passive conjugation. Its sign is an accented
य `yá` added to the root: thus, हन्य `hanyá` from √ हन् `han` *slay*,
आप्य `āpyá` from √आप् `āp` *obtain*, गृहय `grhyá` from √गृह् `gṛh` (or
`grah`) *seize*: and so on, without any reference to the class according
to which the active and middle forms are made.

769\. The form of the root to which the passive-sign is added is (since
the accent is on the sign) the weak one: thus, a penultimate nasal is
dropped, and any abbreviation which is made in the weak forms of the
perfect (794), in the aorist optative (922 b), or before `ta` of the
passive participle (954), is made also in the passive present-system:
thus, `ajyá` from √`añj`, `badhyá` from √`bandh`, `ucyá` from √`vac`,
`ijyá` from √`yaj`.

770\. On the other hand, a final vowel of a root is in general liable to
the same changes as in other parts of the verbal system where it is
followed by `y`: thus —

a\. Final `i` and `u` are lengthened: thus, `mīyá` from √`mi`; `sūyá`
from √`su`;

b\. Final `ā` is usually changed to `ī`: thus, `dīyá` from √`dā`; `hīyá`
from √`hā`: but `jñāyá` from √`jñā`, and so `khyāyá`, `khāyá`, `mnāyá`,
etc.;

c\. Final `ṛ` is in general changed to `ri`: thus, `kriyá` from √`kṛ`;
but if preceded by two consonants (and also, it is claimed, in the root
`ṛ`), it has instead the `guṇa`-strengthening: thus, `smaryá` from
√`smṛ` (the only quotable case); — and in those roots which show a
change of `ṛ` to `ir` and `ur` (so-called `ṝ`-verbs: see 242), that
change is made here also, and the vowel is lengthened: thus, `çīrya`
from √`çṛ`, `pūryá` from √`pṛ`.

771\. The inflectiom of the passive-stem is precisely like that of the
other `a`-stems; it differs only in accent from that of the class last
given. It may be here presented, therefore, in the same abbreviated
form:

a\. Example of inflection: root `kṛ` *make*; passive-stem क्रिय `kriyá`:


1\. Present Indicative.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

क्रिये  
`kriyé`

क्रियावहे  
`kriyā́vahe`

क्रियामहे  
`kriyā́mahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

b\. The forms noticed as occurring in the older language are alone here
instanced:

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`kriyāí`

`kriyā́mahāi`

2

`kriyā́dhvāi`

3

`kriyā́te`  
`kriyā́tāi`

`kriyā́ntāi`

c\. The 3d pl. ending `antāi` is found once (`ucyantāi` K.).

3\. Present Optative.

1

क्रियेय  
`kriyéya`

क्रियेवहि  
`kriyévahi`

क्रियेमहि  
`kriyémahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

d\. No forms of the passive optative chance to occur in RV. or AV.; they
are found, however, in the Brāhmaṇas. ChU. has once `dhmāyīta`.

4\. Present Imperative.

2

क्रियस्व  
`kriyásva`

क्रियेथाम्  
`kriyéthām`

क्रियध्वम्  
`kriyádhvam`

etc.

etc.

etc.

5\. Present Participle.

e\. This is made with the suffix मान `māna`: thus, क्रियमाण `kriyámāṇa`.

f\. In use, this participle is well distinguished from the other passive
participle by its distinctively present meaning: thus, `kṛtá` *done*,
but `kriyámāṇa` *in process of doing*, or *being done*.

6\. Imperfect.

1

अक्रिये  
`ákriye`

अक्रियावहि  
`ákriyāvahi`

अक्रियामहि  
`ákriyāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

g\. The passive-sign is never resolved into `ia` in the Veda.

772\. The roots `tan` and `khan` usually form their passives from
parallel roots in `ā`: thus, `tāyáte, khāyáte` (but also `tanyate`, ``
`khanyate`); and `dham`, in like manner, makes either `dhamyate` or
`dhmāyáte`. The corresponding form to √`jan`, namely `jā́yate` (above,
761 b), is apparently a transfer to the preceding class.

773\. By their form, `mriyáte` *dies*, and `dhriyáte` *maintains itself,
is steadfast*, are passives from the roots `mṛ` *die* and `dhṛ` *hold*;
although neither is used in a proper passive sense, and `mṛ` is not
transitive except in the derivative form `mṛṇ` (above, 731). With them
are to be compared the stems `ā-driyá` *heed* and `ā-priyá` *be busy*,
which are perhaps peculiar adaptations of meaning of passives from the
roots `dṛ` *pierce* and `pṛ` *fill*.

774\. Examples of the transfer of stems from the `yá-` or passive class
to the `ya-` or intransitive class were given above (761 b); and it was
also pointed out that active instead of middle endings are occasionally,
even in the earlier language, assumed by forms properly passive:
examples are `ā́ dhmāyati` and `vy àpruṣyat` (ÇB.), `bhūyati` (MāiU.). In
the epics, however (as a part of their general confusion of active and
middle forms: 529 a), active endings are by no means infrequently taken
by the passive: thus, `çakyati, çrūyanti, bhriyantu, ijyant-`, etc.

The so-called Tenth or `cur`-Class.

775\. As was noticed above (607), the Hindu grammarians — and, after
their example, most European also — recognize yet another
conjugation-class, coördinate with those already described; its stems
show the class-sign `áya`, added to a generally strengthened root (for
details as to the strengthening, see 1042). Though this is no proper
class, but a secondary or derivative conjugation (its stems are partly
of causative formation, partly denominative with altered accent), an
abbreviated example of its forms may, for the sake of accordance with
other grammars, be added here.

a\. Example: root `cint` *think, meditate*; stem `cintáya`:

active.

middle.

Pres.

Indic.

`cintáyāmi`

`cintáye`

Subj.

`cintáyāni`

`cintáyāi`

Opt.

`cintáyeyam`

`cintáyeya`

Pple.

`cintáyant`

`cintáyamāna`

Impf.

`ácintayam`

`ácintaye`

  
b. The inflection, of course, is the same with that of other forms from
`a`-stems (733 a).

c\. The middle participle, in the later language, is more often made
with `āna` instead of `māna`: thus, `cintayāna`: see 1043 f. 

Uses of the Present and Imperfect.

776\. The uses of the mode-forms of the present-system have been already
briefly treated in the preceding chapter (572 ff.). The tense-uses of
the two indicative tenses, present and imperfect, call here for only a
word or two of explanation.

777\. The present has, besides its strictly present use, the same
subsidiary uses which belong in general to the tense: namely, the
expression of habitual action, of future action, and of past action in
lively narration.

a\. Examples of future meaning are:
`imáṁ céd vā́ imé cinváte táta evá no ‘bhíbhavanti` (ÇB.) *verily if
these build this up, then they will straightway get the better of us*;
`agnir ātmabhavam prādād yatra vāñchati nāiṣadhaḥ` (MBh.) *Agni gave his
own presence wherever the Nishadhan should desire*;
`svāgataṁ te ‘stu kiṁ karomi tava` (R.) *welcome to thee; what shall I
do for thee?*

b\. Examples of past meaning are: úttarā sū́r ádharaḥ putrá āsīd dā́nuḥ
çaye sahávatsā ná dhenúḥ (RV.) *the mother was over, the son under;
there Dānu lies, like a cow with her calf*;
`prahasanti ca tāṁ kecid abhyasūyanti cā ’pare akurvata dayāṁ kecit`
(MBh.) *some ridicule her, some revile her, some pitied her;*
`tato yasya vacanāt tatrā ’valambitās taṁ sarve tiraskurvanti` (H.)
*thereupon they all fall to reproaching him by whose advice they had
alighted there.*

778\. In connection with certain particles, the present has rather more
definitely the value of a past tense. Thus:

a\. With `purā́` *formerly*: thus,
`saptarṣī́n u ha sma vāí purá rkṣā íty ā́cakṣate` (ÇB.) *the seven sages,
namely, are of old called the bears*;
`tanmātram api cen mahyaṁ na dadāti purā bhavān` (MBh.) *if you have
never before given me even an atom.*

b\. With the asseverative particle `sma`: thus,
`çrámeṇa ha sma vāí tád devā́ jayanti yád eṣāṁ jáyyam ā́sá rṣayaç ca`
(ÇB.) *in truth, both gods and sages were wont to win by penance what
was to be won;* `āviṣṭaḥ kalinā dyūte jīyate sma nalas tadā` (MBh.)
*then Nala, being possessed by Kali, was beaten in play.*

c\. No example of this last construction is found in either RV. or AV.,
or elsewhere in the metrical parts of the Veda. In the Brāhmaṇas, only
habitual action is expressed by it. At all periods of the language, the
use of `sma` with a verb as pure asseverative particle, with no effect
on the tense-meaning, is very common; and the examples later are hardly
to be distinguished from the present of lively narration — of which the
whole construction is doubtless a form.

779\. The imperfect has remained unchanged in value through the whole
history of the language; it is the tense of narration; it expresses
simple past time, without any other implication.

a\. Compare what is said later (end of chap. X. and chap. XI.) as to the
value of the older past tenses, the perfect and aorist.

## Notes\[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Sanskrit_Grammar_(Whitney)/Chapter_IX&action=edit&section=1 "Edit section: Notes")\]

1.  [↑](#cite_ref-1) Such statements of numbers, with regard to the
    various parts of the system of conjugation, are in all cases taken
    from the author's Supplement to this grammar, entitled "Roots,
    Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language", where
    lists of roots, and details as to forms etc., are also given.
