+++
title = "14 Chapter X PERFECT-SYSTEM"

+++




## CHAPTER X.

  

THE PERFECT-SYSTEM.

780\. THE perfect-system in the later language, as has been seen above
(535), consists only of an indicative tense and a participle — both of
them in the two voices, active and middle.

a\. In the oldest language, the perfect has also its modes and its
augment-preterit, or pluperfect, or is not less full in its apparatus of
forms than is the present-system (see 808 ff.).

781\. The formation of the perfect is essentially alike in all verbs,
differences among them being of only subordinate consequence, or having
the character of irregularities. The characteristics of the formation
are these:

1\. a stem made by reduplication of the root;

2\. a distinction between stronger and weaker forms of stem, the former
being used (as in presents of the First or non-`a`-conjugation) in the
singular active, the latter in all other persons;

3\. endings in some respects peculiar, unlike those of the present;

4\. the frequent use, especially in the later language, of a union-vowel
इ `i` between stem and endings.

782\. Reduplication. In roots beginning with a consonant, the
reduplication which forms the perfect-stem is of the same character with
that which forms the present-stem of the reduplicating conjugation-class
(see 643) — but with this exception, that radical अ `a` and आ `ā` and ऋ
`ṛ` (or अर् `ar`) have only अ `a`, and never इ `i`, as vowel of the
reduplicating syllable: thus, from √पृ `pṛ` *fill* comes the
present-stem पिपृ `pipṛ`, but the perfect-stem पपृ `papṛ`; from √मा `mā`
*measure* comes the present-stem मिमा `mimā`, but the perfect-stem ममा
`mamā`; and so on.

a\. Irregularities of roots with initial consonants will be given below,
784.

783\. For roots beginning with a vowel, the rules of reduplication are
these:

a\. A root with initial अ `a` before a single final consonant repeats
the अ `a`, which then fuses with the radical vowel to आ `ā` (throughout
the whole inflection): thus, आद् `ād` from √अद् `ad` *eat*; and in like
manner आज् `āj`, आन् `ān`, आस् `ās`, आह् `āh`. The root ऋ `ṛ` forms
likewise throughout आर् `ār` (as if from अर् `ar`).

b\. A root with इ `i` or उ `u` before a single final consonant follows
the same analogy, except in the strong forms (sing. act.); here the
vowel of the radical syllable has `guṇa`, becoming ए `e` or ओ `o`; and
before this, the reduplicating vowel maintains its independent form, and
is separated from the radical syllable by its own semivowel: thus, from
√इष् `iṣ` comes ईष् `īṣ` in weak forms, but इयेष् `iyeṣ` in strong; from
√उच् `uc`, in like manner, come ऊच् `ūc` and उवोच् `uvoc`. The root इ
`i`, a single vowel, also falls under this rule, and forms ईय् `īy` (`y`
added before a vowel) and इये `iye`.

c\. Roots which begin with vowels long by nature or by position do not
in general make a perfect-system, but use instead a periphrastic
formation, in which the perfect tense of an auxiliary verb is added to
the accusative of a verbal noun (see below, chap. XV.: 107O ff.).

d\. To this rule, however, √`āp` (probably originally `ap`: 1087 f)
constitutes an exception, making the constant perfect-stem `āp` (as if
from `ap`: above, a). Also are met with `īḍé` (RV.) and `īḍire` from
√`īḍ`, and `īriré` (V.) from √`īr`.

e\. For the peculiar reduplication `ān`, belonging to certain roots with
initial vowels, see below, 788.

784\. A number of roots beginning with `va` and ending with a single
consonant, which in various of their verbal forms and derivatives
abbreviate the `va` to `u`, do it also in the perfect, and are treated
like roots with initial `u` (above, 783 b), except that they retain the
full form of root in the strong persons of the singular active. Thus,
from √`vac` *speak* come `ūc` and `uvac`; from √`vas` *dwell* come `ūṣ`
and `uvas`; and so on.

a\. The roots showing this abbreviation are `vac`, `vap`, `vad`, `vaç`,
`vas`, `vah`; and `vā` *weave* is said to follow the same rule.

b\. A single root beginning with `ya`, namely `yaj` *offer*, has the
same contraction, forming the stems `iyaj` and `ij`.

c\. Occasional exceptions are met with: as, `vavāca` and `vavakṣé`
(RV.); `vavāpa` and `vavāha` and `vavāhatus` (E. and later); `yejé`
(V.).

785\. A number of roots having `ya` after a first initial consonant take
`i` (from the `y`) instead of `a` in the reduplicating syllable: thus,
from √`vyac` comes `vivyac`; from √`pyā` comes `pipyā`.

a\. These roots are `vyac`, `vyath`, `vyadh`, `vyā`, `jyā`, `pyā`,
`syand`; and, in the Veda, also `tyaj`, with `cyu` and `dyu`, which have
the root-vowel `u`. Other sporadic cases occur.

b\. A single root with `va` is treated in the same way: namely `svap`,
which forms `suṣvap`.

c\. These roots are for the most part abbreviated in the weak forms: see
below, 794.

786\. A considerable number of roots have in the Veda a long vowel in
their reduplication.

a\. Thus, of roots reduplicating with `ā`:
`kan, kḷp, gṛdh, tṛp, tṛṣ, dṛh, dhṛ, dhṛṣ, nam, mah, mṛj, mṛç, ran, radh, rabh, vañc, van, vaç, vas`
*clothe*, `vāç, vṛj, vṛt, vṛdh, vṛṣ, çad` *prevail*, `sah, skambh`. Some
of these occur only in isolated cases; many have also forms with short
vowel. Most are Vedic only; but `dādhāra` is common also in the Brāhmaṇa
language, and is even found later. As to `jāgṛ`, see 1020 a.

b\. Of roots reduplicating with `ī`: the so-called roots (676) `dīdhī`
and `dīdī`, which make the perfect from the same stem with the present:
thus, `dīdétha, dīdā́ya; dīdhima, dīdhyus` (also `dīdhiyus, dīdiyus`).
But `pīpī` has `pipye, pipyus`, etc., with short `i`. In AV. occurs once
`jīhīḍa`, and in AB. (and AA.) `bībhāya`.

c\. Of roots reduplicating with `ū`: `tu, jū`, and `çū` (or `çvā`).

787\. A few roots beginning with the (derivative: 42) palatal mutes and
aspiration show a reversion to the more original guttural in the radical
syllable after the reduplication: thus, √`ci` forms `ciki`; √`cit` forms
`cikit`; √`ji` forms `jigi`; √`hi` forms `jighi`; √`han` forms `jaghan`
(and the same reversions appear in other reduplicated forms of these
roots: 2161). A root `dā` *protect* is said by the grammarians to form
`digi`; but neither root nor perfect is quotable.

788\. A small number of roots with initial `a` or `ṛ` (`ar`) show the
anomalous reduplication ān in the perfect.

a\. Thus (the forms occurring mainly in the older language only): 

√`añj` or `aj`, which forms the pres. `anákti`, has the perfect `ānañja`
and `ānajé` etc. (with `anajā` and `anajyāt`);

√`aç` *attain* (from which comes once in RV. `anáçāmahāi`), has the weak
forms `ānaçma` etc. (with opt. `ānaçām`), `ānaçé` etc. (and LÇS. has
`ānaçadhve`), and the strong forms `ānáṅça` and `ānāça` — along with the
regular `āça` etc.;

√`ṛdh` (from which comes once `ṛṇádhat`) has `ānṛdhús` and `ānṛdhe`;

√`ṛc` or `arc` has `ānṛcús` and `ānṛcé`, and later `ānarca` and
`ānarcus`;

√`arh` has (in TS.) `ānṛhús`;

`anāha` (RV., once) has been referred to a root ah, elsewhere unknown,
and explained as of this formation; hut with altogether doubtful
propriety.

b\. The later grammar, then, sets up the rule that roots beginning with
`a` and ending with more than one consonant have `ān` as their regular
reduplication; and such perfects are taught from roots like `akṣ`,
`arj`, and `añc` or `ac`; but the only other quotable forms appear to be
`ānarchat` (MBh.) and `ānarṣat` (TA.); which are accordingly reckoned as
"pluperfects".

789\. One or two individual cases of irregularity are the following:

a\. The extremely common root `bhū` *be* has the anomalous reduplication
`ba`, forming the stem `babhū`; and, in the Veda, √`sū` forms in like
manner `sasū`.

b\. The root `bhṛ` *bear* has in the Veda the anomalous reduplication
`ja` (as also in intensive: 1002); but RV. has once also the regular
`babhre`, and pple `babhrāṇá`.

c\. The root `ṣṭhīv` *spew* forms either `tiṣṭhīv` (ÇB. et al.) or
`ṭiṣṭhīv` (not quotable).

d\. `Vivakvā́n` (RV., once) is doubtless participle of √`vac`, with
irregular reduplication (as in the present, 660).

790\. Absence of reduplication is met with in some cases. Thus:

a\. The root `vid` *know* has, from the earliest period to the latest, a
perfect without reduplication, but otherwise regularly made and
inflected: thus, `véda`, `véttha`, etc., pple `vidvā́ṅs`. It has the
meaning of a present. The root `vid` *find* forms the regular `vivéda`.

b\. A few other apparently perfect forms lacking a reduplication are
found in RV.: they are `takṣathus` and `takṣus`, `yamátus, skambháthus`
and `skambhus, nindima` (for `ninidima`?), `dhiṣe` and `dhire` (?
√`dhā`), and `vidré` and `arhire` (? see 613). And AV. VS. have
`cetatus`. The participial words `dāçvā́ṅs, mīḍhvā́ṅs, sāhvā́ṅs` are common
in the oldest language; and RV. has once `jānúṣas` (√`jñā`), and
`khidvas` (voc.), perhaps for `cikhidvas`.

c\. A few sporadic cases also are quotable from the later language,
especially from the epics: thus, `karṣatus, ceṣṭa` and
`ceṣṭatus, bhrājatus, sarpa, çaṅsus` and
`çaṅsire, dhvaṅsire, sraṅsire, jalpire, edhire`; also the pples
`çaṅsivāṅs` and `darçivāṅs`, the latter being not infrequent. 

791\. For an anomalous case or two of reduplicated preposition, see
below, 1087f.

792\. Strong and weak stem-forms. In the three persons of the singular
active, the root-syllable is accented, and exhibits usually a stronger
form than in the rest of the tense-inflection. The difference is
effected partly by strengthening the root in the three persons referred
to, partly by weakening it in the others, partly by doing both.

793\. As regards the strengthening:

a\. A final vowel takes either the `guṇa` or `vṛddhi` change in 1st
sing. act., `guṇa` in 2d, and `vṛddhi` in 3d: thus, from √भी `bhī`, 1st
बिभे `bibhé` or बिभै `bibhāí`; 2d बिभे `bibhé`; 3d बिभै `bibhāí`; from
√कृ `kṛ`, 1st चकर् `cakár` or चकार् `cakā́r`, 2d चकर् `cakár`, 3d चकार्
`cakā́r`.

b\. But the `ū` of √`bhū` remains unchanged, and adds `v` before a
vowel-ending: thus, `babhū́va` etc.

c\. Medial अ `a` before a single final consonant follows the analogy of
a final vowel, and is lengthened or vriddhied in the 3d. sing., and
optionally in the first: thus, from √तप् `tap`, 1st ततप् `tatáp` or
तताप् `tatā́p`, 2d ततप् `tatáp`, 3d तताप् `tatā́p`.

d\. In the earlier language, however, the weaker of the two forms
allowed by these rules in the first person is almost exclusively in use:
thus, 1st only `bibháya`, `tatápa`; 3d `bibhā́ya`, `tatā́pa`. Exceptions
are `cakāra` and `jagrā́ha` (doubtful reading) in AV., `cakāra` in AÇS.
and BAU. (ÇB. `cakara`), `jigāya` in AÇS., as first persons.

e\. A medial short vowel has in all three persons alike the
`guṇa`-strengthening (where this is possible: 240): thus, from √द्रुह्
`druh` comes दुद्रोह् `dudróh`; from √विश् `viç` comes विवेश् `vivéç`;
from √कृत् `kṛt` comes चकर्त् `cakárt`.

f\. An initial short vowel before a single final consonant is to be
treated like a medial, but the quotable examples are very few: namely,
`iyeṣa` from √`iṣ` *seek*, `uvocitha` and `uvoca` from √`uc`, `uvoṣa`
from √`uṣ`. As to roots `i` and `ṛ`, whose vowels are both initial and
final, see above, 783 a, b.

g\. These rules are said by the grammarians to apply to the 2d sing.
always when it has simple `tha` as ending; if it has `itha` (below, 797
d), the accent is allowed to fall on any one of the syllables of the
word, and the root-syllable if unaccented has sometimes the weak form
(namely, in contracted stems with `e` for medial `a`: below, 794 e; and
in certain other verbs, as `vivijitha`). The earlier language, however,
affords no example of a 2d sing., whatever its ending, accented on any
other than the radical syllable, or failing to conform to the rules of
strengthening as given above (in a, c, e).

h\. Occasional instances of strengthening in other than the singular
persons are met with: thus, `yuyopima` and `viveçus` (RV.), `pasparçus`
(KeU.), and, in the epics, `cakartus` and `cakartire`, `cakarṣatus`,
`jugūhire`, `nanāmire`, `bibhedus`, `vavāhatus`, `viveçatus`,
`vavarṣus`. The roots `dṛ`, `pṛ`, and `çṛ`, and optionally `jṛ`, are
said by the grammarians to have the strong stem in weak forms; but no
examples appear to be quotable. AV., however, has once `jaharus`
(probably a false reading); and in the later language occur `caskare`
(√`kṛ` *scatter*) and `tastare`.

i\. The root `mṛj` has (as in the present-system: 627) `vṛddhi` instead
of `guṇa` in strong forms: thus, `mamā́rja`; and √`guh` (also as in
present: 745 c) has `ū` instead of `o` (but also `juguhe` E.).

794\. As regards the weakening in weak forms:

a\. It has been seen above (783 b) that roots beginning with `i` or `u`
fuse reduplicating and radical syllable together to `ī` or `ū` in the
weak forms; and (784) that roots contracting `va` and `ya` to `u` or `i`
in the reduplication do it also in the root in weak forms, the two
elements here also coalescing to `ū` or `ī`.

b\. A few roots having `ya` and `va` after a first initial consonant,
and reduplicating from the semivowel (785), contract the `ya` and `va`
to `i` and `u`: thus, `vivic` from √`vyac`, `vividh` from √`vyadh` (but
`vivyadhus` MBh.), `suṣup` from √`svap`. The extended roots `jyā`,
`pyā`, `vyā`, `çvā`, `hvā` show a similar apparent contraction, making
their weak forms from the simpler roots `jī, pī, vī, çū, hū`, while
`hvā` must and `çvā` may get their strong forms also from the same (and
only `jijyāú` is quotable from the others).

c\. The root `grabh` or `grah` (if it be written thus: see 729 a)
contracts to `gṛh`, making the three forms of stem `jagráh` (1st and 2d
sing. act.), `jagrā́h` (3d), and `jagṛh`; but `prach` (if it be so
written: see 756 a) remains unchanged throughout.

d\. Some roots omit in weak forms of this tense, or in some of them, a
nasal which is found in its strong forms: thus, we have `cakradé` etc.
(RV.) from √`krand`; `tatasré` (RV.) from √`taṅs`; `dadaçvā́ṅs` (RV.)
from √`daṅç`; `bedhús, bedhé`, etc. (AV.) from √`bandh`; `sejus` (ÇB.)
from √`sañj`; `caskabhāná` (AV.) from √`skambh`; `tastabhús` etc. (V.),
`tastabhāná` (V.B.), from √`stambh`. Compare also 788 a.

e\. A number of roots having medial a between single consonants drop
that vowel. These are, in the later language, `gam, khan, jan`,
`han, ghas`; they form the weak stems `jagm, cakhn, jajñ, jaghn`
(compare 637), `jakṣ` (compare 640): but RV. has once `jajanús`.

f\. In the old language are found in like manner `mamnāthe` and
`mamnāte` from √`man`; `vavné` from √`van`; `tatne, tatniṣe, tatnire`
from √`tan` (beside `tatane`, and `tate`, as if from √`tā`); `paptima`
and `paptús` and `paptivā́ṅs` from √`pat` (beside `pet`-forms; below, g);
`papné` from √`pan`; `saçcima` and `saçcus`, `saçce` and `saçciré`, from
√`sac`.

g\. Roots in general having medial `a` before a single final consonant,
and beginning also with a single consonant that is repeated unchanged in
the reduplication — that is, not an aspirate, a guttural mute, or `h` —
contract their root and reduplication together into one syllable, having
`e` as its vowel: thus, √`sad` forms the weak stem `sed`, √`pac` forms
`pec`, √`yam` forms `yem`; and so on.

h\. Certain roots not having the form here defined are declared by the
grammarians to undergo the same contraction — most of them optionally;
and examples of them are in general of very rare occurrence. They are as
follows: `rāj` (E.C.) and `rādh` (`radh`?), notwithstanding their long
vowel; `phaṇ`, `phal` (`phelire` C.), `bhaj` (occurs from RV. down),
though their initial is changed in reduplication; `trap`, `tras`
(`tresus` E.C.), `çrath`, `syarn`, `svan`, though they begin with more
than one consonant; `dambh` (`debhús`, RV., from the weaker `dabh`),
though it ends with more than one; and `bhram` (`bhremus` etc. KSS.),
`bhrāj, granth, svañj`, in spite of more reasons than one to the
contrary. And ÇB. has `sejus` from √`sañj`, and KB. has `çremus` from
√`çram`. On the other hand, RV. has once `rarabhmá`, and R. has
`papatus`, for `petus`, from √`pat`.

i\. This contraction is allowed also in 2d sing. act. when the ending is
`itha`: thus, `tenitha` beside `tatantha` (but no examples are quotable
from the older language).

j\. The roots `çaç` and `dad` (from `dā`: 672) are said to reject the
contraction; but no perfect forms of either appear to have been met with
in use.

k\. From √`tṛ` (or `tar`) occurs `terus` (R.); and `jerus` from √`jṛ` is
authorized by the grammarians — both against the general analogy of
roots in `ṛ`.

l\. Roots ending in `ā` lose their `ā` before all endings beginning with
a vowel, including those endings that assume the union-vowel `i` (796) —
unless in the latter case it be preferred to regard the `i` as a
weakened form of the `ā`.

795\. Endings, and their union with the stem. The general scheme of
endings of the perfect indicative has been already given (553 c); an dit
has also been pointed out (543 a) that roots ending in आ `ā` have औ `āu`
in 1st and 3d sing. active. 

a\. The ending `mas` instead of `ma` is found in `çuçrumas` (E.C.). For
the alleged occurrence of `ḍhve` instead of `dhve` in 2d pl. mid., see
226 c.

796\. Those of the endings which begin with a consonant — namely थ
`tha`, व `va`, म `ma` in active; से `se`, वहे `vahe`, महे `mahe`, ध्वे
`dhve`, रे `re` in middle — are very often, and in the later language
usually, joined to the base with the help of an interposed union-vowel इ
`i`.

a\. The union-vowel `i` is found widely used also in other parts of the
general verbal system: namely, in the sibilant aorist, the futures, and
the verbal nouns and adjectives (as also in other classes of derivative
stems). In the later language, a certain degree of correspondence is
seen among the different parts of the same verb, as regards their use or
non-use of the connective; but this correspondence is not so close that
general rules respecting it can be given with advantage; and it will be
best to treat each formation by itself.

b\. The perfect is the tense in which the use of `i` has established
itself most widely and firmly in the later language.

797\. The most important rules as to the use of इ `i` in the later
language are as follows:

a\. The रे `re` of 3d pl. mid. has it always.

b\. The other consonant-endings, except थ `tha` of 2d sing. act., take
it in nearly all verbs.

c\. But it is rejected throughout by eight verbs — namely `kṛ` *make*,
`bhṛ` *bear*, `sṛ` *go*, `vṛ` *choose*, `dru` *run*, `çru` *hear*, `stu`
*praise*, `sru` *flow*; and it is allowably (not usually) rejected by
some others, in general accordance with their usage in other formations.

d\. In 2d sing. act., it is rejected not only by the eight verbs just
given, but also by many others, ending in vowels or in consonants, which
in other formations have no इ `i`; but it is also taken by many verbs
which reject it in other formations; — and it is optional in many verbs,
including those in आ `ā` (of which the आ `ā` is lost when the ending is
इथ `itha`), and most of those in इ `i`, ई `ī`, and उ `u`.

e\. The rules of the grammarians, especially as regards the use of `tha`
or `itha`, run out into infinite detail, and are not wholly consistent
with one another; and, as the forms are very infrequent, it is not
possible to criticise the statements made, and to tell how far they are
founded on the facts of usage. 

f\. With this `i`, a final radical `i` or `ī` is not combined, but
changed into `y` or `iy`. The `ū` of √`bhū` becomes `ūv` throughout
before a vowel.

798\. In the older language, the usage is in part quite otherwise. Thus.

a\. In the RV., the union-vowel `i` is taken by roots ending in
consonants provided the last syllable of the stem is a heavy one, but
not otherwise: thus, `ā́sitha, uvócitha, vivéditha`, but `tatántha` and
`vivyáktha`; `ūcimá, paptima, sedima, yuyopimá`, but
`jaganma, jagṛbhmá, yuyujma; ūçiṣé, jajñiṣé, sasāhiṣe`, but `vivitse`
and `dadṛkṣé`; `bubhujmáhe` and `çāçadmahe` etc. (no examples of `ivahe`
or `imahe` chance to occur, nor any of either `idhve` or `dhve`);
`ījiré, jajñiré, yetiré, tataksiré`, but
`cākḷpré, vividré, duduhré, paspṛdhré, tatasré` (and so on: twenty-two
forms). The only exception in RV. is `véttha` from √`vid`, without `i`
(in Br., also `āttha` from √`ah`: below, 801 a). The other Vedic texts
present nothing inconsistent with this rule, but in the Brāhmaṇas 3d pl.
forms in `ire` are made after light syllables also: thus,
`sasṛjire, bubudhire, yuyujire, rurudhire`.

b\. In roots ending with a vowel, the early usage is more nearly like
the later. Thus: for roots in `ā` the rule is the same (except that no
2d sing. in `itha` is met with), as
`dadhimá, dadhiṣé, dadhidhvé, dadhiré` (the only persons with `i`
quotable from RV. and AV.; and RV. has `dadhre` twice); — roots in `ṛ`
appear also to follow the later rule: as
`cakṛṣé, papṛṣe, vavṛṣé, vavṛmáhe`, but `dadhriṣe` and `jabhriṣe`, and
in 3d pl. mid. both `cakriré` and `dadhrire`; — √`bhū` has both
`babhū́tha` (usually) and `babhū́vitha`, but only `babhūvimá` (AV.). But
there are found, against the later rules, `suṣuma`, `cicyuṣe`, `juhuré`,
and `juhūré`, without `i`: the instances are too few to found a rule
upon.

799\. The ending `riré` of 3d pl. mid. is found in RV. in six forms:
namely,
`cikitrire, jagṛbhriré, dadrire, bubhujriré, vividrire, sasṛjrire`; to
which SV. adds `duduhrire`, and TB. `dadṛçrire`.

800\. Examples of inflection. By way of illustration of the rules given
above may be given in full the perfect indicative inflection of the
following verbs:

a\. As example of the normal inflection of a root with final consonant,
we take the root बुध् `budh` *know*: its strong form of perfect-stem is
बुबोध् `bubódh`; weak form, बुबुध् `bubudh`.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

बुबोध  
`bubódha`

बुबुधिव  
`bubudhivá`

बुबुधिम  
-`dhimá`

बुबुधे  
`bubudhé`

बुबुधिवहे  
-`dhiváhe`

बुबुधिमहे  
-`dhimáhe` 

2

बुबोधिथ  
`bubódhitha`

बुबुधथुस्  
-`dháthus`

बुबुध  
-`dhá`

बुबुधिषे  
`bubudhiṣé`

बुबुधाथे  
-`dhā́the`

बुबुधिध्वे  
-`dhidhvé`

3

बुबोध  
`bubódha`

बुबुधतुस्  
-`dhátus`

बुबुधुस्  
-`dhús`

बुबुधे  
`bubudhé`

बुबुधाते  
-`dhā́te`

बुबुधिरे  
-`dhiré`

b\. The asserted variety of possible accent in 2d sing. act. (above, 793
g) needs to be noted both in this and in the remaining paradigms.

c\. As example of the normal inflection of a root with final `i` or
`u`-vowel, we may take the root नी `nī` *lead*: its forms of stem are
निनय् `nináy` or निनाय् `ninā́y`, and निनी `ninī`.

  

1

निनय, निनाय  
`nináya, ninā́ya`

निन्यिव  
`ninyivá`

निन्यिम  
`ninyimá`

निन्ये  
`ninyé`

निन्यिवहे  
`ninyiváhe`

निन्यिमहे  
`ninyimáhe`

2

निनेथ, निनयिथ  
`ninétha, nináyitha`

निन्यथुस्  
`ninyáthus`

निन्य  
`ninyá`

निन्यिषे  
`ninyiṣé`

निन्याथे  
`ninyā́the`

निन्यिध्वे  
`ninyidhvé`

3

निनाय  
`ninā́ya`

निन्यतुस्  
`ninyátus`

निन्युस्  
`ninyús`

निन्ये  
`ninyé`

निन्याते  
`ninyā́te`

निन्यिरे  
`ninyiré`

d\. The root `krī` would make (129 a) in weak forms `cikriyivá`,
`cikriyátus`, `cikriyús`, etc.; and √`bhū` is inflected as follows in
the active (middle forms not quotable):

1

`babhū́va`

`babhūvivá`

`babhūvimá`

2

`babhū́tha, babhū́vitha`

`babhūváthus`

`babhūvá`

3

`babhū́va`

`babhūvátus`

`babhūvús`

Other roots in `ū` or `u` change this to `uv` before the initial vowel
of an ending.

e\. As example of the inflection of a root ending in आ `ā`, we may take
दा `dā` *give*: its forms of stem are ददा `dadā́` and दद् `dad` (or ददि
`dadi`: see above, 7941).

1

ददौ  
`dadāú`

ददिव  
`dadivá`

ददिम  
`dadimá`

ददे  
`dadé`

ददिवहे  
vdadiváhe

ददिमहे  
`dadimáhe`

2

ददाथ, ददिथ  
`dadā́tha, dadithá`

ददथुस्  
`dadáthus`

दद  
`dadá`

ददिषे  
`dadiṣé`

ददाथे  
`dadā́the`

ददिध्वे  
`dadidhvé`

3

ददौ  
`dadāú`

ददतुस्  
`dadátus`

ददुस्  
`dadús`

ददे  
`dadé`

ददाते  
`dadā́te`

ददिरे  
`dadiré`

f\. The RV. has once paprā́ for paprāú (and jahā́ for jahāú?). 

g\. As example of a root with medial अ `a` showing fusion of root and
reduplication, resulting in medial ए `e`, in the weak forms (794 g), we
may take तन्,`tan` *stretch*: its forms of stem are ततन् `tatán` or
ततान् `tatā́n`, and तेन् `ten`.

1

ततन, ततान  
`tatána, tatā́na`

तेनिव  
`tenivá`

तेनिम  
`tenimá`

तेने  
`tené`

तेनिवहे  
`teniváhe`

तेनिमहे  
`tenimáhe`

2

ततन्थ, तेनिथ  
`tatántha, tenithá`

तेनथुस्  
`tenáthus`

तेन  
`tená`

तेनिषे  
`teniṣé`

तेनाथे  
`tenā́the`

तेनिध्वे  
`tenidhvé`

3

ततान  
`tatā́na`

तेनतुस्  
`tenátus`

तेनुस्  
`tenús`

तेने  
`tené`

तेनाते  
`tenā́te`

तेनिरे  
`teniré`

h\. The root `jan`, with the others which expel medial `a` in weak forms
(794 e), makes `jajántha` or
`jajñithá, jajñivá, jajñús; jajñé, jajñimáhe, jajñiré`; and so on.

i\. As example of a root with initial व `va` contracted to उ `u` in the
reduplication, and contracted with the reduplication to ऊ `ū` in weak
forms (784), we may take वच् `vac` *speak*: its forms of stem are उवच्
`uvác` or उवाच् `uvā́c`, and ऊच् `ūc`.

1

उवच, उवाच  
`uváca, uvā́ca`

ऊचिव  
`ūcivá`

ऊचिम  
`ūcimá`

ऊचे  
`ūcé`

ऊचिवहे  
`ūciváhe`

ऊचिमहे  
`ūcimáhe`

2

उवक्थ, उवचिथे  
`uváktha`, `uvácitha`

ऊचथुस्  
`ūcáthus`

ऊच  
`ūcá`

ऊचिषे  
`ūciṣé`

ऊचाथे  
`ūcā́the`

ऊचिध्वे  
`ūcidhvé`

3

उवाच  
`uvā́ca`

ऊचतुस्  
`ūcátus`

ऊचुस्  
`ūcús`

ऊचे  
`ūcé`

ऊचाते  
`ūcáte`

ऊचिरे  
`ūciré`

j\. In like manner, √`yaj` forms `iyája` or `iyā́ja`, `iyáṣṭha` or
`iyájitha`; `ījé, ījiṣé`, and so on; √`uc` has `uvóca` and `uvócitha` in
the strong forms, and all the rest like `vac`.

k\. Of the four roots in ऋ `ṛ` mentioned at 797 c, the inflection is as
follows:

1

चकर, चकार  
`cakára, cakā́ra`

चकृव  
`cakṛvá`

चकृम  
`cakṛmá`

चक्रे  
`cakré`

चकृवहे  
`cakṛváhe`

चकृमहे  
`cakṛmáhe`

2

चकर्थ  
`cakártha`

चक्रथुस्  
`cakráthus`

चक्र  
`cakrá`

चकृषे  
`cakṛṣé`

चक्राथे  
`cakrā́the`

चकृध्वे  
`cakṛdhvé`

3

चकार  
`cakā́ra`

चक्रतुस्  
`cakrátus`

चक्रुस्  
`cakrús`

चक्रे  
`cakré`

चक्राते  
`cakrā́te`

चक्रिरे  
`cakriré`

l. Of the roots in ऋ `ṛ` in general, the first persons are made as
follows:

1

दधर, दधार  
`dadhára, dadhā́ra`

दथ्रिव  
`dadhrivá`

दथ्रिम  
`dadhrimá`

दथ्रे  
`dadhré`

दथ्रिवहे  
`dadhriváhe`

दथ्रिमहे  
`dadhrimáhe`

m\. We may further add here, finally, the active inflection (the middle
is not in use) of the perfect of `as` *be*, which (like `babhū́va` and
`cakā́ra`, given above) is frequently employed as an auxiliary.

1

`ā́sa`

`āsivá`

`āsimá`

2

`ā́sitha`

`āsáthus`

`āsá`

3

`ā́sa`

`āsátus`

`āsús`

801\. A few miscellaneous irregularities call still for notice:

a\. The root `ah` *speak* occurs only in the perfect indicative, and
only in the 3d persons of all numbers and in the 2d sing. and du., in
active (and in 2d sing. the `h` is irregularly changed to `t` before the
ending): thus, `āttha, ā́ha; āhathus, āhatus; āhús` (in V., only `ā́ha`
and `āhús` are met with).

b\. From √`vā` *weave*, the 3d pl. act. `ūvus` occurs in RV., and no
other perfect form appears to have been met with in use. It is allowed
by the grammarians to be inflected regularly as `vā`; and also as `vay`
(the present-stem is `váya`: 761 f), with contraction of `va` to `u` in
weak forms; and further, in the weak forms, as simple `u`.

c\. The root `vyā` *envelop* has in RV. the perfect-forms `vivyathus`
and `vivyé`, and no others have been met with in use; the grammarians
require the strong forms to be made from `vyay`, and the weak from `vī`.

d\. The root `i` *go* forms in RV. and AV. the 2d sing. act. `iyátha`
beside the regular `iyétha`; and beside `īriré` from √`īr`, RV. has
several times `eriré`.

e\. RV. has an anomalous accent in `dádṛçe` and `dádṛçre` (beside
`dadṛkṣé`) and the pple `dádṛçāna`. And `cíketa` (once, beside `cikéta`)
is perhaps a kindred anomaly.

f\. Persons of the perfect from the `ir`-forms of roots in changeable
`ṛ` (242) are `titirus` and `tistire` (both RV.); and they have
corresponding participles.

g\. The bastard root `ūrṇu` (713) is said by the grammarians to make the
perfect-stem `ūrṇunu`; the roots `majj` and `naç` are said to insert a
nasal in the 2d sing. active, when the ending is simple `tha`: thus,
`maman̄ktha, nanaṅṣṭha` (also `mamajjitha` and `neçitha`).

h\. Further may be noted `sasajjatus` (MBh.: √`sañj`, which has in
passive the secondary form `sajj`), `rurundhatus` (R.), and `dudūhus`
(BhP).

i\. The anomalous `ajagrabhāiṣam` (AH. vi. 35) seems a formation on the
perfect-stem (but perhaps for `ajigrabhiṣan`, desid.?). 

Perfect Participle.

802\. The ending of the active participle is वांस् √`vā́ṅs` (that is to
say, in the strong forms: it is contracted to उष् `úṣ` in the weakest,
and replaced by वत् `vát` in the middle forms: see above, 458 ff.). It
is added to the weak form of the perfect stem — as shown, for example,
in the dual and plural of the active inflection of the given verb; and,
mechanically, the weakest participle-stem is identical with the 3d pl.
active. Thus, बुबुध्वांस् `bubudhvā́ṅs`, निनीवांस् `ninīvā́ṅs`, चकृवांस्
`cakṛvā́ṅs`.

803\. If the weak form of the perfect stem is monosyllabic, the ending
takes the union-vowel इ `i` (which, however, disappears in the weakest
cases): thus, तेनिवांस् `tenivā́ṅs`, ऊदिवांस् `ūcivā́ṅs`, जज्ञिवांस्
`jajñivā́ṅs`, आदिवांस् `ādivā́ṅs` (from √आद् `ād`: 783 a), and so on;
ददिवांस् `dadivā́ṅs` and its like, from roots in आ `ā`, are to be
reckoned in the one class or the other according as we view the इ `i` as
weakened root-vowel or as union-vowel (7941).

a\. But participles of which the perfect-stem is monosyllabic by absence
of the reduplication do not take the union-vowel: thus, `vidvā́ṅs`, and
in V., `dāçvā́ṅs` (SV. `dāçivā́ṅs`), `mīḍhvā́ṅs`, `sāhvā́ṅs`, `khidvāṅs`
(?); and RV. has also `dadvā́ṅs` (AV. `dadivā́ṅs` and once `dadāvā́ṅs`)
from √`dā` (or `dad`: 672); and `án-āçvāṅs` (√`aç` *eat*) occurs in TS.
and TB. But AV. has `viçivā́ṅs` and `varjivāṅs` (in negative fem.
`ávarjuṣī`).

804\. Other Vedic irregularities calling for notice are few. The long
vowel of the reduplication (786) appears in the participle as in the
indicative: thus, `vāvṛdhvā́ṅs, sāsahvā́ṅs, jūjuvā́ṅs`. RV. and AV. have
`sasavā́ṅs` from √`san` or `sā`. RV. makes the participial forms of √`tṛ`
or `tar` from different modifications of the root: thus, `titirvā́ṅs`,
but `tatarúṣas`. Respecting the occasional exchanges of strong and weak
stem in inflection, see above, 462 c.

805\. a. From roots `gam` and `ban` the Veda makes the strong stems
`jaganvā́ṅs` (as to the `n`, see 212 a) and `jaghanvā́ṅs`; the later
language allows either these or the more regular `jagmivāṅs` and
`jaghnivā́ṅs` (the weakest stem-forms being everywhere `jagmúṣ` and
`jaghnúṣ`). RV. has also `tatanvā́ṅa`. 

b\. From three roots, `vid` *find*, `viç`, and `dṛç`, the later language
allows strong participle-stems to be made with the union-vowel, as well
as in the regular manner without it: thus, `viviçivāṅs` or `viviçvāṅs`;
`dadṛçivāṅs` occurs in KṭhU. PB. has once `cicchidivāṅs`.

806\. The ending of the middle participle is `āná`. It is added to the
weak form of perfect-stem, as this appears in the middle inflection:
thus, बुबुधान `bubudhāná`, निन्यान `ninyāná`, ददान `dadāná`, तेनान
`tenāná`, जज्ञान `jajñāná`, उचान `ūcāná`.

a\. In the Veda, the long reduplicating vowel is shown by many middle
participles: thus, `vāvṛdhāná, vāvasāná, dādṛhāṇá, tūtujāná`, etc. RV.
has `çaçayāná` from √`çī` (with irregular `guṇa`, as in the
present-system: 629); `tistirāṇá` from √`stṛ`; and once, with `māna`,
`sasṛmāṇá` from √`sṛ`. A few participles with long redupl. vowel have it
irregularly accented (as if rather intensive: 1013): thus, `tū́tujāna`
(also `tūtujāná`), `bā́badhāna, çā́çadāna, çū́çujāna, çū́çuvāna`.

807\. In the later language, the perfect participles have nearly gone
out of use; even the active appears but rarely, and is made from very
few verbs, and of the middle hardly any examples are quotable, save such
as the proper name `yuyudhāna`, the adjective `anūcāna` *learned in
scripture*, etc.

Modes of the Perfect.

808\. Modes of the perfect belong only to the Vedic language, and even
are seldom found outside of the Rig-Veda.

a\. To draw the line surely and distinctly between these and the
mode-forms from other reduplicated tense-stems — the present-stem of the
reduplicating class, the reduplicated aorist, and the intensive — is not
possible, since no criterion of form exists which does not in some cases
fail, and since the general equivalence of modal forms from all stems
(582), and the common use of the perfect as a present in the Veda (823),
deprive us of a criterion of meaning. There can be no reasonable doubt,
however, that a considerable body of forms are to be reckoned here;
optatives like `ānaçyām` and `babhūyās` and `babhūyā́t`, imperatives like
`babhūtu`, subjunctives like `jabhárat`, show such distinctive
characteristics of the perfect formation that by their analogy other
similar words are confidently classed as belonging to the perfect.

809\. The normal method of making such forms would appear to be as
follows: from a reduplicated perfect-stem, as (for example) `mumuc`, an
imperative would be made by simply appending, as usual, the imperative
endings; the derived subjunctive mode-stem would be `mumóca` (accented
after the analogy of the strong forms of the perfect indicative), and
would take either primary or secondary endings; and the optative
mode-stems would be `mumucyā́` in the active, and `mumucī` (accent on
personal endings) in the middle.

And the great majority of the forms in question (about three quarters)
are made in these ways. Thus:

810\. Examples of the regular subjunctive formation are:

a\. with secondary endings, active: 2d sing.,
`papráthas, cākánas, māmáhas, pipráyas, bubodhas, rāráṇas`; 3d sing.,
`cākánat, jabhárat, rāráṇat, sāsáhat, paspárçat, pipráyat`; 1st pl.,
`cākánāma, tatánāma, çūçávāma`; 3d pl., `tatánan, papráthan` (other
persons do not occur). This is the largest class of cases.

b\. with primary endings, active: here seem to belong only `dadhárṣati`
and `vavártati`: compare the formation with different accent below, 811
a.

c\. of middle forms occur only the 3d sing.,
`tatápate, çaçámate, yuyójate, jujóṣate` (SV.; RV. has `jújoṣate`); and
the 3d pl. `cākánanta, tatánanta` (and perhaps two or three others:
below, 811 b, end).

811\. But not a few subjunctives of other formation occur; thus:

a\. With strengthened root-syllable, as above, but with accent on the
reduplication (as in the majority of present-forms of the reduplicating
class: above, 645). Here the forms with primary endings, active,
preponderate, and are not very rare: for example,
`jújoṣasi, jújoṣati, jújoṣathas, jújoṣatha` (other persons do not
occur). With secondary endings, `jújoṣas, jújoṣat`, and `jújoṣan` are
the forms that belong most distinctly here (since `dádāças` and
`súṣūdas` etc. are perhaps rather aorists). And there is no middle form
but `jújoṣate` (RV.: see above, 810 c).

b\. With unstrengthened root-syllable occur a small body of forms, which
are apparently also accented on the reduplication (accented examples are
found only in 3d pl. mid.): thus, active, for example,
`mumucas; vavṛtat, vividat, çūçuvat`; the only middle forms are
`dadhṛṣate, vāvṛdhate`, 3d sing.; and
`cákramanta, dádhṛṣanta, rúrucanta` (with
`dadabhanta, paprathanta, māmahanta, juhuranta`, which might also belong
elsewhere: 810 c).

c\. Accented on the ending are `vāvṛdhánta` and `cakṛpánta` (which are
rather to be called augmentless pluperfects).

d\. As to forms with double mode-sign, or transfers to an
`a`-conjugation, see below, 815.

812\. Examples of the regular optative formation are:

a\. In active: 1st sing., `ānaçyām, jagamyām, papṛcyām, riricyām`; 2d
sing., `vavṛtyās, viviçyās, çuçrūyā́s, babhūyās`; 3d sing., jagamyāt,
vavṛtyāt, tutujyā́t, babhūyā́t; 2d du., `jagmyātam, çuçrūyā́tam`; 1st pl.,
`sāsahyāma, vavṛtyāma, çūçuyāma`; 3d pl.,
`tatanyus, vavṛjyús, vavṛtyus`. The forms are quite numerous. 

b\. In middle, the forms are few: namely, 1st sing., `vavṛtīya`; 2d
sing., `vāvṛdhīthā́s, cakṣamīthās`; 3d sing.,
`jagrasīta, vavṛtīta, māmṛjīta, dudhuvīta, çuçucīta`; 1st pl.,
`vavṛtīmahi`. And `sāsahīṣṭhās` and `ririṣīṣṭa` appear to furnish
examples of precative optative forms.

c\. There is no irregular mode of formation of perfect optatives.
Individual irregularities are shown by certain forms: thus,
`cakriyās, papīyāt, çuçrūyā́s and çuçrūyā́tam`, with treatment of the
final as before the passive-sign `yá` (770); `anajyāt` with short
initial; `çiçrītá` from √`çri`; `jakṣīyāt` is anomalous: `ririṣes` is
the only form that shows a union-vowel `a` (unless also `siṣet`, from
√`sā`).

813\. Of regular imperative forms, only a very small number are to be
quoted: namely, active,
`cākandhi, rārandhí, cikiddhi, titigdhi, mumugdhí, çuçugdhí`, and
`piprīhí`; `cākantu, rārantu, mumoktu`, and `babhūtu`; `mumuktam` and
`vavṛktam`; `jujuṣṭana` and `vavṛttana` (unless we are to add
`mamaddhí, mamattu, mamáttana`); — middle, `vavṛtsva` and `vavṛddhvam`.
AV. has once `dadṛçrām`.

814\. As irregular imperatives may be reckoned several which show a
union-vowel `a`, or have been transferred to an `a`-conjugation. Such
are, in the active, `mumócatam` and `jujoṣatam` (2d du.), and `mumócata`
(2d pl.); in the middle, `pipráyasva` (only one found with accent), and
`māmahasva, vāvṛdhasva, vāvṛṣasva` (2d sing.), and `māmahantām` (3d pl.:
probably to be accented -`ásva` and -`ántām`).

815\. Such imperatives as these, taken in connection with some of the
subjunctives given above (and a few of the "pluperfect" forms: below,
820), suggest as plausible the assumption of a double present-stem, with
reduplication and added `a` (with which the desiderative stems would be
comparable: below, 1026 ff.): for example, `jujoṣa` from √`juṣ`, from
which would come `jújoṣasi` etc. and `jújoṣate` (811 a) as indicative,
`jújoṣas` etc. as subjunctively used augmentless imperfect, and
`jujoṣatam` as imperative. Most of the forms given above as subjunctives
with primary ending lack a marked and constant subjunctive character,
and would pass fairly well as indicatives. And it appears tolerably
certain that from one root at least, vṛdh, such a double stem is to be
recognized; from `vāvṛdha` come readily `vāvṛdhate`, `vāvṛdhánta`, and
from it alone can come regularly `vāvṛdhasva`, `vāvṛdhéte` and
`vāvṛdhāti` (once, RV.) — and, yet more, the participle `vavṛdhánt`
(RV.; AV. `vāvṛdhánt`: an isolated case): yet even here we have also
`vāvṛdhīthā́s`, not `vāvṛdhéthās`. To assume double present-stems,
however, in all the cases would be highly implausible; it is better to
recognize the formation as one begun, but not carried out.

a\. Only one other subjunctive with double mode-sign — namely,
`papṛcāsi` — is found to set beside `vāvṛdhāti`.

816\. Forms of different model are not very seldom made from the same
root: for example, from √`muc`, the subjunctives `mumócas`, ``
`múmocati`, and `mumucas`; from √`dhṛṣ`, `dadhárṣati` and `dadhṛṣate`;
from √`prī`, the imperatives `piprīhí` and `pipráyasva`.

Pluperfect.

817\. Of an augment-preterit from the perfect-stem, to which the name of
pluperfect is given on the ground of its formation (though not of its
meaning), the Veda presents a few examples; and one or two forms of the
later language (mentioned above, 788 b) have also been referred to it.

a\. There is much of the same difficulty in distinguishing the
pluperfect as the perfect modes from kindred reduplicated formations.
Between it and the aorist, however, a difference of meaning helps to
make a separation.

818\. The normal pluperfect should show a strong stem in the singular
active, and a weak one elsewhere — thus, `mumoc` and `mumuc` — with
augment prefixed and secondary endings added (`us` in 3d pl. act., `ata`
in 3d pl. mid.).

a\. Of forms made according to this model, we have, in the active: 1st
sing., `ajagrabham` and `acacakṣam` (which, by its form, might be
aorist: 860); 2d sing. `ájagan`; 3d sing., `ajagan` and `aciket`; 2d
du., `amumuktam`; 2d pl. `ájaganta`, and `ájagantana` and `ajabhartana`
(a strong form, as often in this person: 556 a); 3d pl. (perhaps),
`amamandus` and `amamadus`. To these may be added the augmentless
`cākán` and `rārán`, `cikétam` and `cakaram`. In the middle, the 3d pl.
`acakriran` and `ajagmiran` (with `iran` instead of `ata`), and the
augmentless 2d sing. `jugūrthās` and `suṣupthās`, are the most regular
forms to be found.

819\. Several forms from roots ending in consonants save the endings in
2d and 3d sing. act. by inserting an `ī` (555 b): thus,
`ábubhojīs, aviveçīs; arirecīt, ájagrabhīt` (`avāvarīt` and `avāvaçītām`
are rather intensives); and the augmentless `jíhiṅsīs` (accent?) and
`dadharṣīt` belong with them.

820\. A few forms show a stem ending in a: they are, in the active: 3d
sing., `asasvajat, acikitat, acakrat`; in the middle: 3d sing.,
`ápiprata`; 2d du., `ápaspṛdhethām`; 3d pl., `atitviṣanta` (which by its
form might be aorist), `ádadṛhanta`; and
`cakradat, cakṛpánta, vāvṛdhánta, juhuranta`, would perhaps be best
classified here as augmentless forms (compare 811, above).

Uses of the Perfect.

821\. Perfects are quotable as made from more than half the roots of the
language, and they abound in use at every period and in almost all
branches of the literature, though not always with the same value.

a\. According to the Hindu grammarians, the perfect is used in the
narration of facts not witnessed by the narrator; but there is no
evidence of its being either exclusively or distinctively so employed at
any period.

b\. In the later language, it is simply a preterit or past tense,
equivalent with the imperfect, and freely interchangeable or coördinated
with it. It is on the whole less common than the imperfect, although the
preferences of different authors are diverse, and it sometimes exceeds
the imperfect in frequency (compare (927).

c\. The perfects `veda` and `āha` are everywhere used with present
value. In the Brāhmaṇas, also others, especially `dādhāra`, also
`dīdāya`, `bibhāya`, etc.

822\. In the Brāhmaṇas, the distinction of tense-value between perfect
and imperfect is almost altogether lost, as in the later language. But
in most of the texts the imperfect is the ordinary tense of narration,
the perfect being only exceptionally used. Thus in PB., the imperfects
are to the perfects as more than a hundred to one; in the Brāhmaṇa parts
of TS. and TB., as over thirty-four to one; and in those of MS. in about
the same proportion; in AB., as more than four to one, the perfect
appearing mostly in certain passages, where it takes the place of
imperfect. It is only in ÇB. that the perfect is much more commonly
used, and even, to a considerable extent, in coördination with the
imperfect. Throughout the Brāhmaṇas, however, the perfect participles
have in general the true "perfect" value, indicating a completed or
proximate past.

823\. In the Veda, the case is very different. The perfect is used as
past tense in narration, but only rarely; sometimes also it has a true
"perfect" sense, or signifies a completed or proximate past (like the
aorist of the older language: 928); but oftenest it has a value hardly
or not at all distinguishable in point of time from the present. It is
thus the equivalent of imperfect, aorist, and present; and it occurs
coördinated with them all.

a\. Examples are: of perfect with present,
`ná çrāmyanti ná ví muñcanty éte váyo ná paptuḥ` (RV.) *they weary not
nor stop, they fly like birds*;
`sé ’d u rā́ja kṣayati carṣaṇīnā́m arā́n ná nemíḥ pári tā́ babhūva` (RV.)
*he in truth rules king of men; he embraces them all, as the wheel the
spokes*; — of perfect with aorist,
`úpo ruruce yuvatír ná yóṣā...ábhūd agníḥ samídhe mā́nuṣāṇām ákar jyótir bā́dhamānā támāṅsi`
(RV.) *she is come beaming like a young maiden; Agni hath appeared for
the kindling of mortals; she hath made light, driving away the
darkness*; — of perfect with imperfect, `áhann áhim ánv apás tatarda`
(RV.) *he slew the dragon, he penetrated to the waters*. Such a
coordination as this last is of constant occurrence in the later
language: e. g. `mumude ‘pūjayac cāi ’nām` (R.) *he was glad, and paid
honor to her*; `vastrānte jagrāha skandhadeçe ‘sṛjat tasya srajam`
(MBh.) *she took hold of the end of his garment, and dropped a garland
on his shoulders*.
