+++
title = "15 Chapter XI AORIST SYSTEMS"

+++




## CHAPTER XI.

  

THE AORIST SYSTEMS.

824\. UNDER the name of aorist are included (as was pointed out above,
532) three quite distinct formations, each of which has its
sub-varieties: namely —

I. A SIMPLE AORIST (equivalent to the Greek "second aorist"), analogous
in all respects as to form and inflection with the imperfect. It has two
varieties: 1. the root-aorist, with a tense-stem identical with the root
(corresponding to an imperfect of the root-class); 2. the `a`-aorist,
with a tense-stem ending in अ `á`, or with union-vowel अ `a` before the
endings (corresponding to an imperfect of the `á`-class).

II\. 3. A REDUPLICATING AORIST, perhaps in origin identical with an
imperfect of the reduplicating class, but having come to be separated
from it by marked peculiarities of form. It usually has a union-vowel अ
`a` before the endings, or is inflected like an imperfect of one of the
`a`-classes; but a few forms occur in the Veda without such vowel.

III\. A SIGMATIC or SIBILANT AORIST (corresponding to the Greek "first
aorist"), having for its tense-sign a स् `s` added to the root, either
directly or with a preceding auxiliary इ `i`; its endings are usually
added immediately to the tense-sign, but in a small number of roots with
a union-vowel अ `a`; a very few roots also are increased by स् `s` for
its formation; and according to these differences it falls into four
varieties: namely, A. without union-vowel अ `a` before endings; 4.
`s`-aorist, with स् `s` alone added to the root; 5. `iṣ`-aorist, the
same with interposed इ `i`; 6. `siṣ`-aorist, the same as the preceding
with स् `s` added at the end of the root; B. with union-vowel अ `a`, 7.
`sa`-aorist. 

825\. All these varieties are bound together and made into a single
complex system by certain correspondences of form and meaning. Thus, in
regard to form, they are all alike, in the indicative, augment-preterits
to which there does not exist any corresponding present; in regard to
meaning, although in the later or classical language they are simply
preterits, exchangeable with imperfects and perfects, they all alike
have in the older language the general value of a completed past or
"perfect", translatable by *have done* and the like.

826\. The aorist-system is a formation of infrequent occurrence in much
of the classical Sanskrit (its forms are found, for example, only
twenty-one times in the Nala, eight in the Hitopadeça, seven in Manu,
six each in the Bhagavad-Gītā and Çakuntalā, and sixty-six times, from
fourteen roots, in the first book, of about 2600 lines, of the Rāmāyaṇa:
compare 927 b), and it possesses no participle, nor any modes (excepting
in the prohibitive use of its augmentless forms: see 579; and the
so-called precative: see 921 ff.); in the older language, on the other
hand, it is quite common, and has the whole variety of modes belonging
to the present, and sometimes participles. Its description, accordingly,
must be given mainly as that of a part of the older language, with due
notice of its restriction in later use.

827\. a. In the RV., nearly half the roots occurring show aorist forms,
of one or another class; in the AV., rather less than one third; and in
the other texts of the older language comparatively few aorists occur
which are not found in these two.

b\. More than fifty roots, in RV. and AV. together, make aorist forms of
more than one class (not taking into account the reduplicated or
"causative" aorist); but no law appears to underlie this variety; of any
relation such as is taught by the grammarians, between active of one
class and middle of another as correlative, there is no trace
discoverable.

c\. Examples are: of classes 1 and 4, `adhām` and `dhāsus` from √`dhā`,
`ayuji` and `ayukṣata` from √`yuj`; — of 1 and 5, `agrabham` and
`agrabhīṣma` from √`grabh`, `mṛṣṭhās` and `marṣiṣṭhās` from √`mṛṣ`; — of
1 and 2, `ārta` and `arāt` from √`ṛ`; — of 2 and 4, `avidam` and
`avitsi` from √`vid` *find*, `anijam` and `anāikṣīt` from √`nij`; — of 2
and 5, `sanéma` and `asāniṣam` from √`san`; of 2 and 7, `aruham` and
`arukṣat` from √`ruh`; — of 4 and 5, `amatsus` and `amādiṣus` from
√`mad`; — of 4 and 6, `hāsmahi` and `hāsiṣus` from √`hā`; — of 1 and 2
and 4, `atnata` and `atanat` and `atān` from √`tan`; — of 1 and 4 and 5,
`abudhran` and `ábhutsi` and `bódhiṣat` from √`budh`, `ástar` and
`stṛṣīya` and `astarīs` from √`stṛ`. Often the second, or second and
third, class is represented by only an isolated form or two.

I. Simple Aorist.

828\. This is, of the three principal divisions of aorist, the one least
removed from the analogy of forms already explained; it is like an
imperfect, of the root-class or of the `á`-class, without a
corresponding present indicative, but with (more or less fragmentarily)
all the other parts which go to make up a complete present-system.

1\. Root-aorist.

829\. a. This formation is in the later language limited to a few roots
in आ `ā` and the root भू `bhū`, and is allowed to be made in the active
only, the middle using instead the `s`-aorist (4), or the `iṣ`-aorist
(5).

b\. The roots in आ `ā` take उस् `us` as 3d pl. ending, and, as usual,
lose their आ `ā` before it; भू `bhū` (as in the perfect: 793 a) retains
its vowel unchanged throughout, inserting व् `v` after it before the
endings अम् `am` and अन् `an` of 1st sing. and 3d pl. Thus:

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अदाम्  
`ádām`

अदाव  
`ádāva`

अदाम  
`ádāma`

अभूवम्  
`ábhūvam`

अभूव  
`ábhūva`

अभूम  
`ábhūma`

2

अदास्  
`ádās`

अदातम्  
`ádātam`

अदात  
`ádāta`

अभूस्  
`ábhūs`

अभूतम्  
`ábhūtam`

अभूत  
`ábhūta`

3

अदात्  
`ádāt`

अदाताम्  
`ádātām`

अदुस्  
`ádus`

अभूत्  
`ábhūt`

अभूताम्  
`ábhūtam`

अभूवन्  
`ábhūvan`

For the classical Sanskrit, this is the whole story.

830\. In the Veda, these same roots are decidedly the most frequent and
conspicuous representatives of the formation: especially the roots
`gā, dā, dhā, pā` *drink*, `sthā, bhū`; while sporadic forms are made
from `jñā, prā, sā, hā`. As to their middle forms, see below, 834 a.

a\. Instead of `abhūvam`, RV. has twice `abhuvam`. BhP. has `agan`, 3d
pl., instead of `agus`.

831\. But aorists of the same class are also made from a number of roots
in `ṛ`, and a few in `i`- and `u`-vowels (short or long) — with, as
required by the analogy of the tense with an imperfect of the
root-class, `guṇa`-strengthening in the three persons of the singular.

a\. Thus (in the active), from √`çru`, `áçravam` and `áçrot`; from
√`çri`, `áçres` and `áçret`; from √`kṛ` *make*, `ákaram` and `ákar` (for
`akars` and `akart`); from `vṛ` *enclose*, `ā́var` (585 a); and so
`ástar, aspar`. Dual and plural forms are much less frequent than
singular; but for the most part they also show an irregular
strengthening of the root-vowel: thus (including augmentless forms),
`ákarma` and `karma` and `ákarta`, `vartam`, `spartam`, `áhema` and
`áhetana`, `bhema`, `açravan`; regular are only `avran, ákran, ahyan`,
and `áçriyan`.

832\. Further, from a few roots with medial (or initial) vowel capable
of `guṇa`-strengthening and having in general that strengthening only in
the singular.

a\. Thus, `ábhedam` and `abhet` from √`bhid`; `ámok` from √`muc`;
`yojam` from √`yuj`; `rok` (VS.) from √`ruj`; `arodham` and `arudhma`
from √`rudh`; `avart` from √`vṛt`; `várk` from √`vṛj` (AV. has once
`avṛk`); `adarçam` from √`dṛç`, `ā́rdhma` from √`ṛdh`; and `adṛçan`,
`avṛjan`, `açvitan`. But `chedma`, with `guṇa`, from √`chid`, and
`adarçma` (TS.) from √`dṛç`.

833\. Again, from a larger number of roots with `a` as radical vowel:

a\. Of these, `gam` (with `n` for `m` when final or followed by `m`: 143
a, 212 a) is of decidedly most frequent occurrence, and shows the
greatest variety of forms: thus, `ágamam`, `ágan` (2d and 3d sing.),
`áganma`, `aganta` (strong form), `ágman`. The other cases are `akran`
from √`kram`; `átan` from √`tan`; `abhrāṭ` from √`bhrāj`; `askan` from
√`skand`; `asrat` from √`sraṅs` (? VS.); `dhak` and `daghma` from
√`dagh`; `ā́naṭ` (585 a) and `anaṣṭām` from √`naç`; `ághas` or `aghat`,
`ághastām`, `aghasta`, and `ákṣan` (for `aghsan`, like `agman`) from
√`ghas`; and the 3d pll. in `us`, `ákramus, ayamus, dabhús, nṛtus`
(pf.?), `mandús`.

834\. So far only active forms have been considered. In the middle, a
considerable part of the forms are such as are held by the grammarians
(881) to belong to the `s`-aorist, with omission of the `s`: they
doubtless belong, however, mostly or altogether, here. Thus:

a\. From roots ending in vowels, we have `adhithās, adhita` (also
`ahita`), and `adhīmahi; adithās, adita`, and `adimahi` (and `adīmahi`
from √`dā` *cut*); `áçīta` (?); `sīmáhi; ásthithās` and `ásthita` and
`ásthiran`, forms of `ā`-roots; — of `ṛ`-roots,
`akri, ákṛthās, ákṛta, akrātām, ákrata` (and the anomalous `kránta`);
`avri, avṛthās, avṛta; ārta, ārata; mṛthās, amṛta; dhṛthās; adṛthās; astṛta; ahṛthās; gūrta`;
— of `i` and `u` roots, the only examples are `ahvi` (? AV., once),
`áhūmahi`, and `ácidhvam`. The absence of any analogies whatever for the
omission of a `s` in such forms, and the occurrence of `avri` and `akri`
and `ákrata`, show that their reference to the `s`-aorist is probably
without sufficient reason.

b\. As regards roots ending in consonants, the case is more
questionable, since loss of `s` after a final consonant before `thās`
and `ta` (and, of course, `dhvam`) would be in many cases required by
euphonic rule (233 c ff.). We find, however, such unmistakable middle
inflection of the root-aorist as
`ayuji, áyukthās, áyukta, ayujmahi, áyugdhvam, áyujran; ā́ṣṭa` and
`ā́çata; náṅçi; apadi` (1st sing.) and `apadmahi` and
`apadran; ámanmahi; gánvahi` and `áganmahi` and `ágmata; atnata; ájani`
(1st sing.) and `ajñata` (3d pl.); from √`gam` are made `agathās` and
`agata`, from √`tan`, `atathās` and `átata`, and from √`man`, `amata`,
with treatment of the final like that of `han` in present inflection
(637). The ending `ran` is especially frequent in 3d pl., being taken by
a number of verbs which have no other middle person of this aorist:
thus,
`agṛbhran, ásṛgran, adṛçran, abudhran, ávṛtran, ajuṣran, akṛpran, aspṛdhran, avasran, áviçran`;
and `ram` is found beside `ran` in `ádṛçram, ábudhram, ásṛgram`.

c\. From roots of which the final would combine with `s` to `kṣ`, it
seems more probable that aorist-forms showing `k` (instead of `ṣ`)
before the ending belong to the root-aorist: such are `amukthās` (and
`ámugdhvam`), `apṛkthās` and `apṛkta, ábhakta, avṛkta, asakthās` and
`asakta, rikthās, vikthās` and
`vikta, arukta; apraṣṭa, ayaṣṭa, áspaṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās` and `ásṛṣṭa`, and
`mṛṣṭhās` would be the same in either case.

d\. There remain, as cases of more doubtful belonging, and probably to
be ranked in part with the one formation and in part with the other,
according to their period and to the occurrence of other persons:
`chitthās, nutthā́s` and `ánutta` and
`ánuddhvam, patthās, bhitthās, amatta, atapthās, alipta, asṛpta`; and
finally, `árabdha, alabdha, aruddha, abuddha, ayuddha`, and `drogdhās`
(MBh.: read `drugdhās`): see 883.

Modes of the Root-aorist.

835\. Subjunctive. In subjunctive use, forms identical with the
augmentless indicative of this aorist are much more frequent than the
more proper subjunctives. Those to which no corresponding form with
augment occurs have been given above; the others it is unnecessary to
report in detail.

836\. a. Of true subjunctives the forms with primary endings are quite
few. In the active, `kárāṇi, gāni, gamāni` (for `bhuvāni`, see below,
c); `kárasi; sthāti, dā́ti` and `dhā́ti` (which are almost indicative in
value),
`karati, joṣati, padāti, bhédati, rādhati, varjati; sthāthas, karathas`
and `karatas, darçathas, çravathas and çrávatas`; and (apparently)
`karanti, gámanti`. In the middle, `joṣase`; `idhaté` (?),
`kárate, bhójate, yojate, várjate; dhéthe` and
`dhāithe; karāmahe, dhāmahe, gámāmahāi`.

b\. Forms with secondary endings are, in the active,
`dárçam, bhojam, yojam; káras, tárdas, párcas, yámas, rādhās, váras; karat, gámat, garat, jóṣat, daghat, padāt, yamat, yodhat, rādhat, várat, vártat, çrávat, sághat, spárat; kárāma, gamāma, rādhāma; gáman,`
`garan, dárçan, yaman`. No middle forms are classifiable with
confidence here.

c\. The series `bhuvam, bhúvas, bhúvat, bhúvan`, and `bhuvāni` (compare
`abhuvam`: 830 a), and the isolated `çrúvat`, are of doubtful
belongings; with a different accent, they would seem to be of the next
class; here, a `guṇa`-strengthening would be more regular (but note the
absence of `guṇa` in the aorist indicative and the perfect of √`bhū`).

837\. Optative. The optative active of this aorist constitutes, with a
`s` interposed between mode-sign and personal endings (567), the
precative active of the Hindu grammarians, and is allowed by them to be
made from every verb, they recognizing no connection between it and the
aorist. But in the 2d sing. the interposed `s` is not distinguishable
from the personal ending; and, after the earliest period (see 838), the
ending crowds out the sibilant in the 3d sing., which thus comes to end
in `yāt` instead of `yās` (compare 555 a).

a\. In the older language, however, pure optative forms, without the
`s`, are made from this tense. From roots in `ā` occur (with change of
`ā` to `e` before the `y`: 250 d) `deyām, dheyām` and `dheyus`, and
`stheyāma`; in `u`-vowels, `bhūyā́ma`; in `ṛ`, `kriyāma`; in consonants,
`açyā́m` and `açyā́ma` and `açyus`, `vṛjyām`, `çakyām`, `yujyāva` and
`yujyā́tām`, `sāhyāma`, and `tṛdyus`.

b\. The optative middle of the root-aorist is not recognized by the
Hindu grammarians as making a part of the precative formation. The RV.
has, however, two precative forms of it, namely `padīṣṭá` and `mucīṣṭa`.
Much more common in the older language are pure optative forms: namely,
`açīya` and `açīmáhi` (this optative is especially common),
`indhīya, gmīya, murīya, rucīya; arīta, uhīta, vurīta; idhīmahi, naçīmahi, nasīmahi, pṛcīmahi, mudīmahi, yamīmahi`;
and probably, from `ā`-roots, `sīmáhi` and `dhīmahi` (which might also
be augmentless indicative, since `adhīmahi` and `adhītām` also occur).
All these forms except the three in 3d sing. might be precative
according to the general understanding of that mode, as being of persons
which even by the native authorities are not claimed ever to exhibit the
inserted sibilant.

838\. Precative active forms of this aorist are made from the earliest
period of the language. In RV., they do not occur from any root which
has not also other aorist forms of the same class to show. The RV. forms
are: 1st sing., `bhūyāsam`; 2d sing.,
`avyās, jñeyās, bhūyā́s, mṛdhyās, sahyās`; 3d sing. (in -`yās`, for
-`yāst`; RV. has no 3d sing, in `yāt`, which is later the universal
ending),
`avyās, açyās, ṛdhyās, gamyā́s, daghyās, peyās, bhūyā́s, yamyās, yūyās, vṛjyās, çrūyās, sahyās`;
1st pl., `kriyāsma` (beside `kriyāma`: 837 a). AV. has six 1st persons
sing, in -`yā́sam`, one 2d in -`yā́s`, one 3d in -`yāt` (and one in
-`yās`, in a RV. passage), three 1st pl. in -`yā́sma` (beside one in
`yāma`, in a RV. passage), and the 2d `bhūyāstha` (doubtless a false
reading: TB. has -`sta` in the corresponding passage). From this time
on, the pure optative forms nearly disappear (the exceptions are given
in 837 a). But the precative forms are nowhere common, excepting as made
from √`bhū`; and from no other root is anything like a complete series
of persons quotable (only `bhūyāsva` and `bhūyāstām` being wanting; and
these two persons have no representative from any root). All together,
active optative or precative forms are made in the older language from
over fifty roots; and the epic and classical texts add them from hardly
a dozen more: see further 925.

839\. Imperative. Imperative forms of the root-aorist are not rare in
the early language. In the middle, indeed, almost only the 2d sing.
occurs: it is accented either regularly, on the ending, as
`kṛṣvá, dhiṣvá, yukṣvá`, or on the root, as
`mátsva, yákṣva, váṅsva, rā́sva, sákṣva`; `dīṣva` and `māsva` are not
found with accent; the 2d pl. is represented by `kṛdhvam, voḍhvam`. In
the active, all the persons (2d and 3d) are found in use; examples are:
2d sing.,
`kṛdhí, vṛdhi, çagdhí, çrudhí, gadhi, yaṁdhí, gahi, māhi, sāhi, mogdhi`;
3d sing., `gaṁtu, dātu, aṣṭu, çrótu, sótu`; 2d du.,
`dātam, jitam, çaktam, çrutám, bhūtám, spṛtám, gatám, riktám, voḍham, sitam, sutám`;
3d du., only `gaṁtām, dātām, voḍhā́m`; 2d pl.,
`gātá, bhūtá, çruta, kṛta, gata, dāta, dhātana`; 3d pl., only
`dhāntu, çruvantu`. These are the most regular forms; but irregularities
as to both accent and strengthening are not infrequent. Thus, strong
forms in 2d du. and pl. are `yaṁtám, varktam, vartam; kárta, gáṁta`
(once `gáṁtá`), `yaṁta, vartta, heta, çróta, sóta`; and, with
`tana, kártana, gáṁtana, yaṁtana, sotana`, and the irregular `dhetana`
(√`dhā`); in 3d du., `gāṁtām`. Much more irregular are `yódhi` (instead
of `yuddhí`) from √`yudh`, and `bodhí` from both √`budh` and √`bhū`
(instead of `buddhí` and `bhūdhí`). A single form (3d sing.) in `tāt` is
found, namely `çastāt`. We find `kṛdhi` also later (MBh. BhP.).

a\. As to 2d persons singular in `si` from the simple root used in an
imperative sense, see above, 624.

Participles of the Root-aorist.

840\. In the oldest language, of the RV., are found a number of
participles which must be reckoned as belonging to this formation.

a\. In the active, they are extremely few: namely, `kránt, citánt` (?),
`gmánt, sthā́nt, bhidánt, vṛdhánt, dyutant`- (only in composition), and
probably `ṛdhánt`. And BhP. has `mṛṣant` (but probably by error, for
`mṛṣyant`).

b\. In the middle, they are in RV. much more numerous. The accent is
usually on the final of the stem: thus,
`arāṇá, idhāṇá, krāṇá, juṣāṇá, tṛṣāṇá, nidāná, piçāná, pṛcāná, prathāná, budhāná, bhiyāná, manāná, mandāná, yujāná, rucāná, vipāná, vrāṇá, urāṇá, çubhāná, sacāná, suvāná`
or `svāná, sṛjāná, spṛdhāná, hiyāná`; — but sometimes on the
root-syllable: thus, `cítāna, cyávāna, rúhāṇa, úhāna` (pres.?),
`vásāna, çúmbhāna`; — while a few show both accentuations (compare 619
d): thus, `dṛçāná` and `dṛ́çāna`, `dyutāná` and `dyútāna`, `yatāná` and
`yátāna`; and `cetāna` and `hrayāṇa` occur only in composition. A very
few of these are found once or twice in other texts, namely
`citāna, dyutāna, ruhāṇa, vasāna, suvāna`; and -`kupāna` occurs once in
Āpast. (xiv. 28. 4).

841\. All together, the roots exhibiting in the older language forms
which are with fair probability to be reckoned to the root-aorist-system
are about a hundred and thirty; over eighty of them make such forms in
the RV.

Passive Aorist third person singular.

842\. A middle third person singular, of peculiar formation and
prevailingly passive meaning, is made from many verbs in the older
language, and has become a regular part of the passive conjugation,
being, according to the grammarians, to be substituted always for the
proper third person of any aorist middle that is used in a passive
sense.

843\. This person is formed by adding इ `i` to the root, which takes
also the augment, and is usually strengthened.

a\. The ending `i` belongs elsewhere only to the first person; and this
third person apparently stands in the same relation to a first in `i` as
do, in the middle voice, the regular 3d sing. perfect, and also the
frequent Vedic 3d sing. present of the root-class (613), which are
identical in form with their respective first persons. That a fuller
ending has been lost off is extremely improbable; and hence, as an
aorist formation from the simple root, this is most properly treated
here, in connection with the ordinary root-aorist.

844\. Before the ending इ `i`, a final vowel, and usually also a medial
अ `a` before a single consonant, have the `vṛddhi`-strengthening; other
medial vowels have the `guṇa`-strengthening if capable of it (240);
after final आ `ā` is added य् `y`.

a\. Examples (all of them quotable from the older language) are: from
roots ending in `ā, ájñāyi, ádhāyi, ápāyi`; in other vowels,
`áçrāyi, ástāvi, áhāvi, ákāri, ástāri`; — from roots with medial
`i, u, ṛ, aceti, ácchedi, açeṣi, ábodhi, ámoci, áyoji, ádarçi, asarji, varhi`;
from roots with medial `a` strengthened,
`agāmi, ápādi, ayāmi, avāci, vāpi, ásādi` (these are all the earlier
cases); with `a` unchanged, only `ájani` (and RV. has once `jā́ni`), and,
in heavy syllables, `ámyakṣi, vandi, çaṅsi, syandi`; with medial
`ā, ábhrāji, árādhi`; — from roots with initial vowel, `ārdhi` (only
case).

b\. According to the grammarians, certain roots in `am`, and √`vadh`,
retain the `a` unchanged: quotable are `ajani` (or `ajāni`), `agami` (or
`agāmi`), `asvani, avadhi`, also `araci`; and there are noted besides,
from roots sometimes showing a nasal,
`adaṅçi, arambhi, arandhi, ajambhi, abhañji` or `abhāji, alambhi`
(always, with prepositions) or `alābhi, astambhi`; ÇB. has `asañji`.

c\. Augmentless forms, as in all other like cases, are met with, with
either indicative or subjunctive value: examples (besides the two or
three already given) are:
`dhā́yi, çrā́vi, bhāri, reci, védi, roci, jáni, pā́di, sā́di, ardhi`. The
accent, when present, is always on the root-syllable (SV. `dhāyí` is
doubtless a false reading).

845\. These forms are made in RV. from forty roots, and all the other
earlier texts combined add only about twenty to the number; from the
later language are quotable thirty or forty more; in the epics they are
nearly unknown. When they come from roots of neuter meaning, as
`gam, pad, sad, bhrāj, rādh, ruc, sañj`, they have (like the so-called
passive participle in `ta`: 952) a value equivalent to that of other
middle forms; in a case or two (RV. vii. 73. 3 \[?\]; VS. xxviii. 15;
TB. ii. 6. 102) they appear even to be used transitively.

2\. The `a`-aorist.

846\. a. This aorist is in the later language allowed to be made from a
large number of roots (near a hundred). It is made in both voices, but
is rare in the middle, most of the roots forming their middle according
to the `s`-class (878 ff.) or the `iṣ`-class (898 ff.).

b\. Its closest analogy is with the imperfect of the `á`-class (751
ff.); its inflection is the same with that in all particulars; and it
takes in general a weak form of root — save the roots in ऋ `ṛ` (three or
four only), which have the `guṇa`-strengthening.

c\. As example of inflection may be taken the root सिच् `sic` *pour*.
Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

असिचम्  
`ásicam`

असिचाव  
`ásicāva`

असिचाम  
`ásicāma`

असिचे  
`ásice`

असिचावहि  
`ásicāvahi`

असिचामहि  
`ásicāmahi`

2

असिचस्  
`ásicas`

असिचतम्  
`ásicatam`

असिचत  
`ásicata`

असिचथास्  
`ásicathās`

असिचेथाम्  
`ásicethām`

असिचध्वम्  
`asicadhvam`

3

असिचत्  
`ásicat`

असिचताम्  
`ásicatām`

असिचन्  
`ásican`

असिचत  
`ásicata`

असिचेताम्  
`ásicetām`

असिचन्त  
`ásicanta`



847\. The `a`-aorist makes in the RV. a small figure beside the
root-aorist, being represented by less than half the latter's number of
roots. It becomes, however, more common later (it is the only form of
aorist which is made from more verbs in AV. than in RV.); and in Veda
and Brāhmaṇa together about eighty roots exhibit the formation more or
less fully. Of these a large number (fully half) are of the type of the
roots which make their present-system according to the `á`-class, having
a vowel capable of `guṇa`-strengthening before a final consonant (754):
thus, with `i, chid, bhid, nij, ric, riṣ, lip, vid`, 1 `çiṣ` (`çās`), 2
`çiṣ, çriṣ, çliṣ, sic, sridh`; — with
`u, krudh, kṣudh, guh, duṣ, dyut, druh, puṣ, budh, bhuj, muc, mruc, yuj, ruc, rud, rudh, muh, ruh, çuc`;
— with
`ṛ, ṛdh, kṛt, gṛdh, gṛh, tṛp, tṛṣ, tṛh, dṛp, dṛç, dhṛṣ, nṛt, mṛdh, mṛṣ, vṛt, vṛdh, vṛṣ, sṛp, hṛṣ`.
A small number end in vowels: thus, `ṛ, kṛ, sṛ` (which have the
`guṇa`-strengthening throughout), `hi` (? `ahyat` once in AV.), and
several in `ā`, apparent transfers from the root-class by the weakening
of their `ā` to `a`: thus, `khyā, hvā, vyā, çvā`, and `dā` and `dhā`;
and `āsthat`, regarded by the grammarians as aorist to √`as` *throw*, is
doubtless a like formation from √`sthā`. A few have a penultimate nasal
in the present and elsewhere, which in this aorist is lost: thus,
`bhraṅç, taṅs, dhvaṅs, sraṅs, krand, randh`. Of less classifiable
character are
`aç, kram, gam, ghas, tam, çam, çram, tan, san, sad, āp, das, yas, çak, dagh`.
The roots `pat, naç, vac` form the tense-stems `papta, neça, voca`, of
which the first is palpably and the other two are probably the result of
reduplication; but the language has lost the sense of their being such,
and makes other reduplicated aorists from the same roots (see below,
854).

a\. Many of these aorists are simply transfers of the root-aorist to an
`a`-inflection. Conspicuous examples are `akarat` etc. and `agamat` etc.
(in the earliest period only `akar` and `agan`).

848\. The inflection of this aorist is in general so regular that it
will be sufficient to give only examples of its Vedic forms. We may take
as model `avidam`, from √`vid` *find*, of which the various persons and
modes are more frequent and in fuller variety than those of any other
verb. Only the forms actually quotable are instanced; those of which the
examples found are from other verbs than vid are bracketed. Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`ávidam`

`ávidāva`

`ávidāma`

`ávide`

\[`ávidāvahi`\]

`ávidāmahi`

2

`ávidas`

\[`ávidata`\]

\[`ávidathās`\]

3

`ávidat`

`ávidan`

\[`avidata`\]

\[`avidetām`\]

`ávidanta`

a\. The middle forms are rare in the earlier language, as in the later:
we have `áhve` etc., `ákhye` etc., `ávide` (?) and `avidanta`,
`avocathās` and `avocāvahi` (and `avidāmahe` GB. and `asicāmahe` KB. are
doubtless to be amended to -`mahi`). 

b\. Augmentless forms, with indicative or subjunctive value, are not
infrequent. Examples, showing accent on the tense-sign, according to the
general analogies of the formation, are:
`ruhám, sṛpas, bhuját, vidát, aratām, vocata, çakan; vidata` and `vyáta`
(3d sing.), `arāmahi, çiṣāmahi, vidánta, budhánta, mṛṣanta` (for
exceptions as regards accent, see below, 853).

Modes of the `a`-aorist.

840\. The subjunctive forms of this aorist are few; those which occur
are instanced below, in the method which was followed for the
indicative:

1

\[`vidā́va`\]

`vidāma`

\[`vidāmahe`\]

2

`vidā́si`  
`vidā́s`

`vidāthas`

`vidātha`

3

`vidā́t`

\[`vidātāi`?\]

a\. The ending `thana` is found once, in `riṣāthana`. Of middle forms
occur only `çíṣātāi` (AV.: but doubtless misreading for `çíṣyātāi`) and
`çiṣāmahe` (AV., for RV. `çiṣāmahi`). The form `sádathas` seems an
indicative, made from a secondary present-stem.

850\. The optatives are few in the oldest language, but become more
frequent, and in the `Brāhmaṇas` are not rare. Examples are: in active,
`bhideyam`, `vidéyam`, `sanéyam` (TB. once `sanem`);
`vidés, games; gamet, vocet; gametam; gaméma, çakéma, sanéma; vareta`;
in middle, (only) `videya; gamemahi, vanemahi: ruhethās` etc. in the
epics must be viewed rather as present forms of the `á`-class.

a\. A single middle precative form occurs, namely `videṣṭa` (AV., once);
it is so isolated that how much may be inferred from it is very
questionable.

851\. A complete series of active imperative forms are made from √`sad`
(including `sadatana`, 2d pl.), and the middle `sadantām`. Other
imperatives are very rare: namely,
`sána, sára, ruha, vidá; ruhátam, vidátam; khyáta`. TS. has once
`vṛdhātu` (compare 740).

Participles of the `a`-aorist.

852\. a. The active participles `tṛpánt, ríṣant` or
`rī́ṣant, vṛdhánt, çiṣánt, çucánt, sádant`, and (in participial
compounds, 1309) `kṛtant`-, `guhant`-, `vidant`- (all RV.), are to be
assigned with plausibility to this aorist.

b\. Likewise the middle participles `guhámāna, dhṛṣámāṇa, dásamāna` (?),
`nṛtámāna, çucámāna`, and perhaps `vṛdhāná, sridhāná`.

Irregularities of the `a`-aorist.

853\. A few irregularities and peculiarities may be noticed here. The
roots in `ṛ`, which (847) show a strengthening like that of the present
of the unaccented a-class, have likewise the accent upon the radical
syllable, like that class: thus, from √ṛ, áranta (augmentless 3d pl.),
sárat and sára. The root sad follows the same rule: thus, sádatam; and
from √san are found sánas and sánat and sánema and sána, beside sanéyam
and sanéma. It is questionable whether these are not true analogues of
the bhū-class (unaccented a-class) present-system. On the other hand,
rúhat (beside ruhám, ruhā́va, ruhátam), çíṣat and çíṣātāi (?), and ríṣant
or rī́sant are more isolated cases. In view of such as these, the forms
from the stem bhúva and çrúva (836 c) are perhaps to be referred hither.
From √vac, the optative is accented vocéyam, vocés, vocéma, vocéyus;
elsewhere the accent is on the root-syllable: thus, vóce, vócat, vócati,
vócanta.

854\. a. The stem voc has in Vedic use well-nigh assumed the value of a
root; its forms are very various and of frequent use, in RV. especially
far outnumbering in occurrences all other forms from √vac. Besides those
already given, we find vocā (1st sing, impv.) and vocāti, vocāvahāi;
voces, voceya, vocemahi; vocatāt (2d sing.), vocatu, vocatam, vocata.

b\. Of the stem neça from √naç only neçat occurs.

c\. The root çās (as in some of its present forms: 639) is weakened to
çiṣ, and makes açiṣam.

855\. Isolated forms which have more or less completely the aspect of
indicative presents are made in the oldest language from some roots
beside the aorist-systems of the first two classes. It must be left for
maturer research to determine how far they may be relics of original
presents, and how far recent productions, made in the way of conversion
of the aorist-stem to a root in value.

a\. Such forms are the following: from √kṛ *make*, kárṣi, kṛthas, kṛtha,
kṛṣe; from √gam, gathá; from √ci *gather*, ceti; from √dā *give*, dā́ti,
dāta; from √dhā *put*, dhāti; from √pā *drink*, pāthás, pānti; from
√bhṛ, bharti; from √muc, mucánti; from √rudh, rudhmas (?); from √vṛt,
vartti.

II\. (3) Reduplicated Aorist.

856\. The reduplicated aorist is different from the other forms of
aorist in that it has come to be attached in almost all cases to the
derivative (causative etc.) conjugation in अय áya, as the aorist of that
conjugation, and is therefore liable to be made from all roots which
have such a conjugation, beside the aorist or aorists which belong to
their primary conjugation. Since, however, the connection of the two is
not a formal one (the aorist being made directly from the root, and not
from the causative stem), but rather a matter of established
association, owing to kinship of meaning, the formation and inflection
of this kind of aorist is best treated here, along with the others.

857\. Its characteristic is a reduplication of the radical syllable, by
which it is assimilated, on the one hand, to the imperfect of the
reduplicating class (656 ff.), and, on the other hand, to the so-called
pluperfect (817 ff.). But the aorist reduplication has taken on a quite
peculiar character, with few traces left even in the Veda of a different
condition which may have preceded this.

858\. a. As regards, indeed, the consonant of the reduplication, it
follows the general rules already given (590). And the quality of the
reduplicated vowel is in general as in the formations already treated:
it needs only to be noted that an `a`-vowel and `ṛ` (or `ar`) are
usually (for exceptions, see below, 860) repeated by an `i`-vowel — as
they are, to a considerable extent, in the reduplicated present also
(660).

b\. But in regard to quantity, this aorist aims always at establishing a
diversity between the reduplicating and radical syllables, making the
one heavy and the other light. And the preference is very markedly for a
heavy reduplication and a light root-syllable — which relation is
brought about wherever the conditions allow. Thus:

859\. If the root is a light syllable (having a short vowel followed by
a single consonant), the reduplication is made heavy.

a\. And this, usually by lengthening the reduplicating vowel, with `ī`
for radical `a` or `ṛ` or `ḷ`. (in the single root containing that
vowel): thus, `arīriṣam, adūduṣam, ajījanam, avīvṛdham, acīkḷpam`. The
great majority of reduplicated aorists are of this form.

b\. If, however, the root begins with two consonants, so that the
reduplicating syllable will be heavy whatever the quantity of its
vowel, the vowel remains short: thus,
`acikṣipam, acukrudham, atitrasam, apispṛçam`.

860\. If the root is a heavy syllable (having a long vowel, or a short
before two consonants), the vowel of the reduplication is short: and in
this case अ `a` or आ `ā`, and ऋ `ṛ` (if it occurs), are reduplicated by
अ `a`.

a\. Thus, `adidīkṣam, abubhūṣam` (not quotable),
`adadakṣam, adadhāvam, atataṅsam`. And, in the cases in which a root
should both begin and end with two consonants, both syllables would be
necessarily heavy, notwithstanding the short vowel in the former: thus,
`apapraccham, acaskandam` (but no such forms are found in use).

b\. A medial `ṛ` is allowed by the grammarians to retain the
strengthening of the causative stem, together with, of course,
reduplication by `a`: thus, `acakarṣat, avavartat` (beside
`acīkṛṣat, avīvṛtat`); but no such forms have been met with in use.

c\. These aorists are not distinguishable in form from the so-called
pluperfects (817 ff.).

861\. a. In order, however, to bring about the favored relation of heavy
reduplication and light radical syllable, a heavy root is sometimes made
light: either by shortening its vowel, as in `arīradham` from
√`rādh, avīvaçam` from √`vāç, asīṣadham` from √`sādh, ajījivam` from
√`jīv, adīdipam` (K. and later: BV. has `didīpas`) from
√`dīp, abībhiṣam` from √`bhīṣ, asūsucam` from √`sūc`; or by dropping a
penultimate nasal, as in `acikradam` from √`krand, asiṣyadam` from
√`syand`.

b\. In those cases in which (1047) an aorist is formed directly from a
causal stem in `āp`, the `ā` is abbreviated to `i`: thus, `atiṣṭhipam`
etc., `ajijñipat` (but KSS. `ajijñapat`), `jīhipas, ajījipata` (but VS.
`ajījapata`); but from `çrap` comes `açiçrapāma` (ÇB.).

862\. Examples of this aorist from roots with initial vowel are very
rare; the older language has only `āmamat` (or `amamat`) from
√`am, āpipan` (ÇB.: BAU. `āpipipat`) from √`āp`, and `arpipam`
(augmentless) from the causative stem `arp` of √`ṛ` — in which latter
the root is excessively abbreviated. The grammarians give other similar
formations, as `ārcicam` from √`arc, āubjijam` from √`ubj, ārjiham` from
√`arh, āicikṣam` from √`īkṣ, ārdidham` from √`ṛdh`. Compare the similar
reduplication in desiderative stems: 1029 b.

863\. Of special irregularities may be mentioned:

a\. From √`dyut` is made (V.B.) the stem `didyuta`, taking its
reduplicating vowel from the radical semivowel. From √`gup`, instead of
`jūgupa` (B.S.), JB. has `jugūpa`, and some texts (B.S.) have `jugupa`;
and `jīhvara` (B.) is met with beside the regular `jihvara` (V.B.). In
`` `cacchada` (Nir.), and the more or less doubtful `paprátha` and
`çaçvacá` and `sasvaja` (RV.) we have `a` instead of `i` in the
reduplication.

b\. In support of their false view of this aorist as made from the
causative stem instead of directly from the root, the native grammarians
teach that roots ending in an `u`-vowel may reduplicate with `i`, as
representing the `ā` of the strengthened stem: thus, `bībhava` from
`bhāv-aya`, as well as `būbhuva` from `bhū`. No example of such a
formation, however, is met with except `ápiplavam` (ÇB., once); against
it we find `dudruva, būbhuva, rūruva, çuçruva`, and others.

c\. As to `apaptam, avocam`, and `aneçam`, see above, 847.

864\. The inflection of the reduplicated aorist is like that of an
imperfect of the second general conjugation: that is to say, it has अ
`a` as final stem-vowel, with all the peculiarities which the presence
of that vowel conditions (738 a). Thus, from √`jan` *give birth* (stem
`jījana`):

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अजीजनम्  
`ájījanam`

अजीजनाव  
`ájījanāva`

अजीजनाम  
`ájījanāma`

अजीजने  
`ájījane`

अजीजनावहि  
`ájījanāvahi`

अजीजनामहि  
`ájījanāmahi`

2

अजीजनस्  
`ájījanas`

अजीजनतम्  
`ájījanatam`

अजीजनत  
`ájījanata`

अजीजनथास्  
`ájījanathās`

अजीजनेथाम्  
`ájījanethām`

अजीजनध्वम्  
`ájījanadhvam`

3

अजीजनत्  
`ájījanat`

अजीजनताम्  
`ájījanatām`

अजीजनन्  
`ájījanan`

अजीजनत  
`ájījanata`

अजीजनेताम्  
`ájījanetām`

अजीजनन्त  
`ájījananta`

  
865. The middle forms are rare in the older language (the 3d pl. is
decidedly the most common of them, being made from eleven roots; the 3d
s. from seven); but all, both active and middle, are quotable except 1st
and 2d du. middle and 1st du. active.

a\. `Atītape` appears to be once used (RV.) as 3d sing., with passive
sense.

866\. A final `ṛ` has the `guṇa`-strengthening before the endings: thus,
`acīkarat, apīparam, atītaras, dīdaras, adīdharat, amīmarat, avīvaran, jihvaras`.
Of similar strengthened forms from `ī` and `u`-roots are found
`apiprayan` (TS.), `abībhayanta` (RV.), `apiplavam` (ÇB.), `acucyavat`
(K.), `açuçravat` (MS.), `atuṣṭavam` (RV.). Not many roots ending in
other vowels than `ṛ` make this aorist: see below, 868.

867\. Forms of the inflection without union-vowel are occasionally met
with: namely, from roots ending in consonants, `síṣvap` (2d sing.,
augmentless) from √`svap`, and `açiçnat` from √`çnath`; from roots in
`ṛ` or `ar`, `dīdhar` (2d sing.), and `ajīgar` (2d and 3d sing.); for
roots in `i`- and `u`-vowels, see 868. Of 3d pl. in `us` are found
almost only a form or two from `i`- and `u`-roots, with `guṇa` before
the ending: thus, `açiçrayus, ácucyavus, açuçravus, asuṣavus`; but also
`abībhajus` (ÇB.), and `nīnaçus` (MBh.).

868\. In the later language, a few roots are said by the grammarians to
make this aorist as a part of their primary conjugation: they are `çri`
and `çvi, dru` and `aru, kam`, and `dhā` *suck* (`çvi` and `dhā`
optionally).

a\. In the older language are found from √`çri açiçret` and `açiçrayus`
(noticed in the preceding paragraph) and `açiçriyat` (ÇB.); from
√`dru, adudrot` and `adudruvat` (TB.: not used as aorist); from
√`sru, asusrot` and (augmentless) `susros` and `susrot`; from
√`kam, acīkametām` and -`manta` (B.S.). Of forms analogous with these
occur a number from roots in `u` or `ū`: thus, `anūnot` and `nūnot` from
√`nu`; `yūyot` from √`yu` *separate*; `dūdhot` from √`dhū`; `apupot`
from √`pū`; `tūtos` and `tūtot` from √`tu`; `asuṣot` from √`sū`; — and
one or two from roots in `i` or `ī`: thus, `siṣet` from √`si` (or `sā`)
*bind*; `amīmet` from √`mā` *bellow*; `apipres` (with `apiprayan`,
noticed above) from √`prī` (and the "imperfects" from `dīdhī` etc., 676,
are of corresponding form). And from √`cyu` are made, with union-vowel
`ī`, `acucyavīt` and `acucyavītana`. Few of these forms possess a
necessarily causative or a decidedly aoristic value, and it is very
doubtful whether they should not be assigned to the perfect-system.

b\. From the later language are quotable only `açiçriyat` etc. (3d pl.,
-`yan` or -`yus`) and `adudruvat`.

Modes of the Reduplicated Aorist.

869\. a. As in other preterit formations, the augmentless indicative
persons of this aorist are used subjunctively, and they are very much
more frequent than true subjunctives.

b\. Of the latter are found only `rīradhā` (1st sing.); `tītapāsi`;
`cīkḷpāti` and `sīṣadhāti`, and `pispṛçati` (as if corresponding to an
indicative `apispṛk`, like `açiçnat`); and perhaps the 1st sing. mid.
`çaçvacāí`.

c\. The augmentless indicative forms are accented in general on the
reduplication: thus, `dī́dharas, nī́naças; jī́janat, pī́parat; jī́janan`;
also `síṣvap`; but, on the other hand, we have also `pīpárat, çiçráthas`
and `çiçnáthat`, and `dudrávat` and `tuṣṭávat` (which may perhaps belong
to the perfect: compare 810). According to the native grammarians, the
accent rests either on the radical syllable or on the one that follows
it.

870\. Optative forms are even rarer. The least questionable case is the
middle "precative" `rīriṣīṣṭa` (`ririṣīṣṭa` has been ranked above with
`sāsahīṣṭa`, as a perfect: 812 b). `Cucyuvīmahi` and `cucyavīrata`
belong either here or to the perfect-system.

871\. Of imperatives, we have the indubitable forms pūpurantu and
`çiçrathantu`. And `jigṛtám` and `jigṛtá`, and `didhṛtam` and `didhṛtá`,
and `jajastám` (all RV. only), and perhaps `suṣūdáta` (AV.), are to be
referred hither, as corresponding to the indicatives (without
union-vowel) `ajīgar` and `adīdhar`: their short reduplicating vowel and
their accent assimilate them closely to the reduplicated imperfects (656
ff.) with which we are probably to regard this aorist as ultimately
related.

872\. No participle is found belonging to the reduplicated aorist.

873\. The number of roots from which this aorist is met with in the
earlier language is about a hundred and twenty. In the later Sanskrit it
is unusual; in the series of later texts mentioned above (826) it occurs
only twice; and it has been found quotable from hardly fifty roots in
the whole epic and classical literature.

III\. Sigmatic or Sibilant Aorist.

874\. a. The common tense-sign of all the varieties of this aorist is a
स् `s` (convertible to ष् `ṣ`: 180) which is added to the root in
forming the tense-stem.

b\. This sibilant has no analogues among the class-signs of the
present-system; but it is to be compared with that which appears (and
likewise with or without the same union-vowel `i`) in the stems of the
future tense-system (932 ff.) and of the desiderative conjugation (1027
ff.).

c\. To the root thus increased the augment is prefixed and the secondary
endings are added.

875\. In the case of a few roots, the sibilant tense-stem (always ending
in क्ष `kṣ`) is further increased by an अ `a`, and the inflection is
nearly like that of an imperfect of the second or `a`- conjugation.

876\. a. In the vast majority of cases, the sibilant is the final of the
tense-stem, and the inflection is like that of an imperfect of the first
or non-`a`-conjugation.

b\. And these, again, fall into two nearly equal and strongly marked
classes, according as the sibilant is added immediately to the final of
the root, or with an auxiliary vowel इ `i`, making the tense-sign इष्
`iṣ`. Finally, before this इष् `iṣ` the root is in a very small number
of cases increased by a स् `s`, making the whole addition सिष् `siṣ`.
877. We have, then, the following classification for the varieties of
sibilant-aorist:

A. With endings added directly to the sibilant:

4\. with स् `s` simply after the root: `s`-aorist;

5\. with इ `i` before the स् `s`: `iṣ`-aorist;

6\. the same, with स् `s` at end of root: `siṣ`-aorist.

B. With अ `a` added to the sibilant before the endings:

7\. with sibilant and अ `a`: `sa`-aorist.

a\. As regards the distinction between the fourth and fifth forms, it
may be said in a general way that those roots incline to take the
auxiliary `i` in the aorist which take it also in other formations; but
it is impossible to lay down any strict rules as to this accordance.
Compare 903.

4\. The `s`-aorist.

878\. The tense-stem of this aorist is made by adding स् `s` to the
augmented root, of which also the vowel is usually strengthened.

879\. The general rules as to the strengthening of the root-vowel are
these:

a\. A final vowel (including ऋ `ṛ`) has the `vṛddhi`-change in the
active, and (excepting ऋ `ṛ`) `guṇa` in the middle: thus, from √नी
*lead*, active stem अनैष् `anāiṣ`, middle stem अनेष् `aneṣ`; from √श्रु
`çru` *hear*, अश्रौष् `açrāuṣ` and अश्रोष् `açroṣ`; from √कृ `kṛ`
*make*, अकार्ष `akārṣ` and अकृष् `akṛṣ`.

b\. A medial vowel has the `vṛddhi`-change in the active, and remains
unaltered in the middle: thus, from √छन्द `chand` *seem*, active stem
अच्छान्त्स `acchānts`, middle stem अच्छन्त्स `acchants`; from √रिच्
`ric` *leave*, अरैक्ष् `arāikṣ` and अरिक्ष् `arikṣ`; from √रुध् `rudh`
*obstruct*, अरौत्स `arāuts` and अरुत्स `aruts`; from √सृज् `sṛj` *pour
out*, अस्राक्ष् `asrākṣ` and असृक्ष् `asṛkṣ`.

880\. a. The endings are the usual secondary ones, with उस् `us` (not
अन् `an`) in 3d pl. act., and अत `ata` (not अन्त `anta`) in 3d pl. mid.


b\. But before स् `s` and त् `t` of 2d and 3d sing. act. is in the later
language always inserted an ई `ī`, making the endings ईस् `īs` and ईत्
`īt`.

c\. This insertion is unknown in the earliest language (of the BV.): see
below, 888.

881\. a. Before endings beginning with `t` or `th`, the tense-sign `s`
is (233 c–e) omitted after the final consonant of a root — unless this
be `r`, or `n` or `m` (converted to `anusvāra`).

b\. The same omission is of course made before `dhvam` after a
consonant; and after a vowel the sibilant is either omitted or
assimilated (the equivalence of `dhv` and `ddhv` in the theories of the
grammarians and the practice of the manuscripts makes it impossible to
say which: 232); and then the ending becomes `ḍhvam`, provided the
sibilant, if retained, would have been `ṣ` (226 c): thus, `astoḍhvam`
and `avṛḍhvam` (beside `astoṣata` and `avṛṣata`); `dṛḍhvam` (√`dṛ`
*regard*: ÇB., once), which is to `dṛthās` (2d sing.) as `avṛḍhvain` and
`avṛṣata` to `avri` and `avṛthās`; and `kṛḍhvam` (M.).

c\. According to the grammarians, the omission of `s` before `t` and
`th` takes place also after a short vowel (the case can occur only in
the 2d and 3d sing, mid.); but we have seen above (834 a) that this is
to be viewed rather as a substitution in those persons of the forms of
the root-aorist. Neither in the earlier nor in the later language,
however, does any example occur of an aorist-form with `s` retained
after a short vowel before these endings.

d\. After the final sonant aspirate of a root, the sibilant before the
same endings is said by the Hindu grammarians to disappear altogether,
the combination of the aspirate with the `th` or `t` of the ending being
then made according to the ordinary rule for such cases (160): thus,
from the stem `arāuts`, for `arāudh`-`s`, is made `arāuddha`, as if from
`arāudh`+`ta` directly. No example of such a form is quotable from the
literature; but the combination is established by the occurrence of
other similar cases (233 f). In the middle, in like manner, `aruts`+`ta`
becomes `aruddha`, as if from `arudh`+`ta`; but all such forms admit
also of being understood as of the root-aorist. Those that have been
found to occur were given above (834 d); probably they belong at least
in part to this aorist.

e\. From the three nasal roots `gam, tan, man` are made the 2d and 3d
sing. mid. persons `agathās` and `agata, atathās` and `atata`, and
`amata` (`amathās` not quotable), reckoned by the native grammarians as
`s`-aorist forms, made, after loss of their final root-nasal, with loss
also of the sibilant after a short vowel. They are doubtless better
referred to the root-aorist. But JB. has a corresponding 1st sing.
`atasi` from √`tan`.

882\. As examples of the inflection of this variety of sibilant aorist
we may take the roots नी `nī` *lead*, and छिद् `chid` *cut off*. Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अनैषम्  
`ánāiṣam`

अनैष्व  
`ánāiṣva`

अनैष्म  
`ánāiṣma`

अनेषि  
`áneṣi`

अनेष्वहि  
`áneṣvahi`

अनेष्महि  
`áneṣmahi`

2

अनैषीस्  
`ánāiṣīs`

अनैष्टम्  
`ánāiṣṭam`

अनैष्ट  
`ánāiṣṭa`

अनेष्टास्  
`áneṣṭhās`

अनेषाथाम्  
`áneṣāthām`

अनेढ्वम्  
`áneḍhvam`

3

अनैषीत्  
`ánāiṣīt`

अनैष्टाम्  
`ánāiṣṭām`

अनैषुस्  
`ánāiṣus`

अनेष्ट  
`áneṣṭa`

अनेषाताम्  
`áneṣātām`

अनेषत  
`áneṣata`

active.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अच्छैत्सम्  
`ácchāitsam`

अच्छैत्स्व  
`ácchāitsva`

अच्छैत्स्म  
`ácchāitsma`

2

अच्छैत्सीस्  
`ácchāitsīs`

अच्छैत्तम्  
`ácchāittam`

अच्छैत्त  
`ácchāitta`

3

अच्छैत्सीत्  
`ácchāitsīt`

अच्छैत्ताम्  
`ácchāittām`

अच्छैत्सुस्  
`ácchāitsus`

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अच्छित्सि  
`ácchitsi`

अच्छित्स्वहि  
`ácchitsvahi`

अच्छित्स्महि  
`ácchitsmahi`

2

अच्छित्थास्  
`ácchitthās`

अच्छित्साथाम्  
`ácchitsāthām`

अच्छिद्ध्वम्  
`ácchiddhvam`

3

अच्छित्त  
`ácchitta`

अच्छित्साताम्  
`ácchitsātām`

अच्छित्सत  
`ácchitsata`

  
a. From √`rudh` *obstruct*, the 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl. act. and the 2d
and 3d sing. mid. would be
`árāuddham, árāuddhām, árāuddha, áruddhās, áruddha`; from √`sṛj` *pour
out*, `ásrāṣṭam, ásrāṣṭām, asrāṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās, asṛṣṭa`; from √`dṛç`
*see*, `ádrāṣṭam` etc. (as from `sṛj`). But from √`kṛ` *do* the same
persons in the active are `ákārṣṭam, ákārṣṭām, ákārṣṭa`; from √`tan`
*stretch* they are `átāṅstam, átāṅstām, átāṅsta`.

883\. The omission of `s` in the active persons
(`ácchāittam, ácchāittām, ácchāitta`) is a case of very rare occurrence;
all the quotable examples were given above (233 e). As to the like
omission in middle persons, see 881. The ChU. has twice `ávāstam` for
`avāts`-`tam` (√`vas` *dwell*): this may be viewed as another case of
total disappearance of the sibilant, and consequent restoration of the
final radical to its original form. 

884\. Certain roots in `ā` weaken the `ā` in middle inflection to `i`
(as also in the root-aorist: above, 834 a): these are said to be
`sthā, dā`, and `dhā`; in the older language have been noted `ádiṣi` and
`adiṣata` from √`dā` *give* (and `adiṣi` perhaps once from √`dā`
*bind*), `adhiṣi` and `adhiṣata` (with the optative `dhiṣīya`) from
√`dhā` *put*, and `asthiṣata`; also `agīṣṭhās` and `agīṣata` from √`gā`
*go* (with `adhi`).

a\. The middle inflection of the aorist of √`dā` would be, then,
according to the grammarians:
`ádiṣi, ádithās, ádita; ádiṣvahi, ádiṣāthām, ádiṣātām; ádiṣmahi, ádiḍhvam, ádiṣata`.

885\. Roots ending in changeable `ṛ` (so-called roots in `ṝ`: 242) are
said by the grammarians to convert this vowel to `īr` in middle forms:
thus, `astīrṣi, astīrṣṭhās` etc. (from √`stṛ`); of such forms, however,
has been found in the older language only `akīrṣata`, PB.

886\. The `s`-aorist is made in the older language from about a hundred
and forty roots (in RV., from about seventy; in AV., from about fifty,
of which fifteen are additional to those in RV.); and the epic and
classical literature adds but a very small number. It has in the Veda
certain peculiarities of stem-formation and inflection, and also the
full series of modes — of which the optative middle is retained also
later as a part of the "precative" (but see 925 b).

887\. Irregularities of stem-formation are as follows:

a\. The strengthening of the root-syllable is now and then irregularly
made or omitted: thus, `ayokṣīt` (AB.), `chetsīs` (B.S.; also occurs in
MBh., which has further `yotsīs`), `rotsīs` (KU.); `amatsus` (RV.);
`ayāṁsi` and `arāutsi` (AB.), `asākṣi` etc. (V.B.: √`sah`), `māṅsta`
(AY.) and `māṅstām` (TA.); `lopsīya` (U.); and MBh. has `drogdhās`. From
√`saj` is made `sān̄kṣīt` (U. etc.), and from √`majj`, `amān̄kṣīt` (not
quotable). The form `ayun̄kṣmahi` (BhP.) is doubtless a false reading.

b\. A radical final nasal is lost in `agasmahi` (RV.) and `gasāthām`
(TA.) from √`gam`, and in the optatives `masīya` and `vasīmahi` (RV.)
from √√`man` and `van`.

c\. The roots `hū, dhū`, and `nū` have `ū` instead of `o` in the middle:
thus, `ahūṣata, adhūṣata, anūṣi` and `anūṣātām` and `anūṣata`; √`dhur`
(or `dhūrv`) makes `adhūrṣata`.

d\. ÇB. has once `atrāsatām` for `atrāstām` (√`trā`).

888\. The principal peculiarity of the older language in regard to
inflection is the frequent absence of `ī` in the endings of 2d and 3d
sing. act., and the consequent loss of the consonant-ending, and
sometimes of root-finals (150). The forms without `ī` are the only ones
found in RV. and K., and they outnumber the others in AV. and TS.; in
the Brāhmaṇas they grow rarer (only one, `adrāk`, occurs in GB.; one,
`ayāṭ`, in KB.; and two, `adrāk` and `ayāṭ`, in ÇB.; PB. has none). 

889\. If the root ends in a vowel, only the consonant of the ending is
necessarily lost: thus, `aprās` (for both `aprās-s` and `aprās-t`) from
√`prā`; and in like manner `ahās` from √`hā`; — `ajāis` (for `ajāiṣ-t`)
from √`ji`; and in like manner `acāis` from √`ci`, and `nāis`
(augmentless) from √`nī`; — and `yāus` (for `ayāuṣ-t`) from √`yu`.

a\. But (as in other like cases: 555 a) the ending is sometimes
preserved at the expense of the tense-sign; and we have in 3d sing.
`ajāit` (beside `ajāis` and `ajāiṣīt`) from √`ji`; and in like manner
`acāit, açrāit, ahāit, nāit` (no examples have been noted except from
roots in `i` and `ī`): compare `ayās` and `srās`, 2d sing., 890 a.

890\. a. If the root (in either its simple or strengthened form) ends in
a consonant, the tense-sign is lost with the ending. Thus, `abhār` (for
`abhārṣ-t`: beside `abhārṣam, abhārṣṭām`) from √`bhṛ`; other like cases
are `ahār`. and (from roots in `ar`) `akṣār, atsār, asvār, hvār`.
Further, `ārāik` (583 a: for `arāikṣ-t`) from √`ric`; like cases are
`açvāit` from √`çvit` and (from roots with medial `u`) `adyāut` from
√`dyut`, `arāut` from √`rudh`, and `māuk` from √`muc`. Further, from
roots ending in the palatals and `h`, `aprāk` from √`pṛc`, `asrāk` from
√`sṛj`, `abhāk` from √`bhaj`, `adrāk` from √`dṛç`, `adhāk` from √`dah`;
but, with a different change of the final, `ayāṭ` from √`yaj`, `aprāṭ`
from √`pṛch`, `avāṭ` from √`vah`, and `asrāṭ` from √`sṛj`; and (above,
146 a) `srās` appears to stand twice in AV. for `srāṣ-s` from √`sṛj`;
RV. has also twice `ayās` from √`yaj`. Further, from roots ending in a
nasal, `atān` from √`tan`, `khān` from √`khan`, `ayān` and `anān` from
√√`yam` and `nam` (143 a).

b\. If, again, the roots end in a double consonant, the latter of the
two is lost along with tense-sign and ending: thus, `acchān` (for
`acchānts-t`; beside `acchāntta` and `acchāntsus`) from √`chand`; and
other like cases are `akrān, askān`, and `asyān`.

891\. A relic of this peculiarity of the older inflection has been
preserved to the later language in the 2d sing. `bhāis`, from √`bhī`.

Modes of the `s`-aorist.

892\. The indicative forms without augment are used in a subjunctive
sense, especially after `mā́` prohibitive, and are not uncommon. Examples
with accent, however, are extremely rare; there has been noted only
`váṅsi`, middle; judging from this, the tone would be found on the
radical syllable. According to the Hindu grammarians, it may be laid on
either root or ending.

893\. Proper subjunctive forms are not rare in BV., but are markedly
less common in the later Vedic texts, and very seldom met with in the
Brāhmaṇas. They are regularly made with `guṇa`-strengthening of the
radical vowel, in both active and middle, and with accent on the root. 

a\. The forms with primary endings are: in active,
`stoṣāṇi; darṣasi; neṣati, parṣati, pāsati, matsati, yoṣati, vakṣati, sakṣati; dā́sathas, dhāsathas, párṣathas, vakṣathas, varṣathas; pāsatas, yaṁsatas, yakṣatas, vakṣatas; dhāsatha, neṣatha, párṣatha, mátsatha`;
— in middle,
`naṁsāi, máṅsāi; máṅsase; kraṁsate, trāsate, darṣate, máṅsate, yakṣate, rāsate, vaṅsate, sākṣate, hāsate; trā́sāthe`
(not `trāsāithe`, as we should rather expect); `náṁsante, máṅsante`:
and, with the fuller ending in 3d sing., `mā́sātāi`.

b\. The forms with secondary endings are (active only):
`jéṣas, vákṣas; dárṣat, néṣat, pákṣat, párṣat, préṣat, yákṣat, yóṣat, váṅsat, vákṣat, véṣat, sátsat, chantsat`,
etc. (some twenty others);
`yakṣatām; váṅsāma, sā́kṣāma, stoṣāma; parṣan, yaṁsan, yoṣan, rā́san, vakṣan, çéṣan, çróṣan`.
Of these, `yakṣat` and `vakṣat` are found not rarely in the Brāhmaṇas;
any others, hardly more than sporadically.

894\. Of irregularities are to be noted the following:

a\. The forms `dṛ́kṣase` and `pṛkṣase` (2d sing. mid.) lack the
`guṇa`-strengthening.

b\. `Jeṣam, stoṣam`, and `yoṣam` (AV. `yūṣam`, with `ū` for `o` as in
`anūṣata` etc.) appear to be first persons formed under government of
the analogy of the second and third — unless they are relics of a state
of things anterior to the `vṛddhi`-strengthening: in which case `jeṣma`
is to be compared with them (we should expect `jāiṣma` or `jeṣāma`).

c\. From roots in `ā` are made a few forms of problematic character:
namely, `yeṣam` (only case in RV.), `khyeṣam, jñeṣam, geṣam` and
`geṣma, deṣma, seṣam` and `set, stheṣam` and `stheṣus`. Their value is
optative. The analogy of `jeṣam` and `jeṣma` suggests the possibility of
their derivation from `i`-forms of the `ā`-roots; or the sibilant might
be of a precative character (thus, `yā-ī-s-am`). That they really belong
to the `iṣ`-aorist appears highly improbable.

d\. The RV. has a few difficult first persons middle in `se`, which are
perhaps best noted here. They are: 1. from the simple root, `kṛṣe, hiṣe`
(and `ohiṣe`?), `stuṣé`; 2. from present-stems,
`arcase, ṛñjase, yajase, gāyiṣe, gṛṇīṣé` and `punīṣé`. They have the
value of indicative present. Compare below, 897 b.

895\. Optative forms of this aorist are made in the middle only, and
they have in 2d and 3d sing. always the precative `s` before the
endings. Those found to occur in the older language are:
`diṣīya, dhiṣīya, bhakṣīyá, masīya` (for `maṅsīya`),
`mukṣīya, rāṣīya, lopsīya, sākṣīya, stṛṣīya; maṅsīṣṭhās; darṣīṣṭa, bhakṣīṣṭa, maṅsīṣṭha, mṛkṣīṣṭa; bhakṣīmahi, dhukṣīmáhi, maṅsīmáhi, vaṅsīmáhi, vasīmahi, sakṣīmáhi; maṅsīrata`.
PB. has `bhukṣiṣīya`, which should belong to a `siṣ`-aorist. The RV.
form `trā́sīthām` (for `trāsīyāthām` or `trāsāthām`) is an isolated
anomaly.

a\. This optative makes a part of the accepted "precative" of the later
language: see below, 923, 925 b. 

896\. Imperative persons from this aorist are extremely rare: we find
the 2d sing. act. `neṣa` and `parṣa` and the 2d pl. `yaṁsata` (from
`a`-stems, and showing rather, therefore, a treatment of the aorist-stem
as a root), and the 3d sing. mid. `rāsatām` and pl. `rāsantām` (of which
the same may be said).

Participles of the `s`-aorist.

897\. a. Active participles are `dákṣat` or `dhákṣat`, and `sákṣat`
(both RV.).

b\. If `ṛñjase` (above, 894 d) is to be reckoned as an `s`-aorist form,
`ṛñjasāná` is an `s`-aorist participle; and of a kindred character,
apparently, are
`arçasāná, óhasāna, jrayasāná, dhiyasāná, mandasāná, yamasāná, rabhasāná, vṛdhasāná, sahasāná, çavasāná`,
all in RV.; with `namasāná, bhiyásāna`, in AV. In RV. occurs also once
`dhī́ṣamāṇa`, apparently an `a`-form of an `s`-aorist of √`dhī`.

5\. The `iṣ`-aorist.

898\. The tense-stem of this aorist adds the general tense-sign स् `s`
by help of a prefixed auxiliary vowel इ `i`, making इष् `iṣ`, to the
root, which is usually strengthened, and which has the augment.

899\. The rules as to the strengthening of the root are as follows:

a\. A final vowel has `vṛddhi` in the active, and `guṇa` in the middle:
thus, अपाविष् `apāviṣ` and अपविष् `apaviṣ` from √पू `pū` *cleanse*;
अतारिष् `atāriṣ`, act., from √तृ `tṛ` *pass*; अशयिष् `açayiṣ`, mid.,
from √शी `çī` *lie*.

b\. A medial vowel has `guṇa`, if capable of it, in both voices: thus,
अलेशिष् `aleçiṣ`, act. and mid., from √लिश् `liç` *tear*; अरोचिष्
`arociṣ`, from √रुच् `ruc` *shine*; अवर्षिष् `avarṣiṣ` from √वृष् `vṛṣ`
*rain*; but अजीविष् `ajīviṣ` from √जीव् `jīv` *live*.

c\. Medial अ `a` is sometimes lengthened in the active; but it more
usually remains unchanged in both voices.

d\. The roots in the older language which show the lengthening are
`kan, tan, ran, stan, svan, nan, vraj, sad, mad, car, tsar, svar, jval, das, tras`.
From `ran, san, kram, vad, rakṣ`, and `sah` occur forms of both kinds.
From √`math` or `manth` are made the two stems `mathiṣ` and `manthiṣ`. 

900\. a. Of exceptions may be noted: √`mṛj` has (as elsewhere: 627)
`vṛddhi` instead of `guṇa`: thus, `amārjiṣam`; √`stṛ` has `astarīs`, and
√`çṛ` has `açarīt` (also `açarāit` in AV.), with `guṇa` in active.

b\. The root `grabh` or `grah` has (as in future etc., below, 936 e,
956) long `ī` instead of `i` before the sibilant: thus,
`agrabhīṣma, agrahīṣṭa, agrabhīṣata`. The roots in changeable `ṛ`
(so-called roots in `ṝ`: 242), and √`vṛ` are said by the grammarians to
do the same optionally; but no forms with long `ī` from such roots have
been found quotable. A Sūtra (PGS.) has once `anayīṣṭa` from √`nī`
(doubtless a false reading).

901\. The endings are as in the preceding formation (उस् `us` and अत
`ata` in 3d pl.). But in 2d and 3d sing., the combinations `iṣ`-`s` and
`iṣ`-`t` are from the earliest period of the language contracted into
ईस् `īs` and ईत् `īt`.

a\. The 2d pl. mid. should end always in `iḍhvam` (or `iḍḍhvam`, from
`iṣ`-`dhvam`: 226); and this is in fact the form in the only examples
quotable, namely `ajaniḍhvam, artiḍhvam, āindhiḍhvam, vepiḍhvam`; as to
the rules of the native grammarians respecting the matter, see 226 c.

902\. As examples of the inflection of the `iṣ`-aorist may be taken the
roots पू `pū` *cleanse*, and बुध् `budh` *wake*. Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अपाविषम्  
`ápāviṣam`

अपाविष्व  
`ápāviṣva`

अपाविष्म  
`ápāviṣma`

अपविषि  
`ápaviṣi`

अपविष्वहि  
`ápaviṣvahi`

अपविष्महि  
`ápaviṣmahi`

2

अपावीस्  
`ápāvīs`

अपाविष्टम्  
`ápāviṣṭam`

अपाविष्ट  
`ápāviṣṭa`

अपविष्ठास्  
`ápaviṣṭhās`

अपविषाथाम्  
`ápaviṣāthām`

अपविढ्वम्  
`ápaviḍhvam`

3

अपावीत्  
`ápāvīt`

अपाविष्टाम्  
`ápāviṣṭām`

अपाविषुस्  
`ápāviṣus`

अपविष्ट  
`ápaviṣṭa`

अपविषाताम्  
`ápaviṣātām`

अपविषत  
`ápaviṣata`

1

अबोधिषम्  
`ábodhiṣam`

अबोधिष्व  
`ábodhiṣva`

अबोधिष्म  
`ábodhiṣma`

अबोधिषि  
`ábodhiṣi`

अबोधिष्वहि  
`ábodhiṣvahi`

अबोधिष्महि  
`ábodhiṣmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

903\. The number of roots from which forms of this aorist have been
noted in the older language is nearly a hundred and fifty (in RV., about
eighty; in AV., more than thirty, of which a dozen are additional to
those in RV.); the later texts add less than twenty. Among these are no
roots in `ā`; but otherwise they are of every variety of form (rarest in
final `i` and `ī`). Active and middle persons are freely made, but
sparingly from the same root; only about fifteen roots have both active
and middle forms in the older language, and of these a part only
exceptionally in the one voice or the other.

a\. No rale appears to govern the choice of usage between the `iṣ`- and
the `s`-aorist; and in no small number of cases the same root shows
forms of both classes.

904\. Irregularities are to be noticed as follows:

a\. The contracted forms `akramīm, agrabhīm`, and `avadhīm` (with
augmentless `vádhīm`) are found in 1st sing. act.

b\. For áçarīt occurs in AV. `áçarāit`; also (in a part of the
manuscripts) `çarāis` for `çarīs`; `agrahāiṣam` is found in AB. (also
the monstrous form `ajagrabhāiṣam`: see 801 i). `Ajayit`, with short `i`
in the ending, occurs in TS.

c\. AV. has once `nudiṣṭhās`, without `guṇa`.

d\. The forms `atārima` (RV.), `avādiran` (AV.), and `bādhithās` (TA.),
though they lack the sibilant, are perhaps to be referred to this
aorist: compare `avitá`, 908. A few similar cases occur in the epics,
and are of like doubtful character: thus,
`jānithās, mādithās, vartithās, çan̄kithās`, and (the causative: 1048)
`aghātayithās`. `Agṛhītām` and `gṛhīthās` and `gṛhīta`, if not false
readings for `gṛhṇī`-, are probably irregular present-formations.

Modes of the `iṣ`-aorist.

905\. As usual, augmentless indicative forms of this aorist are more
common than proper subjunctives. Examples, of all the persons found to
occur (and including all the accented words), are, in the active:
`çáṅsiṣam, vádhīm; máthīs, vádhīs, yā́vīs, sā́vīs; ávīt, jū́rvīt, máthīt, vádhīt, veçīt; mardhiṣṭam, doṣiṣṭam, hiṅsiṣṭam; aviṣṭām, jániṣṭām, bādhiṣṭām; çramiṣma, vādiṣma; vadhiṣṭa`
and `vadhiṣṭana, mathiṣṭana, hiṅsiṣṭa; hvāriṣus, grahīṣus`; — in the
middle:
`rādhiṣi; jániṣṭhās, marṣiṣṭhās, vyathiṣṭhās; krámiṣṭa, jániṣṭa, paviṣṭa, práthiṣṭa, mándiṣṭa; vyathiṣmahi`.
The accent is on the root-syllable (`tāriṣús`, AV. once, is doubtless an
error).

906\. a. Of subjunctive forms with primary endings occur only the 1st
sing. act. `daviṣāṇi`, and the 1st pl. mid. (with unstrengthened `e`)
`yāciṣāmahe` and `saniṣāmahe`.

b\. Forms with secondary endings are almost limited to 2d and 3d sing.
act. There are found:
`aviṣas, kā́niṣas, tāriṣas, rakṣiṣas, vádhiṣas; vā́diṣas, véṣiṣas, çaṅsiṣas; kā́riṣat, jambhiṣat, jóṣiṣat, takṣiṣat, tāriṣat, níndiṣat, pā́riṣat, bódhiṣat, márdhiṣat, yāciṣat, yodhiṣat, rakṣiṣat, vaniṣat, vyathiṣat, çaṅsiṣat, saniṣat, sāviṣat`.
They are made, it will be noticed, with entire regularity, by adding `a`
to the tense-stem in `iṣ` before the endings. The only other persons
found to occur are the 3d pl. act. `saniṣan` and mid. `sániṣanta` (and
TS. has `vaniṣanta`, for the problematic `vanuṣanta` of RV.), which are
also regular. `Bhaviṣāt` (AB. once) is a solitary example of a form with
double mode-sign; `cániṣṭhat` (RV.; SV. instead `jániṣṭhat`) seems
hopelessly corrupt. The radical syllable always has the accent, and its
vowel usually accords with that of the indicative: but we have `san`- in
the subjunctive against `asāniṣam` (as to `cay`- and `ran`-, see below,
908).

907\. The middle optative of this aorist also forms a part of the
accepted "precative" of the later language (923, 925 b). It is very rare
at all periods, being made in RV. from only five roots, and in AV. from
two of the same and from three additional ones (six of the eight have
other `iṣ`-forms); and the remaining texts add, so far as noticed, only
four other roots. All the forms found to occur are as follows:
`janiṣīya, indhiṣīya, edhiṣīyá, ruciṣīya and rociṣīya, gmiṣīya; modiṣīṣṭhās; janiṣīṣṭa; vaniṣīṣṭa; sahiṣīvahi; idhiṣīmahi, edhiṣīmáhi, janiṣīmahi, tāriṣīmahi, mandiṣīmahi, vandiṣīmáhi, vardhiṣīmáhi, sahiṣīmahi`
and `sāhiṣīmáhi`. The accent is on the ending, and this would lead us to
expect a weak form of root throughout; but the usage in this respect
appears to be various, and the cases are too few to allow of setting up
any rule. The forms `janiṣeyam` and -`ya`, from a secondary `a`-stem,
occur in K.

908\. Of imperative forms, we have from √`av` a series: namely,
`aviḍḍhí, aviṣṭu, aviṣṭám, avitá` (if this, as seems probable, stands
anomalously for `aviṣṭá`) and `aviṣṭána`; two of these are of
unmistakably imperative form. Other forms occur only in 2d du. and 2d
pl., and are accordingly such as might also be subjunctives used
imperatively (which is further made probable for two of them by their
accentuation on the root-syllable): they are
`kramiṣṭam, gamiṣṭam, caniṣṭám, cayiṣṭam` (against `acāyiṣam`),
`tā́riṣṭam, yodhiṣṭam, vadhiṣṭam, çnathiṣṭam; ráṇiṣṭana` (against
`arāṇiṣus`), `çnathiṣṭana`.

909\. No words having a participial ending after `iṣ` are found anywhere
to occur.

910\. This is the only aorist of which forms are made in the secondary
and denominative conjugations: see below, 1035, 1048, 1068.

6\. The `siṣ`-aorist.

911\. According to the grammarians, this aorist is made from roots in आ
`ā` (including मि `mi` *fix*, मि `mi` (or `mī`) *damage* and ली `Iī`
*cling*, which substitute forms in `ā`), and from नम् `nam` *bow*, यम्
`yam` *reach*, and रम् `ram` *be content*, and is used only in the
active; the corresponding middle being of the `s`-form (878 ff.). Its
inflection is precisely like that of the `iṣ`-aorist; it is unnecessary,
then, to give more than its first persons, which we may form from the
roots या `yā` *go* and नम् `nam` *low*. Thus:

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अयासिषम्  
`áyāsiṣam`

अयासिष्व  
`áyāsiṣva`

अयासिष्म  
`áyāsiṣma`

अनंसिषम्  
`ánaṁsiṣam`

अनंसिष्व  
`ánaṁsiṣva`

अनंसिष्म  
`ánaṁsiṣma`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

912\. The `siṣ`-aorist is properly only a sub-form of the `iṣ`-aorist,
having the tense-sign and endings of the latter added to a form of root
increased by an added s. It is of extreme rarity in the older language,
being made in RV. only from the roots `gā` *sing* and `yā` *go*, and in
AV. only from `hā` *leave*, and doubtless also from `pyā` *fill up* and
`van` *win* (see below, 914 b); the remaining older texts add `jñā`
*know* (B.), `jyā` *overpower*, `dhyā` *think* (ÇB. once: the edition
reads -dhā-), and `ram` *be content* (SV.: a bad variant for RY.
`rāsīya`); other Brāhmaṇa forms which might be also of the `s`-aorist
are `adrāsīt, avāsīt`, and `ahvāsīt`; and `bhukciṣīya` (PB. S.) must be
regarded as an anomalous formation from √`bhuj`, unless we prefer to
admit a secondary root `bhukṣ`, like `bhakṣ` from `bhaj`. In the later
language have been found quotable from other roots only
`glāsīs, adhmāsīt, anaṁsīt, apāsīt, mlāsīs`, and `amnāsiṣus`.

a\. The participle `hā́samāna` and causative `hāsayanti` (RV.) show that
`hās` had assumed, even at a very early period, the value of a secondary
root beside `hā` for other forms than the aorist.

913\. The whole series of older indicative forms (omitting, as doubtful,
the 2d and 3d sing.) is as follows:
`agāsiṣam, ajñāsiṣam, ayāsiṣam, adhyāsiṣam; ajyāsiṣṭām, ayāsiṣṭām; ajñāsiṣma; ajñāsiṣṭa, áyāsiṣṭa; agāsiṣus, ayāsiṣus`
(`ākṣiṣus` is from √`akṣ` *attain*).

a\. Forms without augment are these:
`jñāsiṣam, raṁsiṣam, hāsiṣam; hāsiṣṭam; hāsiṣṭām; hāsiṣṭa; hāsiṣus, gāsiṣus, jñāsiṣus`.
The accent would doubtless be upon the root-syllable.

914\. a. Of proper subjunctives are found two, `gāsiṣat` and `yāsiṣat`
(both RV.).

b\. Optatives are not less rare: namely, `yāsisīṣṭhas` and `pyāsiṣīmahi`
(for which the AV. manuscripts read `pyāçiṣīmahi`, altered in the
edition to `pyāyiṣ`-); and doubtless `vaṅçiṣīya` (AV., twice) is to be
corrected to `vaṅsiṣīya`, and belongs here. As to `bhukṣiṣīya`, see
above, 912.

c\. The accent of `yāsiṣṭám` (like `aviṣṭám`, 908) shows it to be a true
imperative form; and `yāsīṣṭa` (RV., once) is doubtless the same, with
anomalous `ī` for `i`.

915\. Middle forms of this aorist, it will be noticed, occur from the
optative only; but, considering the great rarity of the whole formation,
we are hardly justified in concluding that in the ancient language the
middle persons in -`siṣi`, -`siṣṭhās`, etc., were not allowable, like
those in -`iṣi`, -`iṣṭhās`, and the others of the `iṣ`-aorist. 

7\. The `sa`-aorist.

916\. In the later language, the roots allowed to form this aorist end
in श् `ç`, ष् `ṣ`, or ह् `h` — all of them sounds which in combination
with the tense-sign make क्ष् `kṣ`; and they have इ `i`, उ `u`, or ऋ `ṛ`
as radical vowel.

a\. They are as follows:
`diç, riç, liç, viç, kliç, kruç, ruç, mṛç, spṛç; tviṣ, dviṣ, çliṣ, viṣ, kṛṣ; dih, mih, lih, guh, duh, ruh, tṛh, vṛh, stṛh`;
from about half of them `sa`-forms, earlier or later, are quotable. Some
of them may, or with certain meanings must, take aorists of other forms.
And a few are allowed to drop both tense-sign and union-vowel `a` in
certain persons of the middle: that is, they may make instead forms of
the root-aorist.

917\. As the tense-stem ends in अ `a`, the inflection is in the main
like that of an imperfect of the second general conjugation. But
(according to the grammarians: the forms unfortunately have not been
found quotable) the 1st sing. mid. ends in इ `i` instead of ए `e`, and
the 2d and 3d du. mid. in आथाम् `āthām` and आताम् `ātām`, as in
imperfects of the other conjugation. Both active and middle inflection
is admitted. The root is throughout unstrengthened.

918\. As example of inflection we may take the root दिश् `diç` *point*.
Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अदिक्षम्  
`ádikṣam`

अदिक्षाव  
`ádikṣāva`

अदिक्षाम  
`ádikṣāma`

अदिक्षि  
`ádikṣi`

अदिक्षावहि  
`ádikṣāvahi`

अदिक्षामहि  
`ádikṣāmahi`

2

अदिक्षस्  
`ádikṣas`

अदिक्षतम्  
`ádikṣatam`

अदिक्षत  
`ádikṣata`

अदिक्षाथास्  
`ádikṣāthās`

अदिक्षाथाम्  
`ádikṣāthām`

अदिक्षध्वम्  
`ádikṣādhvam`

3

अदिक्षित्  
`ádikṣat`

अदिक्षताम्  
`ádikṣatām`

अदिक्षन्  
`ádikṣan`

अदिक्षत  
`ádikṣata`

अदिक्षाताम्  
`ádikṣātām`

अदिक्षन्त  
`ádikṣanta`

919\. In the earlier language, the forms of the `sa`-aorist are hardly
more than sporadic. They are made in RV. from seven roots; in AV., from
two of these and from two others; and the remaining texts add ten more,
making nineteen in all (the later language makes no additions to this
number). As later, all have `i` or `u` or `ṛ` as root-vowel, and a final
consonant which combines with `s` to `kṣ`; but there are in the list
also two ending in `j`, namely `mṛj` and `vṛj`. All the examples noted
are given below.

a\. So far as the middle forms are concerned, this aorist would be fully
explained as a transfer of certain `s`-aorists to an `a`-inflection. The
marked difference in the strength of radical vowel in the active,
however, stands in the way of the successful application of such an
explanation to the active forms.

920\. a. In the indicative, we find, in the active:
`avṛkṣam; adrukṣas, adhukṣas, arukṣas, akrukṣas, aspṛkṣas` (and MBh.
adds `amṛkṣas`);
`adikṣat, amikṣat, alikṣat, avikṣat, ákrukṣat, aghukṣat, adukṣat` and
`ádhukṣat, árukṣat, avṛkṣat, akṛkṣat, ámṛkṣat, áspṛkṣat; aghukṣatām; arukṣāma, amṛkṣāma, avṛkṣāma; ádhukṣan, apikṣan`
(√`piṣ`), `arukṣan, aspṛkṣan`; — in the middle, only `akṛkṣathās`
(√`kṛṣ`), `ádhukṣata`, and `amṛkṣanta` (and MBh. adds `amṛkṣata`?).

b\. Forms without augment (no true subjunctives occur) are, in the
active:
`dṛkṣam, mṛkṣam; dukṣas, rukṣas, mṛkṣas; dvikṣat; mṛkṣata; dhukṣán` and
`dukṣán`; — in the middle, `dvikṣata, dukṣata` and
`dhúkṣata, dhukṣánta`.

c\. There are no optative forms.

d\. Imperative are: in the active, `mṛkṣatam`; in the middle,
`dhukṣásva`.

e\. The few accented forms without augment which occur have the tone on
the tense-sign `sá`, in analogy with the `a`-aorist (2) and the
imperfect of the `á`-class: a single exception is `dhúkṣata`, which
probably needs emendation to `dhukṣáta`.

f\. The aspiration of initial `d` and `g`, after loss of the aspirated
quality of the root-final (155), is seen in forms from the roots `duh`
and `guh`, but not from `druh` (only a single case, AB.); RV., however,
has also `adukṣat` and `dukṣas, dukṣán, dukṣata`.

Precative.

921\. As the so-called precative is allowed by the grammarians to be
made in the later language from every root, and in an independent way,
without reference to the mode of formation of the aorist from the same
root, it is desirable to put together here a brief statement of the
rules given for it.

922\. The precative active is made by adding the active precative
endings (above, 568) directly to the root. But:

a\. Of final root-vowels (as before the passive-sign `yá`: 770), `i` and
`u` are lengthened; `ṛ` is usually changed to `ri`, but to `īr` and `ūr`
in those roots which elsewhere show `ir`- and `ur`- forms (so-called
`ṝ`-roots: 242), and to `ar` in `ṛ` and `smṛ`; `ā` is changed to `e` in
the roots `dā, dhā, sthā, pā` *drink*, `gā` *sing*, and a few others, in
part optionally. 

b\. The root in general assumes its weakest form: a penultimate nasal is
lost, as in `badhyāsam` from √`bandh`; the roots which are abbreviated
in the weak persons of the perfect (794) have the same abbreviation
here, as in `ucyāsam, ijyāsam, vidhyāsam, supyāsam, gṛhyāsam`; √`çās`
forms `çiṣyāsam` (compare 639, 854 c): and so on.

c\. It has been pointed out above (837) that the active precative is an
optative of the root-aorist, with a problematic insertion of a sibilant
between mode-sign and ending.

923\. a. The precative middle is made by adding the middle precative
endings (above, 568) to the root increased by स् `s` or इष् `iṣ` — that
is, to the tense-stem of an `s`-aorist or of an `iṣ`-aorist (but without
augment).

b\. The root is strengthened according to the rules that apply in
forming the middle-stem of the `s` and of the `iṣ`-aorists respectively:
in general, namely, a final vowel is gunated in both formations; but a
medial vowel, only before इष् `iṣ`.

c\. As was pointed out above (567) the middle precative is really the
optative of certain aorists, with the insertion of a sibilant between
mode-sign and ending only (so far as authenticated by use) in the 2d and
3d singular. In the older language, such forms are oftenest made from
the `s`-aorist (895) and the `iṣ`-aorist (907); but also from the
root-aorist (837 b), the `a`-aorist (850 a), the reduplicated aorist
(870), and the `siṣ`-aorist (914 b); and even from the perfect (812 b).

924\. As example of inflection, we may take the root भू `bhū` *be*,
which is said (no middle aorist or precative from it is quotable) to
form its middle on the `iṣ`-stem. Thus:

active.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

भूयासम्  
`bhūyā́sam`

भूयास्व  
`bhūyā́sva`

भूयास्म  
`bhūyā́sma`

2

भूयास्  
`bhūyā́s`

भूयास्तम्  
`bhūyā́stam`

भूयास्त  
`bhūyā́sta`

3

भूयात्  
`bhūyā́t`

भूयास्ताम्  
`bhūyā́stām`

भूयासुस्  
`bhūyā́sus` 

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

भविषीय  
`bhaviṣīyá`

भविषीवहि  
`bhaviṣīváhi`

भविषीमहि  
`bhaviṣīmáhi`

2

भविषीष्ठास्  
`bhaviṣīṣṭhā́s`

भविषीयास्थाम्  
`bhaviṣīyā́sthām`

भविषीढ्वम्  
`bhaviṣīḍhvám`

3

भविषीष्ट  
`bhaviṣīṣṭá`

भविषीयास्ताम्  
`bhaviṣīyā́stām`

भविषीरन्  
`bhaviṣīrán`

a\. The forms given by the grammarians as 2d and 3d dual are of very
questionable value, as regards the place assigned to the sibilant. Those
persons, and the 2d pl., have never been met with in use. For the
question respecting the ending of the 2d pl., as `dhvam` or `ḍhvam`, see
226 c.

925\. a. The precative active is a form of very rare occurrence in the
classical language. In each of the texts already more than once referred
to (Manu, Nala, Bhagavad-Gītā, Çakuntalā, Hitopadeça) it occurs once and
no more, and not half-a-dozen forms have been found quotable from the
epics. As to its value, see 573 c.

b\. The precative middle is virtually unknown in the whole later
literature, not a single occurrence of it having been brought to light.
The BhP. has once `rīriṣīṣṭa`, which is also a RV. form, belonging
probably to the reduplicated aorist: see 870.

Uses of the Aorist.

926\. The uses of the aorist mode-forms (as has been already pointed
out: 582) appear to accord with those of the mode-forms of the
present-system. The predilection of the earlier language, continued
sparingly in the later, for the augmentless forms in prohibitive
expression after `mā́` was sufficiently stated and illustrated above
(579).

a\. The tense-value of the aorist indicative has also been more than
once referred to, and calls only for somewhat more of detail and for
illustration here.

927\. The aorist of the later language is simply a preterit, equivalent
to the imperfect and perfect, and frequently coördinated with them.

a\. Thus,
`tataḥ sa gardabhaṁ laguḍena tāḍayāmāsa; tenā ’sāu pañcatvam agamat`
(H.) *thereupon he beat the donkey with a stick; and hereof the latter
died*; `tataḥ sā vidarbhān agamat punaḥ; tāṁ tu bandhujanaḥ samapūjayat`
(MBh.) *thereupon she went back to Vidarbha; and her kindred paid her
reverence*; `prītimān abhūt, uvāca` `cāi ’nam` (MBh.) *he was filled
with affection, and said to him*;
`tam adahat kāṣṭhāiḥ so ‘bhūd divyavapus tadā` (R.) *he burned him with
wood, and he became then a heavenly form*.

928\. The aorist of the older language has the value of a proper
"perfect": that is, it signifies something past which is viewed as
completed with reference to the present; and it requires accordingly to
be rendered by our tense made with the auxiliary *have*. In general, it
indicates what has just taken place; and oftenest something which the
speaker has experienced.

a\. Examples from the Veda are:
`párī ’mé gā́m aneṣata páry agním ahṛṣata, devéṣv akrata çrávaḥ ká imā́n ā́ dadharṣati`
(RV.) *these here have led about a cow, they have carried around the
fire, they have done honor to the gods — who shall venture anything
against them?* `yám āíchāma mánasā sò ‘yám ā́ ’gāt` (RV.) *he whom we*
(*formerly*, impf.) *sought with our mind has* (*now*, aor.) *come*;
`yéné ’ndro havíṣā kṛtvy ábhavad dyumny ùttamáḥ, idáṁ tád akri devā asapatnáḥ kílā ’bhuvam`
(RV.) *that libation by which Indra, making it, became* (impf.) *of
highest glory, I have now made, ye gods; I have become free from
enemies*.

b\. Examples from the Brāhmaṇa language are:
`sā́ hā ’smiñ jyóg uvāsa... táto ha gandharvā́ḥ sám ūdire: jyóg vā́ iyám urváçī manuṣyèṣv avātsīt`
(ÇB.) *she lived with him a long time. Then the Gandharvas said to one
another, "this Urvaçī, forsooth, hath dwelt a long time among mortals"*;
`tasya ha dantāḥ pedire: taṁ ho ’vāca: apatsata vā asya dantāḥ` (AB.)
*his teeth fell out. He said to him: "his teeth truly have fallen out"*;
`índrasya vṛtráṁ jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryàm pṛthivī́m ánu vy ā̀rchat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho ‘bhavan sá prajapā́tim úpā ’dhāvad vṛtrám me jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryàm pṛthivī́m ánu vy ā̀rat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho ‘bhūvann íti`
(TS.) *of Indra, when he had slain Vritra, the force and might went away
into the earth, and became the herbs and plants; he ran to Prajāpati,
saying: "my force and might, after slaying Vritra, have gone away into
the earth, and have become the herbs and plants"*;
`svayám enam abhyudétya brūyād vrā́tya kvā̀ ’vātsīḥ` (AV., in prose
passage) *going up to him in person, let him say: "Vrātya, where hast
thou abode"?*
`yád idā́nīṁ dvāú vivádamānāv eyā́tām ahám adarçam ahám açrāuṣam íti yá evá brūyā́d ahám adarçam íti tásmā evá çráddadhyāma`
(ÇB.) *if now two should come disputing with one another, \[the one\]
saying "I have seen", \[the other\] "I have heard", we should believe
the one who said "I have seen"*.

929\. a. This distinction of the aorist from the imperfect and perfect
as tenses of narration is very common in the Brāhmaṇalanguage (including
the older Upanishads and the Sūtras), and is closely observed; violation
of it is very rare, and is to be regarded as either due to corruption of
text or indicative of a late origin.

b\. In the Vedic hymns, the same distinction is prevalent, but is both
less clear and less strictly maintained; many passages would admit an
interpretation implying either sense; and evident aorist-forms are
sometimes used narratively, while imperfect-forms are also occasionally
employed in the aorist sense.

930\. The boundary between what has just been and what is is an
evanescent one, and is sometimes overstepped, so that an aorist appears
where a present might stand, or was even rather to be expected. Thus:
`svāsasthe bhavatam indave na iti somo vāi rāje ’nduḥ somāyāi ’vāi ’ne etad rājña āsade ‘cīkḷpat`
(AB. i. 29. 7) *"be ye comfortable seats for our Indu", he says; Indu is
king Soma; by this means he has made them* (instead of *makes them*)
*suitable for king Soma to sit upon*;
`vāruṇī́r ā́po yád adbhír abhiṣiñcáti váruṇam evāí ’nam akar` (MS. iv. 3.
10) *the waters are Varuna's; in that he bepours him with waters, he has
made him Varuna*;
`pañcábhir vyā́ghārayati pā́n̄kto yajñó yā́vān evá yajñás tám ā́labdhā́ ’tho yā́vān evá yajñás tásmād rákṣāṅsy ápahanti`
(MS. iii. 2. 6) *he smears with five; fivefold is the offering; as great
as is the offering, of it he has \[thereby\] taken hold; then, as great
as is the offering, from it he smites away the demons*. This idiom is
met with in all the Brāhmaṇas; but it is especially frequent in the MS.
