+++
title = "16 Chapter XII FUTURE-SYSTEMS"

+++




## CHAPTER XII.

  

THE FUTURE-SYSTEMS.

931\. THE verb has two futures, of very different age and character. The
one has for tense-sign a sibilant followed by य `ya`, and is an
inheritance from the time of Indo-European unity. The other is a
periphrastic formation, made by appending an auxiliary verb to a
derivative noun of agency, and it is a recent addition to the
verb-system; its beginnings only are met with in the earliest language.
The former may be called the `s`-future (or the old future, or simply
the future); the latter may be distinguished as the periphrastic future.


I. The `s`-future.

932\. The tense-sign of this future is the syllable स्य `syá`, added to
the root either directly or by an auxiliary vowel इ `i` (in the latter
case becoming इष्य `iṣyá`). The root has the `guṇa`-strengthening. Thus,
from √दा `dā` *give* is formed the future tense-stem दास्य `dāsyá`; from
√इ `i` *go*, the stem एष्य `eṣyá`; from √दुह् `duh` *milk*, the stem
धोक्ष्य `dhokṣyá`; from √भू `bhū` *be*, the stem भविष्य `bhaviṣyá`; from
√ऋध् `ṛdh` *thrive*, the stem अर्धिष्य `ardhiṣyá`; and so on.

a\. But from √`jīv` *live* the stem is `jīviṣyá`, from √`ukṣ` *sprinkle*
it is `ukṣiṣyá`, and so on (240).

b\. There are hardly any Vedic cases of resolution of the tense-sign
`sya` into `sia`; RV. has `kṣeṣiántas` once.

933\. This tense-stem is then inflected precisely like a present-stem
ending in अ `a` (second general conjugation: 733 a). We may take as
models of inflection the future of √दा `dā` *give*, and that of √कृ `kṛ`
*make*. Thus:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

दास्यामि  
`dāsyā́mi`

दास्यावस्  
`dāsyā́vas`

दास्यामस्  
`dāsyā́mas`

दास्ये  
`dāsyé`

दास्यावहे  
`dāsyā́vahe`

दास्यामहे  
`dāsyā́mahe`

2

दास्यसि  
`dāsyási`

दास्यथस्  
`dāsyáthas`

दास्यथ  
`dāsyátha`

दास्यसे  
`dāsyáse`

दास्येथे  
`dāsyéthe`

दास्यध्वे  
`dāsyádhve`

3

दास्यति  
`dāsyáti`

दास्यतस्  
`dāsyátas`

दास्यन्ति  
`dāsyánti`

दास्यते  
`dāsyáte`

दास्येते  
`dāsyéte`

दास्यन्ते  
`dāsyánte`

1

करिष्यामि  
`kariṣyā́mi`

करिष्यावस्  
`kariṣyā́vas`

करिष्यामस्  
`kariṣyā́mas`

करिष्ये  
`kariṣyé`

करिष्यावहे  
`kariṣyā́vahe`

करिष्यामहे  
`kariṣyā́mahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. In the epics are found occasional cases of 1st du. and pl. in `va`
and `ma`: e. g. `raṁsyāva` (R.), `bhakṣayiṣyāva` (causative: MBh.);
`eṣyāma` (MBh.), `vatsyāma` (R.).

934\. With regard to the use or non-use of the auxiliary vowel `i`
before the sibilant, there is a degree of general accordance between
this tense and the other future and the desiderative; but it is by no
means absolute, nor are any definite rules to be laid down with regard
to it (and so much the less, because of the infrequency of the two
latter formations in actual use): between this and the aorist
(`s`aorist on the one side, or `iṣ`-aorist on the other), any
correspondence is still less traceable. Practically, it is necessary to
learn, as a matter of usage, how any given root makes these various
parts of its conjugational system.

935\. Below is added a statement of the usage, as regards the auxiliary
vowel, of all the roots found quotable — for the most part, in the form
of a specification of those which add the tense-sign directly to the
root; in brackets are further mentioned the other roots which according
to the grammarians also refuse the auxiliary vowel.

a\. Of roots ending in vowels, the great majority (excepting those in
`ṛ`) take no `i`. Thus, all in `ā` (numerous, and unnecessary to
specify: but compare c below); those in `i`, as `kṣi` *possess*, `ci`
*gather*, `ci` *note*, `mi, si` or `sā` *bind* (`siṣya`), `hi`; from
`i`, `kṣi` *destroy*, and `ji` occur forms of both classes; `çri` \[and
`çvi`\] has `i`; — those in `ī`, as `krī, bhī, mī, vlī`; but `çī` *lie*
and `nī` have both forms \[and `ḍī` takes `i`\]; — those in `u`, as
`cyu, dru, plu, çru, hu`; but `su` *press out* and `stu` have both forms
\[and `kṣu, kṣṇu, nu, yu, ru, snu` take `i`\]; — of those in `ū, dhū`
and `bhū` take `i; sū` has both forms. But all in `ṛ` (numerous, and
unnecessary to specify) take `i` \[those in changeable `ṛ`, for
so-called `ṝ`-roots (242), are said by the grammarians to take either
`i` or `ī`; no `ī`-forms, however, are quotable\].

b\. Of roots ending in mutes, about half add the tense-sign directly.
Thus, of roots ending in gutturals, `çak`; — in palatals: in
`c, pac, muc, ric, vac, vic, vraçc, sic` (but `yāc` takes `i`); in
`ch, prach`; in `j`, `bhañj, mṛj` (`mārkṣya` and `mrakṣya`),
`yaj, bhuj, yuj, vṛj, sṛj` \[also
`bhrajj, rañj, sañj, svañj, nij, ruj`\], while `tyaj, bhaj`, and `majj`
(`man̄kṣya` and `majjiṣya`) have both forms, and `vij` (`vijiṣya` and
`vejiṣya`) and `vraj` take `i`; — in dentals: in `t`, `kṛt` *cut* and
`vṛt` \[also `cṛt` and `nṛt`\] make both forms; in `d, ad, pad, çad`
*fall*, `skand, syand, chid, bhid, vid` *find*, `nud` \[also
`had, khid, svid, kṣud, tud`\]; while `sad` (`satsya` and `sīdiṣya`) and
`vid` *know* make both forms \[also `chṛd` and `tṛd`\], and `vad` has
`i`; in `dh`, `vyadh` (`vetsya`), `rādh`, `sidh` *succeed*,
`budh, yudh, rudh, vṛdh`. \[also `sādh, krudh, kṣudh, çudh`\], and
`bandh` and `sidh` *repel* have both forms; in `n, tan`, while `man` and
`han` have both forms; — in labials: in `p, āp, kṣip, gup, tṛp, sṛp`
(`srapsya` and `sarpsya`) \[also `çap, lip, lup`\], while
`tap, vap, svap, dṛp`, and `kḷp` have both forms; in `bh, yabh` and
`rabh, labh` having both forms; in `m, ram`, while `kram, kṣam, nam`,
and `yam` make both forms.

c\. Of the roots reckoned by the grammarians as ending in semivowels
(761 d–g) all take `i`. And `vā` or `vi` *weave*, `vyā` or `vī`
*envelop*, and `hvā` or `hū` *call* take a `y`-form, as in their
present-system, to which then `i` is added: thus,
`vayiṣya, vyayiṣya, hvayiṣya` (but also `hvāsya`).

d\. Of roots ending in spirants, the minority (about a third) are
without the auxiliary vowel. They are: roots in `ç, diç, viç, dṛç`
(`drakṣya`), `spṛç` (`sprakṣya`) \[also `daṅç, riç, liç, kruç, mṛç`\],
while `naç` *be lost* has both forms (`nan̄kṣya` and `naçiṣya`); in
`ṣ, piṣ, viṣ, çiṣ` \[also `tviṣ, dviṣ, çliṣ, tuṣ, duṣ, puṣ, çuṣ`\],
while `kṛṣ` has both forms (`krakṣya` and `karṣiṣya`); — in `s`, `vas`
*shine*, `vas` *clothe* \[also `ghas`\], while `vas` *dwell* has both
forms; — in `h`, `mih`, `duh`, `druh` \[also `nah, dih, lih`\], while
`dah, vah, sah`, and `ruh` have both forms.

e\. In the older language, a majority (about five ninths) of simple
roots add the `sya` without auxiliary `i`; of the futures occurring in
the later language only, nearly three quarters have the `i`, this being
generally taken by any root of late origin and derivative character — as
it is also uniformly taken in secondary conjugation (1019, 1036, 1050,
1068).

936\. As the root is strengthened to form the stem of this future, so,
of a root that has a stronger and a weaker form, the stronger form is
used: thus, from √`bandh` or `badh` *bind*, `bhantsya` or `bandhiṣya`.

a\. By an irregular strengthening, `nan̄kṣya` (beside `naçiṣya`) is made
from √`naç` *be lost*, and `man̄kṣya` (beside `majjiṣya`) from √`majj`
*sink*.

b\. But a few roots make future-stems in the later language without
strengthening: thus, `likhiṣya, miliṣya` (also TS.), `vijiṣya` (also
`vejiṣya`), `siṣya` (√`sā` or `si`), `sūṣya` (939 b), `sphuṭiṣya`; and
√`vyadh` makes `vetsya` from the weaker form `vidh`.

c\. The ÇB. has once the monstrous form `açnuviṣyāmahe`, made upon the
present-stem `açnu` (697) of √`aç` *attain*. And the later language
makes `sīdiṣya` and `jahiṣya` from the present-stems of √`sad` and
√`hā`. Compare further `hvayiṣya` etc., 935 c. Also `khyāyiṣya` from
√`khyā` (beside `khyāsya`) appears to be of similar character.

d\. A number of roots with medial `ṛ` strengthen it to `ra` (241): thus,
`krakṣya, trapaya, drapaya, drakṣya, mrakṣya` (beside `mārkṣya`),
`sprakṣya, srakṣya, srapsya` (beside `sarpsya`), and `mradiṣya` (beside
`mardiṣya`); and √`kḷp` forms `klapsya` (beside `kalpiṣya`).

e\. The root `grah` (also its doublet `glah`) takes `ī` instead of `i`,
as it does also in the aorist and elsewhere.

937\. This future is comparatively rare in the oldest language — in
part, apparently, because the uses of a future are to a large extent
answered by subjunctive forms — but becomes more and more common later.
Thus, the RV. has only seventeen occurrences of personal forms, from
nine different roots (with participles from six additional roots); the
AV. has fifty occurrences, from twenty-five roots (with participles from
seven more); but the TS. has occurrences (personal forms and participles
together) from over sixty roots; and forms from more than a hundred and
fifty roots are quotable from the older texts.

Modes of the `s`-future.

938\. Mode-forms of the future are of the utmost rarity. The only
example in the older language is `kariṣyā́s`, 2d sing. subj. act.,
occurring once (or twice) in RV. (AB. has once `notsyāvahāi`, and GB.
has `eṣyāmahāi, taṅsyāmahāi, sthāsyāmahāi`, but they are doubtless false
readings for -`he`. Two or three optative forms are found in the epics:
thus, `dhakṣyet` and `maṅsyeran` (MBh.), and `drakṣyeta` (R.); also an
imperative `patsyantu` (Har.). And several 2d pl. mid. in `dhvam` are
quotable from the epics: thus, `vetsyadhvam, saviṣyadhvam`, and (the
causative) `kālayiṣyadhvam` (PB.) and `jīvayiṣyadhvam` (MBh.: and one
text has `mokṣyadhvam` at i. 133. 13, where the other reads
`mokṣayadhvam`), and `bhaviṣyadhvam` (MBh. R.): it is a matter of
question whether these are to be accounted a real imperative formation,
or an epic substitution of secondary for primary endings (compare 542
a).

Participles of the `s`-future.

939\. Participles are made from the future-stem precisely as from a
present-stem in अ `a`: namely, by adding in the active the ending न्त्
`nt`, in the middle the ending मान `māna`; the accent remains upon the
stem. Thus, from the verbs instanced above, दास्यन्त् `dāsyánt` and
दास्यमान `dāsyámāna`, करिष्यन्त् `kariṣyánt` and करिष्यमाण
`kariṣyámāṇa`.

a\. According to the grammarians, the feminine of the active participle
is made either in `ántī` or in `atī́`; but only the former has been noted
as occurring in the older language, and the latter is everywhere
extremely rare: see above, 449 e,f.

b\. In RV. occurs once `sū́ṣyantī`, from √`sū`, with anomalous
accentuation.

Preterit of the `s`-future: Conditional.

940\. From the future-stem is made an augment-preterit, by prefixing the
augment and adding the secondary endings, in precisely the same manner
as an imperfect from a present-stem in अ `a`. This preterit is called
the conditional.

a\. It stands related to the future, in form and meaning, as the French
conditional *aurais* to the future *aurai*, or as the English *would
have* to *will have* — nearly as the German *würde haben* to *werde
haben*.

b\. Thus, from the roots already instanced:

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अदास्यम्  
`ádāsyam`

अदास्याव  
`ádāsyāva`

अदास्याम  
`ádāsyāma`

अदास्ये  
`ádāsye`

अदास्यावहि  
`ádāsyāvahi`

अदास्यामहि  
`ádāsyāmahi` 

2

अदास्यस्  
`ádāsyas`

अदास्यतम्  
`ádāsyatam`

अदास्यत  
`ádāsyata`

अदास्यथास्  
`ádāsyathās`

अदास्येथाम्  
`ádāsyethām`

अदास्यध्वम्  
`ádāsyadhvam`

3

अदास्यत्  
`ádāsyat`

अदास्यताम्  
`ádāsyatām`

अदास्यन्  
`ádāsyan`

अदास्यत  
`ádāsyata`

अदास्येताम्  
`ádāsyetām`

अदास्यन्त  
`ádāsyanta`

1

अकरिष्यम्  
`ákariṣyam`

अकरिष्याव  
`ákariṣyāva`

अकरिष्याम  
`ákariṣyāma`

अकरिष्ये  
`ákariṣye`

अकरिष्यावहि  
`ákariṣyāvahi`

अकरिष्यामहि  
`ákariṣyāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

941\. The conditional is the rarest of all the forms of the Sanskrit
verb. The RV. has but a single example, `ábhariṣyat` *was going to carry
off*, and none of the Vedic texts furnishes another. In the Brāhmaṇas it
is hardly more common — except in ÇB., where it is met with more than
fifty times. Nor does it, like the future, become more frequent later:
not an example occurs in Nala, Bhagavad-Gītā, or Hitopadeça; only one in
Manu; and two in Çakuntalā. In the whole MBh. (Holtzmann) it is found
about twenty-five times, from thirteen roots. The middle forms are
extremely few.

II\. The Periphrastic Future.

942\. a. This formation contains only a single indicative active tense
(or also middle: see 947), without modes, or participle, or preterit.

b\. It consists in a derivative *nomen agentis*, having the value of a
future active participle, and used, either with or without an
accompanying auxiliary, in the office of a verbal tense with future
meaning.

943\. The noun is formed by the suffix तृ `tṛ` (or तर् `tar`); and this
(as in its other than verbal uses: see 1182) is added to the root either
directly or with a preceding auxiliary vowel इ `i`, the root itself
being strengthened by `guṇa`, but the accent resting on the suffix:
thus, दातृ `dātṛ́` from √दा `dā` *give*; कर्तृ `kartṛ́` from √कृ `kṛ`
*make*; भवितृ `bhavitṛ́` from √भू `bhū` *be*.

a\. As regards the presence or absence of the vowel `i`, the usage is
said by the grammarians to be generally the same as in the `s`-future
from the same root (above, 935). The most important exception is that
the roots in `ṛ` take no `i`: thus, `kartṛ` (against `kariṣya`); roots
`han` and `gam` show the same difference; while `vṛt, vṛdh`, and `syand`
have `i` here, though not in the `s`-future. The few forms which occur
in the older language agree with these statements.

944\. In the third persons, the nom. masc. of the noun, in the three
numbers respectively (373), is used without auxiliary: thus, मविता
`bhavitā́` *he* or *she* or *it will be*; मवितारौ `bhavitā́rāu` *both will
be*; मवितारस् `bhavitā́ras` *they will be*. In the other persons, the
first and second persons present of √अस् `as` *be* (636) are used as
auxiliary; and they are combined, in all numbers, with the singular nom.
masc. of the noun.

a\. Thus, from √दा `dā` *give*:

active.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

दातास्मि  
`dātā́smi`

दातास्वस्  
`dātā́svas`

दातास्मस्  
`dātā́smas`

2

दातासि  
`dātā́si`

दातास्थस्  
`dātā́sthas`

दातास्थ  
`dātā́stha`

3

दाता  
`dātā́`

दातारौ  
`dātā́rāu`

दातारस्  
`dātā́ras`

b\. Occasionally, in the epics and later (almost never in the older
language), the norm of the tense as given above is in various respects
departed from: thus, by use of the auxiliary in the 3d person also; by
its omission in the 1st or 2d person; by inversion of the order of noun
and auxiliary; by interposition of other words between them; by use of a
dual or plural nom. with the auxiliary; and by use of a feminine form of
the noun. Examples are: `vaktā ’sti` (MBh.) *he will speak*; `nihantā`
(MBh.) *I shall* or *thou wilt strike down*, `yoddhā ’ham` (R.) *I shall
fight*, `ahaṁ draṣṭā` (MBh.) *I shall see*, `kartā ’haṁ te` (BhP.) *I
will do for thee*, `tvam bhavitā` (MBh. Megh.) *thou wilt be*;
`asmi gantā` (MBh.) *I shall go*; `pratigrahītā tām asmi` (MBh.) *I will
receive her*, `hantā tvam asi` (MBh.) *thou wilt slay*; `kartārāu svaḥ`
(MBh.) *we two shall do*; `draṣṭry asmi` (MBh.) *I* (f.) *shall see*,
`udbhavitrī` (Nāiṣ.) *she will increase*, `gantrī` (Y.) *she will go*.
AB. has once `sotā` as 2d sing., *thou wilt press*; JUB. makes the
combination `çmaçānāni bhavitāras` *the cemeteries will be*.

c\. An optative of the auxiliary appears to be once used, in
`yoddhā syām` *I would fight* (R. i. 22. 25 Peterson; but the Bombay
edition reads `yoddhuṁ yāsyāmi`).

945\. The accent in these combinations, as in all the ordinary cases of
collocation of a verb with a preceding predicate noun or adjective
(592), is on the noun itself; and, unlike all the true verbal forms, the
combination retains its accent everywhere even in an independent clause:
thus, `tárhi vā́ atināṣṭró bhavitā́smi` (ÇB.) *then I shall be out of
danger* (where `bhaviṣyāmi`, if used, would be accentless). Whether in a
dependent clause the auxiliary verb would take an accent (595), and
whether, if so, at the expense of the accent of the noun (as in the case
of a preposition compounded with a verb-form: 1083b), we are without the
means of determining.

940\. In the Veda, the *nomina agentis* in `tṛ` or `tar`, like various
other derivative nouns (271), but with especial frequency, are used in
participial construction, governing the accusative if they come from
roots whose verbal forms do so (1182). Often, also, they are used
predicatively, with or without accompanying copula; yet without any
implication of time; they are not the beginnings, but only the
forerunners, of a new tense-formation. Generally, when they have a
participial value, the root-syllable (or a prefix preceding it) has the
accent. The tense-use begins, but rather sparingly, in the Brāhmaṇas
(from which about thirty forms are quotable); and it grows more common
later, though the periphrastic future is nowhere nearly so frequent as
the `s`-future (it is quotable later from about thirty additional
roots).

947\. a. A few isolated attempts are made in the Brāhmaṇas to form by
analogy middle persons to this future, with endings corresponding after
the usual fashion to those of the active persons. Thus, TS. has once
`prayoktā́se` *I will apply* (standing related to `prayoktāsmi` as, for
example, `çāse` to `çāsmi`); ÇB. has `çayitā́se` *thou shalt lie*
(similarly related to `çayitāsi`); and TB. has `yaṣṭā́smahe` *we will
make offering*. But in TA. is found (i. 11) `yaṣṭā́he` as 1st sing.,
showing a phonetic correspondence of a problematic character, not
elsewhere met with in the language.

b\. On the basis of such tentative formations as these, the native
grammarians set up a complete middle inflection for the periphrastic
future, as follows:

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

`dātā́he`

`dātā́svahe`

`dātā́smahe`

2

`dātā́se`

`dātā́sāthe`

`dātā́dhve`

3

`dātā́`

`dātā́rau`

`dātā́ras`

c\. Only a single example of such a middle has been brought to light in
the later language, namely (the causative) `darçayitāhe` (Nāiṣ.).

Uses of the Futures and Conditional.

948\. As the `s`-future is the commoner, so also it is the one more
indefinitely used. It expresses in general what is going to take place
at some time to come — but often, as in other languages, adding on the
one hand an implication of will or intention, or on the other hand that
of promise or threatening. 

a\. A few examples are:
`varṣiṣyáty āiṣámaḥ parjányo vṛ́ṣṭimān bhaviṣyati` (ÇB.) *it is going to
rain; Parjanya is going to be rich in rain this year*;
`yás tán ná véda kím ṛcā́ kariṣyati` (RV.) *whoever does not know that,
what will he do with verse?*
`ā́ vāí vayám agnī́ dhāsyāmahé ‘tha yūyáṁ kíṁ kariṣyatha` (ÇB.) *we are
going to build the two fires; then what will you do?*
`tám índro ‘bhyā́dudrāva haniṣyán` (ÇB.) *him Indra ran at, intending to
slay*; `yády evā́ kariṣyátha sākáṁ devāír yajñíyāso bhaviṣyatha` (RV.)
*if ye will do thus, ye shall be worthy of the sacrifice along with the
gods*; `dántās te çatsyanti` (AV.) *thy teeth will fall out*;
`ná mariṣyasi mā́ bibheḥ` (AV.) *thou shalt not die; be not afraid*;
`brūhi kva yāsyasi` (MBh.) *tell us; where are you going to go?*
`yadi mām pratyākhyāsyasi viṣam āsthāsye` (MBh.) *if you shall reject
me, I will resort to poison*. As in other languages, the tense is also
sometimes used for the expression of a conjecture or presumption: thus:
`ko ‘yaṁ devo gandharvo vā bhaviṣyati` (MBh.) *who is this? he is
doubtless a god, or a Gandharva*; `adya svapsyanti` (MBh.) *they must be
sleeping now*.

b\. The spheres of future and desiderative border upon one another, and
the one is sometimes met with where the other might be expected.
Examples of the future taken in a quasi-desiderative sense are as
follows: `yád dāçúṣe bhadráṁ kariṣyási távé ’t tát satyám` (RV.) *what
favor thou willest to bestow on thy worshiper, that of thee becometh
actual* (*is surely brought about*);
`yáthā ’nyád vadiṣyánt sò ‘nyád vádet` (ÇB.) *as if, intending to say
one thing, one were to say another*.

949\. The periphrastic future is defined by the grammarians as
expressing something to be done at a definite time to come. And this,
though but faintly traceable in later use, is a distinct characteristic
of the formation in the language where it first makes its appearance. It
is especially often used along with `çvás` *tomorrow*.

a\. A few examples are: `adyá varṣiṣyati...çvó vraṣṭā́` (MS.) *it is
going to rain today; it will rain tomorrow*;
`yatarān vā ime çvaḥ kamitāras te jetāras` (K.) *whichever of the two
parties these shall choose tomorrow, they will conquer*;
`prātár yaṣṭā́smahe` (TB.) *we shall sacrifice tomorrow morning*;
`ityahé vaḥ paktā̀smi` (ÇB.) *on such and such a day I will cook for
you*;
`tán ma ékāṁ rā́trim ánte çayitā́se jātá u te ‘yáṁ tárhi putró bhavitā́`
(ÇB.) *then you shall lie with me one night, and at that time this son
of yours will be born*. In other cases, this definiteness of time is
wanting, but an emphasis, as of special certainty, seems perhaps to
belong to the form: thus,
`bibhṛhí mā pārayiṣyā́mi tvé ’ti: kásmān mā pārayiṣyasī́ ’ty āughá imā́ḥ sárvāḥ prajā́ nirvoḍhā́, tátas tvā pārayitā̀smī́ ’ti`
(ÇB.) *support me and I will save you, said it. From what will you save
me? said he. A flood is going to carry off all these creatures; from
that I will save you, said it*;
`paridevayāṁ cakrire mahac chokabhayam prāptāsmaḥ` (GB.) *they set up a
lamentation: "we are going to meet with great pain and dread"*;
`yaje ‘yakṣi yaṣṭāhe ca` (TA.) *I sacrifice, I have sacrificed, and I
shall sacrifice*. In yet other cases, in the older language even, and
yet more in the later, this future appears to be equivalent to the
other: thus, `prajāyām enaṁ vijñātāsmo yadi vidvān vā juhoty avidvān vā`
(AB.) *in his children we shall know him, whether he is one that
sacrifices with knowledge or without knowledge*;
`vaktāsmo vā idaṁ devebhyaḥ` (AB.) *we shall tell this to the gods*;
`yadi svārtho mamā ’pi bhavitā tata evaṁ svārthaṁ kariṣyāmi` (MBh.) *if
later my own affair shall come up, then I will attend to my own affair*;
`kathaṁ tu bhavitāsy eka iti tvāṁ nṛpa çocimi` (MBh.) *but how will you
get along alone? that, O king, is the cause of my grief about you*.

950\. The conditional would seem to be most originally and properly used
to signify that something *was going to* be done. And this value it has
in its only Vedic occurrence, and occasionally elsewhere. But usually it
has the sense ordinarily called "conditional"; and in the great majority
of its occurrences it is found (like the subjunctive and the optative,
when used with the same value) in both clauses of a conditional
sentence.

a\. Thus,
`yó vṛtrā́ya sínam átrā́ ’bhariṣyat prá táṁ jánitrī vidúṣa uvāca` (RV.)
*him, who was going here to carry off Vritra's wealth, his mother
proclaimed to the knowing one*; `çatāyuṁ gām akariṣyam` (AB.) *I was
going to make* (*should have made*) *the cow live a hundred years* (in
other versions of the same story is added the other clause, in which the
conditional has a value more removed from its original: thus, in GB.,
*if you, villain, had not stopped* \[`prā́grahīṣyaḥ`\] *my mouth*);
`táta evā̀ ’sya bhayáṁ vī̀ ’yāya kásmād dhy ábheṣyad dvitī́yād vāí bhayám bhavati`
(ÇB.) *thereupon his fear departed; for of whom was he to be afraid?
occasion of fear arises from a second person*;
`útpapāta ciráṁ tán mene yád vā́saḥ paryádhāsyata` (ÇB.) *he leaped up;
he thought it long that he should put on a garment*;
`sá tád evá nā́ ’vindat prajā́patir yátrā́ ’hoṣyat` (MS.) *Prajāpati,
verily, did not then find where he was to* (*should*) *sacrifice*;
`evaṁ cen nā ’vakṣyo mūrdhā te vyapatiṣyat` (GB.) *if you should not
speak thus, your head would fly off*;
`sá yád dhāi ’tā́vad evā́ ’bhaviṣyad yā́vatyo hāi ’vā́ ’gre prajā́ḥ sṛṣṭā́s tā́vatyo hāi ’vā̀ ’bhaviṣyan ná prā̀ ’janiṣyanta`
(ÇB.) *if he had been only so much, there would have been only so many
living creatures as were created at first; they would have had no
progeny*;
`kiṁ vā ’bhaviṣyad aruṇas tamasāṁ vibhettā taṁ cet sahasrakiraṇo dhuri nā ’kariṣyat`
(Ç.) *would the Dawn, forsooth, be the scatterer of the darkness, if the
thousand-rayed one did not set her on the front of his chariot?*
