+++
title = "18 Chapter XIV DERIVATIVE OR SECONDARY CONJUGATION"

+++




## CHAPTER XIV.

  

DERIVATIVE OR SECONDARY CONJUGATION.

996\. SECONDARY conjugations are those in which a whole system of forms,
like that already described as made from the simple root, is made, with
greater or less completeness, from a derivative conjugation-stem; and is
also usually connected with a certain definite modification of the
original radical sense.

a\. We have seen, indeed, that the tense-systems are also for the most
part made from derivative-stems; and even that, in some cases, such
stems assume the appearance and value of roots, and are made the basis
of a complete conjugational system. Nor is there any distinct
division-line to be drawn between tense-systems and derivative
conjugations; the latter are present-systems which have been expanded
into conjugations by the addition of other tenses, and of participles,
infinitives, and so on. In the earliest language, their forms outside of
the present-system are still quite rare, hardly more than sporadic; and
even later they are — with the exception of one or two formations which
attain a comparative frequency — much less common than the corresponding
forms of primary conjugation.

997\. The secondary conjugations are: I. Passive; II. Intensive; III.
Desiderative; IV. Causative; V. Denominative.

a\. The passive is classed here as a secondary conjugation because of
its analogy with the others in respect to specific value, and freedom of
formation, although it does not, like them, make its forms outside the
present system from its present-stem.

I. Passive.

998\. The passive conjugation has been already in the main described.
Thus, we have seen that —

a\. It has a special present-system, the stem of which is present only,
and not made the basis of any of the remaining forms: this stem is
formed with the accented class-sign य `yá`, and it takes (with
exceptions: 774) the middle endings. This present-system is treated with
the others, above, 768 ff.

b\. There is a special passive 3d sing. of the aorist, ending in इ `i`:
it is treated above, 842 ff.

c\. In the remaining tenses, the middle forms are used also in a passive
sense.

d\. But the passive use of middle forms is not common; it is oftenest
met with in the perfect. The participle to a great extent takes the
place of a past passive tense, and the gerundive that of a future. On
the other hand, in the oldest language (RV.), middle forms of other
present-systems are in a considerable number of cases employed with
passive meaning.

e\. According to the grammarians, there may be formed from some verbs,
for passive use, a special stem for the aorist and the two future
systems, coinciding in form with the peculiar 3d sing. aorist.

f\. Thus, from √`dā` (aor. 3d sing. `adāyi`), beside
`ádāsi, dāsyé, dātā́he`, also `ádāyiṣi, dāyiṣyé, dāyitā́he`. The
permission to make this doable formation extends to all roots ending in
vowels, and to `grah, dṛç, and han`. No such passive forms occur in the
older language, and not half-a-dozen are quotable from the later (we
find `adhāyiṣi` and `asthāyiṣi` in DKC., and `anāyiṣata` in Kuval.).

g\. As to the alleged passive inflection of the periphrastic perfect,
see below, 1072.

h\. Besides the participle from the present tense-stem (771. 5), the
passive has a past participle in त `ta` (952), or न `na` (957), and
future participles, or gerundives, of various formation (961 ff.), made
directly from the root.

999\. As already pointed out (282 a), the language, especially later,
has a decided predilection for the passive form of the sentence. This is
given in part by the use of finite passive forms, but oftener by that of
the passive participle and of the gerundive: the participle being taken
in part in a present sense, but more usually in a past (whether
indefinite or proximate past), and sometimes with a copula expressed,
but much oftener without it; and the gerundive representing either a
pure future or one with the sense of necessity or duty added. A further
example is:
`tatrāi ’ko yuvā brāhmaṇo dṛṣṭaḥ: taṁ dṛṣṭvā kāmena pīḍitā saṁjātā: sakhyā agre kathitam: sakhi puruṣo ‘yaṁ gṛhītvā mama mātuḥ samīpam ānetavyaḥ`
(Vet.) *there she saw a young Brahman; at sight of him she felt the
pangs of love; she said to her friend: 'friend, you must take and bring
this man to my mother'.* In some styles of later Sanskrit, the
prevailing expression of past time is by means of the passive participle
(thus, in Vet., an extreme case, more than nine tenths).

a\. As in other languages, a 3d sing, passive is freely made from
intransitive as well as transitive verbs: thus, `ihā ”gamyatām` *come
hither*; `tvayā tatrāi ’va sthīyatām` *do you stand just there*;
`sarvāir jālam ādāyo` ’ḍḍīyatām (H.) *let all fly up with the net*.

II\. Intensive.

1000\. The intensive (sometimes also called frequentative) is that one
of the secondary conjugations which is least removed from the analogy of
formations already described. It is, like the present-system of the
second conjugation-class (642 ff.), the inflection of a reduplicated
stem, but of one that is peculiar in having a strengthened
reduplication. It is decidedly less extended beyond the limits of a
present-system than any other of the derivative conjugations.

a\. The intensive conjugation signifies the repetition or the
intensification of the action expressed by the primary conjugation of a
root.

1001\. According to the grammarians, the intensive conjugation may be
formed from nearly all the roots in the language — the exceptions being
roots of more than one syllable, those conjugated only causatively
(below, 1056), and in general those beginning with a vowel.

a\. In fact, however, intensives in the later language are very rare, so
rare that it is hard to tell precisely what value is to be given to the
rules of the native grammar respecting them. Nor are they at all common
earlier, except (comparatively) in the RV., which contains about six
sevenths of the whole number (rather over a hundred) quotable from Veda
and Brāhmaṇa and Sūtra-texts; AV. has less than half as many as RV., and
many of them in RV. passages; from the later language are quotable about
twenty of these, and about forty more, but for the most part only in an
occurrence or two.

b\. Hence, in the description to be given below, the actual aspect of
the formation, as exhibited in the older language, will be had primarily
and especially in view; and the examples will be of forms found there in
use.

1002\. The strong intensive reduplication is made in three different
ways:

I. a. The reduplicating syllable is, as elsewhere, composed of a single
consonant with following vowel, and, so far as the consonant is
concerned, follows the rules for present and perfect reduplication
(590); but the vowel is a heavy one, radical `a` and `ṛ` (or `ar`) being
reduplicated with `ā`, an `i`-vowel by `e`, and an `u`-vowel by `o`.

Examples are: `vāvad`, `bābadh`, `çāçvas`, `rārandh`; `dādṛ`, `dādhṛ`;
`cekit`, `tetij`, `nenī`, `vevlī`; `çoçuc`, `popruth`, `coṣku`, `johū`.

II\. b. The reduplicating syllable has a final consonant, taken from the
end of the root. With an exception or two, this consonant is either `r`
(or its substitute `l`) or a nasal. 

Examples are: `carcar, calcal, sarsṛ, marmṛj, jarhṛs`;
`can̄kram, jan̄ghan, taṅstan, dandaç` (√`daṅç` or `daç`), `jañjabh`
(√`jambh` or `jabh`), `tantas` (√`taṅs` or `tas`), `nannam` (√`nam`),
`yaṁyam` (√`yam`). The nasal is assimilated to the initial consonant.

c\. Only roots having `a` or `ṛ` as vowel make this form of
reduplication, but with such roots it is more common than either of the
other forms.

d\. Irregular formations of this class are: with a final other than `r`
or `n` in the reduplication, `badbadh`; with a final nasal in the
reduplication which is not found in the root, `jan̄gah` (RV.), `jañjap`
(ÇB.; and `jan̄gūyat` PB. is perhaps from √`gu`; the later language has
further `dandah`); with an anomalous initial consonant in reduplication,
`jarbhur` from √`bhur` (compare the Vedic perfect `jabhāra` from √`bhṛ`,
789 b), `galgal` from √`gal`; with various treatment of an `ṛ` or
`ar`-element, `dardar` and `dardir`, `carkar` and `carkir, tartar` and
`tartur, carcar` and `carcur, jargur` and `jalgul`.

e\. The roots `i` and `ṛ` are the only ones with vowel initial forming
an intensive stem: `i` makes `iyāy` (? PU., once); `ṛ` makes the
irregular `alar` or `alṛ`. As to the stem `ī́ya`, see below, 1021 b.

III\. f. The reduplication is dissyllabic, an `i`-vowel being added
after a final consonant of the reduplicating syllable. This `i`-vowel is
in the older language short before a double consonant, and long before a
single.

Examples are: `ganīgam` (but `gánigmatam`),
`varīvṛt, vanīvāh, caniṣkad, saniṣvan`; `navīnu, davidyut` (and the
participles `dávidhvat` but `távītuat`). A single exception as to the
quantity of the `i` is `davidhāva`.

g\. This method of reduplication is followed in the older language by
about thirty roots. Thus, of roots having final or penultimate `n` (once
`m`), and `n` in the reduplicating syllable,
`pan, phan, san, svan, han`; `gam`; `krand, çcand, skand, syand`; of
roots having final or medial `ṛ`, and `r` in the, reduplicating
syllable, `kṛ` *make*, `tṛ, bhṛ, vṛ, mṛj, mṛç, vṛj, vṛt, sṛp`; also
`mluc` (`malimluc`); — further, of roots assuming in the reduplication a
`n` not found in the root, only `vah` (ÇB.: the grammarians allow also
`kas, pat, pad`; and `panīpad` is quotable later; and AÇS. has
`canīkhudat`, for which TB. reads `kánīkhunat`); finally, of roots
having `u` or `ū` as radical vowel, with `av` before the `i`-vowel,
`tu, dhū, nu, dyut`.

h\. In this class, the general rules as to the form of the reduplicating
consonant (590) are violated in the case of `ghanīghan` and `bharībhṛ`,
and of `ganīgam, karīkṛ` (but the regular `carīkṛ` also occurs),
`kanikrand`, and `kaniṣkand` (but also `caniṣkand` occurs); also in
`kanīkhun`.

i\. The reversion to more original guttural form after the reduplication
in `cekit`, and `jan̄ghan` and `ghanīghan`, is in accordance with what
takes place elsewhere (2161). 

1003\. The same root is allowed to form its intensive stem in more than
one way.

Thus, in the older language, `dādr` and `dardṛ`; `dādhṛ` and `dardhṛ`;
`cācal` and `carcar` (and `carcur`); `tartar` (and `tartur`) and
`tarītṛ`; `jan̄gam` and `ganīgam`; `jan̄ghan` and `ghanīghan`; `pamphan`
and `panīphan`; `marmṛj` and `marīmṛj`; `marmṛç` and `marīmṛç`; `varvṛt`
and `varīvṛt`; `jarbhṛ` and `bharībhṛ`; `dodhū` and `davīdhū`; `nonu`
and `navīnu`; `bābadh` and `badbadh`.

1004\. The model of normal intensive inflection is the present-system of
the reduplicating conjugation-class (642 ff.); and this is indeed to a
considerable extent followed, in respect to endings, strengthening of
stem, and accent. But deviations from the model are not rare; and the
forms are in general of too infrequent occurrence to allow of
satisfactory classification and explanation.

a\. The most marked irregularity is the frequent insertion of an `ī`
between the stem and ending. According to the grammarians, this is
allowed in all the strong forms before an ending beginning with a
consonant; and before the `ī` a final vowel has `guṇa`-strengthening,
but a medial one remains unchanged.

Present-System.

1005\. We will take up the parts of the present-system in their order,
giving first what is recognized as regular in the later language, and
then showing how the formation appears in the earlier texts. As most
grammarians do not allow a middle inflection, and middle forms are few
even in the Veda, no attempt will be made to set up a paradigm for the
middle voice.

1006\. As example of inflection may be taken the root विद् `vid` *know*,
of which the intensive stem is वेविद् `vevid`, or, in strong forms,
वेवेद् `véved`.

a\. Neither from this nor from any other root are more than a few
scattering forms actually quotable.

1\. Present Indicative.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

वेवेद्मि, वेविदीमि  
`vévedmi, vévidīmi`

वेविद्वस्  
`vevidvás`

वेविद्मस्  
`vevidmás` 

2

वेवेत्सि, वेविदीषि  
`vévetsi, vévidīṣi`

वेवित्थस्  
`vevitthás`

वेवित्थ  
`vevitthá`

3

वेवेत्ति, वेविदीति  
`vévetti, vévidīti`

वेवित्तस्  
`vevittás`

वेविदति  
`vévidati`

b\. From √हू `hū`, the singular forms with auxiliary vowel would be
जोहवीमि `jóhavīmi`, जोहवीषि `jóhavīṣi`, जोहवीति `jóhavīti`.

1007\. a. The forms found in the older language agree in general with
the paradigm. Examples are: 1st sing., `carkarmi, veveṣmi`; 2d sing.,
`alarṣi, dárdarṣi`; 3d sing.,
`álarti, dādharti, veveti, nenekti, jan̄ghanti, kánikrantti, ganīgaṁti`;
3d du., `jarbhṛtás`; 1st pl., `nonumas`; 2d pl., `jāgratha`; 3d pl.,
`dādhrati, nānadati, bharibhrati, várvṛtati, dávidyutati, nénijati`,
and, irregularly, `veviṣanti`; and, with the auxiliary vowel,
`jóhavīmi, cākaçīmi`; `cā́kaçīti, nónavīti, dardarīti, jarbhurīti`. No
stem with dissyllabic reduplication takes the auxiliary `ī` in any of
its forms.

b\. A single dual form with `ī` and strong stem occurs: namely,
`tartarīthas`.

c\. The middle forms found to occur are: 1st sing., `jóguve, nenije`; 3d
sing., `nenikté, sarsṛte`; and, with irregular accent,
`tétikte, dédiṣṭe`; with irregular loss of final radical nasal,
`nánnate`; with ending `e` instead of `te`,
`cékite, ján̄gahe, jóguve, yoyuve, bābadhe`, and (with irregular accent)
`badbadhé`; 3d du., `sarsrāte`; 3d pl., `dédiçate`.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

1008\. a. Subjunctive forms with primary endings are extremely rare:
there have been noticed only `jan̄ghánāni, jāgarāsi` (AV.); and, in the
middle, `tantasāíte` (3d du.).

b\. Forms with secondary endings are more frequent: thus, 2d sing.,
`jan̄ghanas, jalgulas`; 3d sing.,
`jāgarat, cékitat, bobhavat, cárkṛṣat, ján̄ghanat, bárbṛhat, mármṛjat, mármṛçat, parpharat, dardirat, caniṣkadat, davidyutat, saniṣvaṇat`;
1st du., `jan̄ghanāva`; 1st pl., `carkirāma, vevidāma`; 3d pl.,
`pā́patan, çóçucan, carkiran`; and, with double mode-sign, `cā́kaçān`
(AV.). Of the middle are found only 3d persons plural: thus,
`ján̄ghananta, jarhṛṣanta, marmṛjanta, nonuvanta, çoçucanta`.

3\. Present Optative.

1009\. This mode would show the unstrengthened stem, with the usual
endings (566), accented. Thus: 

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

वेविद्याम्  
`vevidyā́m`

वेविद्याव  
`vevidyā́va`

वेविद्याम  
`vevidyā́ma`

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. The optative is represented by only an example or two in the older
language: thus, active, `veviṣyāt` (AV.), `jāgṛyās` (KB.), `jāgriyāt`
(AB.), `jāgṝyāma` (VS. MS.; but `jāgriyāma` TS.); RV. has only
`cākanyāt` (pft.?); middle, `nenijīta` (K.).

4\. Present Imperative.

1010\. The regular forms of the imperative, including the usual
subjunctive first persons, would be as follows:

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

वेविदानि  
`vévidāni`

वेविदाव  
`vévidāva`

वेविदाम  
`vévidāma`

2

वेविद्धि  
`veviddhí`

वेवित्तम्  
`vevittám`

वेवित्त  
`vevittá`

3

वेवित्तु, वेविदीतु  
`vévettu, vévidītu`

वेवित्ताम्  
`vevittā́m`

वेविदतु  
`vévidatu`

1011\. a. Older imperative forms are less rare than optative. The first
persons have been given above (`jānghánāni`, the only accented example,
does not correspond with the model, but is in conformity with the
subjunctive of the reduplicating present); the proper imperatives are:
2d sing., `dādṛhí, dardṛhi, carkṛdhi, jāgṛhi, nenigdhi, rāranddhí`; the
ending `tāt` is found in `carkṛtāt` and `jāgṛtāt`; and the latter (as
was pointed out above, 571 b) is used in AV. as first person sing.;
`barbṛhi` shows an elsewhere unparalleled loss of `h` before the ending
`hi`; 3d sing., `dādhartu, veveṣṭu, dardartu, marmarttu`; 2d du.,
`jāgṛtam`; 3d du., `jāgṛtām`; 2d pl., `jāgṛtá`; `can̄kramata` (RV., once)
has an anomalous union-vowel. In the middle voice is found only
`nenikṣva` (ÇB.).

b\. Of imperative forms with auxiliary `ī`, RV. has none; AV. has
`vāvadītu` and `johavītu`, and such are sometimes found in the
Brāhmaṇas; AV. has also, against rule, `taṅstanīhi` and `jan̄ghanīhi`;
VS. has `cākaçīhi`.

5\. Present Participle.

1012\. The intensive participles, both active and middle, are
comparatively common in the older language. They are formed and
inflected like those of the reduplicating present, and have the accent
on the reduplicating syllable. 

Examples are: active,
`cā́kaçat, nā́nadat, cékitat, mémyat, çóçucat, róruvat, dárdrat, mármṛjat, ján̄ghanat, nánnamat, pánīphanat, kánīkradat, dávidyutat`;
— middle,
`bā́badhāna, mémyāna, cékitāna, yóyuvāna, rórucāna, járbhurāṇa, sársrāṇa, jañjabhāna, nánnamāna, dándaçāna`.
No middle participle shows the dissyllabic reduplication.

1013\. a. On account of their accent, `rārahāṇá, rārakṣāṇá`, and
`jāhṛṣāṇá` (beside `járhṛṣāṇa`) are probably to be regarded as perfect
participles, although no other perfect forms with heavy reduplication
from the same roots occur. The inference is, however, rendered uncertain
by the unmistakably intensive `badbadhāná` and `marmṛjāná` (beside
`mármṛjāna`). As to `çū́çucāna` etc., see 806 a.

b\. The RV. has once `ján̄ghnatas`, gen. sing., with root-vowel cast out;
`kánikrat` appears to be used once for `kánikradat`; if `cākát` is to be
referred to √`kā` (Grassmann), it is the only example of an intensive
from a root in `ā`, and its accent is anomalous. `Marmṛçantas` (AB.) is
perhaps a false reading; but forms with the nasal irregularly retained
are found repeatedly in the epics and later: thus,
`lelihan, dedīpyantīm` (MBh.), `jājvalant` (MBh. R.), `sarīsṛpantāu`
(BhP.), `rāraṭantī` (R.).

6\. Imperfect.

1014\. The imperfect is regularly inflected as follows:

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

अवेविदम्  
`ávevidam`

अवेविद्व  
`ávevidva`

अवेविद्म  
`ávevidma`

2

अवेवेत्, अवेविदीस्  
`ávevet, ávevidīs`

अवेवित्तम्  
`ávevittam`

अवेवित्त  
`ávevitta`

3

अवेवेत्, अवेविदीत्  
`ávevet, ávevidīt`

अवेवित्ताम्  
`ávevittām`

अवेविदुस्  
`ávevidus`

1015\. The imperfect forms found in the earlier texts are not numerous.
They are, including those from which the augment is omitted, as follows:
in active, 1st sing., `acākaçam, dediçam`; 2d sing.,
`ajāgar, adardar, dárdar`; 3d sing.,
`adardar, adardhar, avarīvar, dardar, kániṣkan, dávidyot, návīnot`; 2d
du., `adardṛam`; 1st pl., `marmṛjmá`; 3d pl.,
`anannamus, adardirus, acarkṛṣus, ájohavus, anonavus`; and, with
auxiliary `ī`, in 3d sing.,
`avāvacīt, ávāvaçīt, ávāvarīt, áyoyavīt, ároravīt, ájohavīt`; and,
irregularly, in 3d du., `avāvaçītām`. The middle forms are extremely
few: namely, 3d sing., `ádediṣṭa, ánannata` (with loss of the final
radical in a weak form of root); 3d pl. `marmṛjata`, and `avāvaçanta`
(which, if it belongs here, shows a transfer to an `a`-stem). 

1016\. Derivative Middle Inflection. From every intensive stem, as above
described, may be formed in the present-system a further derivative
conjugation which is formally identical with a passive, being made by
the accented sign य `yá`, along with middle endings only. It has not,
however, a passive value, but is in meaning and use indistinguishable
from the simpler conjugation.

a\. A final vowel before this `ya` is treated as before the passive-sign
`ya` (770).

b\. The inflection is precisely like that of any other stem ending in
`a` in the middle voice: thus, from √`mṛj`, intensive stem `marmṛj`, is
made the present indicative `marmṛjyé, marmṛjyáse, marmṛjyáte`, etc.;
optative `marmṛjyéya, marmṛjyéthās, marmṛjyéta`, etc.; imperative
`marmṛjyásva, marmṛjyátām`, etc.; participle `marmṛjyámāna`; imperfect
`ámarmṛjye, ámarmṛjyathās, ámarmṛjyata`, etc.; subjunctive forms do not
occur.

c\. In a very few sporadic cases, these `yá`-forms are given a passive
value: thus, `jan̄ghanyamāna` in MḍU.;
`bambhramyate, dādhmāyamāna, pepīyamāna` in the later language. And
active participles (529 a) are not unknown: thus, `dedīpyantīm` (MBh.),
`dodhūyant` (MBh. BhP.).

1017\. This kind of intensive inflection is more common than the other
in the later language; in the earlier, it is comparatively rare.

a\. In RV., `yá`-forms are made from eight roots, five of which have
also forms of the simpler conjugation; the AV. adds one more; the other
earlier texts (so far as observed) about twenty more, and half of them
have likewise forms of the simpler conjugation. Thus: from
√`mṛj, marmṛjyáte` etc., and `marīmṛjyeta`; from √`tṛ, tartūryante`;
from √`car, carcūryámāṇa`; from √`nī, nenīyéran`, etc.; from
√`vī, vevīyate`; from √`rih, rerihyáte` etc.; from `vij, vevijyáte`;
from √`sku, coṣkūyáse` etc.; from √`diç, dediçyate`; from
√`kāç, cākaçyáte` etc.; from √`vad, vāvadyámāna`; from
√`nam, nannamyadhvam`; from √`vah, vanīvāhyéta` etc. (with lengthened
root-vowel, elsewhere unknown); from √`krand, kanikradyámāna`; from
√`vṛt, varīvartyámāna` (ÇB.: should be `varīvṛty`-); from
√`mṛç, amarīmṛçyanta` (ÇB.? the text reads `amarīmṛtsyanta`); from
√`yup, yoyupyánte` etc.; from √`nud, anonudyanta`; from
√`vlī, avevlīyanta`; from √`jabh, jañjabhyáte` etc.; from
√`jap, jañjapyámāna`; and so on. 

Perfect.

1018\. The grammarians are at variance as to whether a perfect may be
formed directly from the intensive stem, or whether only a periphrastic
perfect (below, 1070 ff.) is to be admitted.

a\. No example of an intensive periphrastic perfect has anywhere come to
light (except from `jāgṛ`: 1020 a). A few unmistakable perfect forms are
made from the intensively reduplicated root in RV.: namely, `davidhāva`
and `nónāva`, 3d sing., and `nonuvus`, 3d pl.; and there occur further
`dodrāva` (TS.), `yoyāva` and `lelā́ya` (MS.), and `leláya` (? ÇB.), all
used in the sense of presents. To them may be added `jāgara` 1st sing.
and `jāgā́ra` 3d sing.: but as to these, see below, 1020 a.

Aorist, Future, etc.

1019\. As to the remaining parts of a full verbal conjugation, also, the
grammarians are not agreed (occurrences of such forms, apparently, being
too rare to afford even them any basis for rules); in general, it is
allowed to treat the intensive stem further as a root in filling up the
scheme of forms, using always the auxiliary vowel इ `i` where it is ever
used in the simple conjugation.

a\. Thus, from √`vid`, intensive stem `vevid`, would be made the aorist
`avevidiṣam` with precative `vevidyāsam`, the futures `vevidiṣyāmi` and
`veviditāsmi`, the participles `vevidita, veviditavya`, etc., the
infinitive `veviditum`, and the gerunds `veviditvā` and -`vevidya`. And,
where the intensive conjugation is the derivative middle one, the aorist
and futures would take the corresponding middle form.

b\. Of all this, in the ancient language, there is hardly a trace. The
RV. has `cárkṛṣe`, 3d sing. mid., of a formation like `hiṣe` and `stuṣé`
(894 d), and the gerundives `vitantasā́yya`, and `marmṛjénya` and
`vāvṛdhénya`; and ÇB. has the participle `vanīvāhitá`, and the
infinitive `dédīyitavāí`. As to `jāgariṣyánt` and `jāgaritá`, see the
next paragraph.

1020\. There are systems of inflection of certain roots, the intensive
character of which is questioned or questionable. Thus:

a\. The root `gṛ` (or `gar`) *wake* has from the first no present-system
save one with intensive reduplication; and its intensive stem, `jāgṛ`,
begins early to assume the value of a root, and form a completer
conjugation; while by the grammarians this stem is reckoned as if simple
and belonging to the root-class, and is inflected throughout
accordingly. Those of its forms which occur in the older language have
been given along with the other intensives above. They are, for the
present-system, the same with those acknowledged as regular later. The
older perfect is like the other intensive perfects found in RV.: namely,
`jāgara` etc., with the participle `jāgṛvā́ṅs`; and a future
`jāgariṣyá`-, a passive participle `jāgaritá`, and a gerundive
`jāgaritavyà`, are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. The old aorist (RV.) is
the usual reduplicated or so-called causative aorist: thus, `ájīgar`.
The grammarians give it in the later language a perfect with additional
reduplication, `jajāgāra` etc., an `iṣ`-aorist, `ajāgariṣam`, with
precative `jāgaryāsam`, and everything else that is needed to make up a
complete conjugation. The perf. `jajāgāra` is quotable from the epics
and later, as also the periphrastic `jāgarām āsa`. And MBh. has the
mutilated `jāgṛmi`, and also `a`-forms, as `jāgarati` and `jāgramāṇa`.

1021\. a. The stem `irajya` (active only) *regulate*, from which a
number of forms are made in RV., has been viewed as an intensive from
√`raj` or `ṛj`. It lacks, however, any analogy with the intensive
formation. The same is true of `iradh` *propitiate* (only `iradhanta`
and `irádhyāi`, apparently for `iradhadhyāi`).

b\. The middle stem `ī́ya`, not infrequent in the oldest language, is
often called an intensive of √`i` *go*, but without any propriety, as it
has no analogy of form whatever with an intensive. The isolated 1st pl.
`īmahe`, common in RV., is of questionable character.

1022\. The root `lī` *totter*, with constant intensive reduplication,
`lelī`, is quite irregular in inflection and accent: thus, pres.,
`lelā́yati` and `lelāyate`, pples `lelāyántī` and `leláyatas` (gen.
sing.) and `lelāyamāna`, impf. `alelāyat` and `alelet` and `alelīyata`,
perf. `lelāya` and `leláya` (?).

1023\. The RV. anomalous form `dart` (or `dard`), 2d and 3d sing. from
√`dṛ` or `dar`, is doubtfully referred to the intensive, as if
abbreviated from `dardar`. RV. has once `avarīvus` (or -`vur`) where the
sense requires a form from √`vṛt`, as `avarīvṛtus`. The form `rarāṇátā`
(RV., once) seems corrupt.

1024\. A marked intensive or frequentative meaning is not always easily
to be traced in the forms classed as intensive; and in some of them it
is quite effaced. Thus, the roots `cit, nij, viṣ` use their intensive
present-system as if it were an ordinary conjugation-class; nor is it
otherwise with `gṛ` (`jāgṛ`). The grammarians reckon the inflection of
`nij` and `viṣ` as belonging to the reduplicating present-system, with
irregularly strengthened reduplication; and they treat in the same way
`vic` and `vij`; `jāgṛ`, as we have seen, they account a simple root.

a\. Also `daridrā`, intensive of √`drā` *run*, is made by the
grammarians a simple root, and furnished with a complete set of
conjugational forms: as `dadaridrāu`; `adaridrāsīt`, etc. etc. It does
not occur in the older language (unless `dáridrat` TS., for which VS.
MS. read `dáridra`). The so-called root `vevī` *flutter* is a pure
intensive. 

1025\. It is allowed by the grammarians to make from the intensive stem
also a passive, desiderative, causative, and so on: thus, from `vevid`,
pass. `vevidyé`; desid. `vévidiṣāmi`; caus. `vevidáyāmi`; desid. of
causative, `vévidayiṣāmi`. But such formations are excessively rare;
quotable are `varīvarjáyantī` AV., `jāgaráyant` TB. etc.; `dādhārayati`
JB., `dandaçayitvā` DKC.

III\. Desiderative.

1026\. By the desiderative conjugation is signified a desire for the
action or condition denoted by the simple root: thus, पिबामि `píbāmi` *I
drink*, desid. पिपासामि `pípāsāmi` *I wish to drink*; जीवामि `jī́vāmi` *I
live*, desid. जिजीविषामि `jíjīviṣāmi` *I desire to live*. Such a
conjugation is allowed to be formed from any simple root in the
language, and also from any causative stem.

a\. The desiderative conjugation, although its forms outside the
present-system are extremely rare in the oldest language, is earlier and
more fully expanded into a whole verbal system than the intensive. Its
forms are also of increasing frequency: much fewer than the intensives
in RV., more numerous in the Brāhmaṇas and later; not one third of the
whole number of roots (about a hundred) noted as having a desiderative
conjugation in Veda and Brāhmaṇa have such in RV.

1027\. The desiderative stem is formed from the simple root by the
addition of two characteristics. 1. a reduplication, which always has
the accent; 2. an appended स `sa` — which, however (like the tense-signs
of aorist and future), sometimes takes before it the auxiliary vowel इ
`i`, becoming इष `iṣa`.

a\. A few instances in the concluding part of ÇB. in which the accent is
otherwise laid — thus, `tiṣṭhā́set, yiyāsántam, vividiṣánti, īpsántas` —
must probably be regarded as errors.

1028\. The root in general remains unchanged; but with the following
exceptions:

a\. A final `i` or `u` is lengthened before `sa`: thus,
`cikṣīṣa, cikīṣa, jigīṣa`; `çuçrūṣa, juhūṣa, cukṣūṣa`.

b\. A final `ṛ` becomes `īr` or `ūr` before `sa`: thus,
`cikīrṣa, titīrṣa` (also irregularly `tūtūrṣa` RV.),
`didhīrṣa, sisīrṣa, tistīrṣa` (also `tustūrṣa`), `jihīrṣa`;
`bubhūrṣa, mumūrṣa` (the only examples quotable). 

c\. Before `iṣa`, a final `i`- or `u`- or `ṛ`-vowel necessarily, and a
penultimate `i` or `u` or `ṛ` optionally, have the `guṇa`-strengthening;
no examples are quotable from the older texts; later occur
`çiçayiṣa, çiçariṣa`;
`cikartiṣa, ninartiṣa, mimardiṣa, vivarṣiṣa, çuçobhiṣa`; but `rurudiṣa`.

More special exceptions are:

d\. A few roots in `ā` weaken this vowel to `ī` or even `i`: thus,
`jigīṣa` from √`gā` *go*; `pipīṣa` (beside `pipāsa`) from √`pā` *drink*,
`jihīṣa` (AV.) from √`hā` *remove* (`jihīte`: 664); `didhiṣa` (beside
`dhitsa`) from √`dhā`.

e\. A few roots in `an` or `am` lengthen the vowel: thus, `jigāṅsa`
(beside `jigamiṣa`) from √`gam`; `jighāṅsa` from √`han`; `mīmāṅsa` from
√`man`; and `titāṅsa` from √`tan`.

f\. Reversion to guttural form of an initial after the reduplication is
seen in `cikīṣa` from √`ci, cikitsa` from √`cit, jigīṣa` from
√`ji, jighāṅsa` from √`han`; and √`hi` is said to make `jighīṣa` (no
occurrence).

g\. The roots `van` and `san` make `vivāsa` and `siṣāsa`, from the
root-forms `vā` and `sā`.

h\. The root `jīv` forms `jujyūṣa` (ÇB.: `jijīviṣa`, VS.); and the other
roots in `īv` (765) are required to make the same change before `sa`,
and to have `guṇa` before `iṣa`: thus, `susyūṣa` or `siseviṣa` from
√`sīv`. `Svap` forms `suṣupsa`. `Dhūrv` forms `dudhūrṣa`.

i\. Initial `s` is usually left unchanged to `ṣ` after the reduplication
when the desiderative sign has `ṣ` (184e): thus, `sisan̄kṣa` (ÇB.:
√`sañj`), and `susyūṣa` and `sisaniṣa`, according to the grammarians;
but `tuṣṭūṣa` is met with.

j\. Further may be mentioned as prescribed by the grammarians:
`ninan̄kṣa` (or `ninaçiṣa`) from √`nāç` *be lost*; `miman̄kṣa` from
√`majj` (occurs in `miman̄kṣu`); `mimārjiṣa` (or `mimṛkṣa`) from √`mṛj`.

1029\. The consonant of the reduplication follows the general rules
(590); the vowel is इ `i` if the root has an `a`-vowel, or ऋ `ṛ`, or an
`i`- vowel; it is उ `u` if the root has an `u`-vowel. But:

a\. A few roots have a long vowel in the reduplicating syllable: thus,
`bībhatsa` from √`badh` or `bādh`; `mīmaṅsa` from √`man`; and `tūtūrṣa`
(RV.) from √`tur`; `dadhiṣu` (AV.) and `dadan̄kṣu` (C.) are probably
false forms.

b\. From √`aç` is made (ÇB.) `açiçiṣa`, and from √`edh` (VS.) `edidhiṣa`
(with a mode of reduplication like that followed sometimes in the
reduplicating aorist: 862). In the older language, these are the only
roots with initial vowel which form a desiderative stem, except `āp` and
`ṛdh`, which have abbreviated stems: see the next paragraph. In the
later language occur further `eṣiṣiṣa` (√`iṣ` *seek*) and `īcikṣiṣa`
(√`īkṣ`); and the grammarians add others, as `arjihiṣa` (√`arh`),
`undidiṣa` (√`und`), `ardidhiṣa` (√`ṛdh`). 

c\. RV. has the stems `ínakṣa` and `íyakṣa`, regarded as desideratives
from √√`naç` *attain* and `yaj`, with mutilated reduplication.

1030\. A number of roots, including some of very common use, form an
abbreviated stem apparently by a contraction of reduplication and root
together into one syllable: thus, ईप्स `īpsa` from √आप् `āp`; दित्स
`ditsa` from √दा `dā`.

a\. Such abbreviated stems are found in the older language as follows:
`dhitsa` (beside `didhiṣa`) from √`dhā`; `ditsa` (beside `didāsa`) from
√`dā`; `dipsa` (`dhīpsa` JB.) from √`dabh`; `çikṣa` from √`çak`; `sīkṣa`
from √`sah`: these are found in RV.; in AV. are added `īpsa` from √`āp`
(RV. has `apsa` once), and `īrtsa` from √`ṛdh`; the other texts furnish
`lipsa` (ÇB.) or `līpsa` (TB.) from √`labh`, `ripsa` (GB.) from √`rabh`,
`pitsa` (ÇB.) from √`pad`, and `dhīkṣa` (ÇB.) from √`dah` (not √`dih`,
since no roots with `i` as medial vowel show the contracted form). In
the later language are further found `pitsa` from √`pat` also, `jñīpsa`
from the causative quasi-root `jñap` (below, 1042 j), and the anomalous
`mitsa` from √`mā` *measure* (allowed also from roots `mi` and `mī`);
and the grammarians give `ritsa` from √`rādh`. Also `mokṣa` is (very
questionably) viewed as a desiderative stem from √`muc`.

1031\. The use of the auxiliary vowel इ `i` is quite rare in the early
language, but more common later; and it is allowed or prescribed by the
grammarians in many stems which have not been found in actual use.

a\. It is declared to follow in general, though not without exceptions,
necessary or optional, the analogy of the futures (934, 943 a).

b\. No example of the use of `i` is found in RV., and only one each in
AV. (`pipatiṣa`), VS. (`jijīviṣa`), and TS. (`jigamiṣa`). The other
examples noted in the early texts are `açiçiṣa, cikramiṣa, jigrahīṣa`
(with `ī` for `i`, as elsewhere in this root),
`cicariṣa, edidhiṣa, jijaniṣa, didīkṣiṣa, bibādhiṣa, ruruciṣa, vivadiṣa, vividiṣa, çiçāsiṣa, tiṣṭighiṣa, jihiṅsiṣa`:
most of them are found only in ÇB. Stems also without the auxiliary
vowel are made from roots `gam, grab, car, jīv, pat, bādh, vid`.

1032\. Inflection: Present-System. The desiderative stem is conjugated
in the present-system with perfect regularity, like other `a`-stems (733
a), in both voices, in all the modes (including, in the older language,
the subjunctive), and with participles and imperfect. It will be
sufficient to give here the first persons only. We may take as active
model ईप्स `īpsa` *seek to obtain*, from √आप् `āp` *obtain*; as middle,
तितिक्ष `titikṣa` *endure*, from √तिज् `tij` *be sharp* (see below,
1040).

1\. Present Indicative.

active.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

ईप्सामि  
i`̄́psāmi`

ईप्सावस्  
`ī́psāvas`

ईप्सामस्  
`ī́psāmas`

तितिक्षे  
`títikṣe`

तितिक्षावहे  
`títikṣāvahe`

तितिक्षामहे  
`títikṣāmahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

1

ईप्सानि  
`ī́psāni`

ईप्साव  
`ī́psāva`

ईप्साम  
`ī́psāma`

तितिक्षै  
`títikṣāi`

तितिक्षावहै  
`títikṣāvahāi`

तितिक्षामहै  
`títikṣāmahāi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

3\. Present Optative.

1

ईप्सेयम्  
`ī́pseyam`

ईप्सेव  
`ī́pseva`

ईप्सेम  
`ī́psema`

तितिक्षेय  
`títikṣeya`

तितिक्षेवहि  
`títikṣevahi`

तितिक्षेमहि  
`títikṣemahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

4\. Present Imperative.

2

ईप्स  
`ī́psa`

ईप्सतम्  
`ī́psatam`

ईप्सत  
`ī́psata`

तितिक्षस्व  
`títikasva`

तितिक्षेथाम्  
`títiksetham`

तितिक्षध्वम्  
`títiksadhvam`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

5\. Present Participle.

ईप्सन्त् `ī́psant` (f.ईप्सन्ती `ī́psantī`)

तितिक्षध्वम् `títikṣadhvam`

6\. Imperfect.

1

ऐप्सम्  
`āípsam`

ऐप्साव  
`āípsāva`

ऐप्साम  
`āípsāma`

अतितिक्षे `átitikṣe`

अतितिक्षावहि  
`átitikṣāvahi`

अतितिक्षामहि  
`átitikṣāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. There are almost no irregularities of inflection to be reported from
the older language. No 1st pl. in `masi`, or 2d pl. in `thana` or
`tana`, is met with; of the impv. in `tāt`, only `īpsatāt`. The quotable
subjunctive forms are those in `sāni`, `sāt` and `sat`, `sān`, and
`santa`. KBU. has `jijñāsīta` (cf. 738 b). But the fem. pple `síṣāsatī`
(instead of `siṣāsantī`) occurs once or twice in the older texts; and
RV. has `dídhiṣāṇa`.

b\. In the epics and later are found sporadic forms of the conjugation:
thus, `sisṛkṣmas` (BhP.), `titikṣmahe` and `bubhūṣate` 3d pl. (MBb.);
and the fem. participles `lipsatī` and `cikīrṣatī` (MBh.: against 449
b). The anomalous `jighīṅsīyāt` occurs also in MBh. and Vas.

1033\. a. Desiderative forms outside the present-system are extremely
rare in the oldest language. The RV. has only perfect forms from a stem
`mimikṣ` — thus, `mimikṣáthus, mimikṣátus, mimikṣús`;
`mimikṣe, mimikṣire` — along with the present forms `mimikṣati, mimikṣa`
etc., `mimikṣant` (pple): they show that `mimikṣ` or `mikṣ` has taken on
the character of an independent root. In AV. are found two aorist forms,
`īrtsīs` and `acikitsīs`, and a participle or two from `mīmāṅsa` (see
below, 1037 a, 1030 a) — all of them from stems which have lost their
distinct desiderative meaning, and come to bear an independent value.
The forms noted from the other earlier texts will be given in full
below.

b\. In the later language, a complete system of verbal forms is allowed
to be made in the desiderative conjugation, the desiderative stem, less
its final vowel, being treated as a root. Thus:

1034\. Perfect. The desiderative perfect is the periphrastic (1070 ff.).

a\. Thus, `īpsāṁ cakāra` etc.; `titikṣāṁ cakre` etc. Such forms are made
in ÇB. from √√`kram, dhūrv, bādh, ruh`; and in ChU. from `man`.

b\. Apparent perfect forms of the ordinary kind made from `mimikṣ` in
RV. have been noticed in the preceding paragraph. And AB. (viii. 21. 10)
has once `didāsitha` *thou hast desired to give*.

1035\. Aorist. The aorist is of the `iṣ`-form: thus, ऐप्सिषम्
`āípsiṣam`, अतितिक्षिषि `átitikṣiṣi`.

a\. The AY. has `acikitsīs`, and `īrtsīs` (`augmentless`, with `mā́`
prohibitive: 579). TB. has `āipsīt`; ÇB. `āírtsīt, ācikīrṣis` and
`ajighāṅsīs`, and `amīmāṅsiṣṭhās`; KB. `jijñāsiṣi`; JUB. `āipsiṣma`; and
AA. `adhitsiṣam`. No examples have been found in the later language.

b\. A precative is also allowed — thus, `īpsyāsam, titikṣiṣīya`; but it
never occurs.

1036\. Futures. The futures are made with the auxiliary vowel इ `i`:
thus, ईप्सिष्यामि `īpsiṣyā́mi` and ईप्सितास्मि `īpsitā́smi`; तितिक्षिष्ये
`titikṣiṣyé` and तितिक्षिताहे `titkṣitā́he`.

a\. The ÇB. has `titikṣiṣyate` and `didṛkṣitā́ras`. Such forms as
`jijñāsyāmas` (MBh.), `didhakṣyāmi` (R.), and `mīmāṅsyant` (GGS.) are
doubtless presents, with -`sya`- blunderingly for -`sa`-.

1037. Verbal Nouns and Adjectives. These too are made with the
auxiliary vowel इ `i`, in all cases where that vowel is ever taken.

a\. In the older language have been noted: participle in `ta, mīmāṅsitá`
(AV., GB.), `jijyūṣita` (AB.), `çuçrūṣitá` and `dhīkṣitá` (ÇB.); —
gerundive in `tavya, līpsitavya` (AB.), `didhyāsitavyá` (ÇB.); in
`ya, jijñāsyà` (ÇB.); — gerund in `tvā, mīmāṅsitvā` (K.).

1038\. Of other declinable stems derived from the desiderative stem, by
far the most common are the adjective in `ú` — e. g.
`titikṣu, dipsú, bībhatsú, siṣāsú` (RV. once `didṛ́kṣu`) — and the
abstract noun in `ā́` — e. g. `īpsā, bībhatsā́, mīmāṅsā́, çuçrūṣā́` — both
of which are made with increasing freedom from an early epoch of the
language: especially the former, which has the value and construction
(271 a) of a present participle. A few adjectives in `enya` (having a
gerundive character: 966 b) occur in the earlier language: thus,
`didṛkṣéṇya` (RV.), `çuçrūṣéṇya` (TS.), `ninīṣeṇya` (PB.), `jijñāsenya`
(AB.), and, with irregular reduplication (apparently) `papṛkṣéṇya`
(RV.), `dadhiṣeṇya` (JB.); and `didṛkṣéya` (RV.) is a similar formation.
RV. has also `siṣāsáni` and `rurukṣáṇi`, and `siṣāsátu` (?). In the
later language, besides some of the formations already instanced (those
in `u` and `ā`, and in `sya` and `sitavya`), are found a few derivatives
in `aka`, as `cikitsaka, bubhūṣaka`; in `ana`, as
`jijñāsana, didhyāsana`; and, very rarely, in `anīya` (`cikitsanīya`)
and `tṛ` (`çuçrūṣitṛ`); further, secondary derivatives (doubtless) in
`in` from the noun in `ā`, as `īpsin, jigīṣin` (one or two of these
occur in the older language). And of an adjective in `a` we have an
example in `bībhatsá` (B.S., and later), and perhaps in `avalipsa`
(AVP.); such words as `ajugupsa, duçcikitsa`, are rather to be
understood as possessive compounds with the noun in `ā`. As to
noun-stems in `is`, see 392 d.

1039\. Derivative or Tertiary Conjugations. A passive is allowed to be
made, by adding the passive-sign य `yá` to the desiderative root (or
stem without final `a`): thus, ईप्स्यते `īpsyáte` *it is desired to be
obtained*; — and a causative, by adding in like manner the
causative-sign अय `áya` (1041): thus, ईप्सयामि `īpsáyāmi` *I cause to
desire obtainment*.

a\. Of these formations in the older language are found `mīmāṅsyámāna`
(doubtless to be read for -`sámāna`, AV.), `lipsyámāna` (ÇB.), and
`rurutsyamāna` (K.). Half-a-dozen such passives are quotable later, and
one or two causatives: e. g. `cikitsyate, vivakṣyate, jijñāsyate`;
`cikīrṣayant, cikitsayiṣyati`.

b\. For the desiderative conjugation formed on causative stems, which is
found as early as the Brāhmaṇas, see below, 1052b. 

1040\. Some stems which are desiderative in form have lost the
peculiarity of desiderative meaning, and assumed the value of
independent roots: examples are `cikits`, *cure*, `jugups`, *despise*,
`titikṣ`, *endure*, `bībhats`, *abhor*, `mīmāṅs` *ponder*, `çuçrūṣ`
*obey*. Doubtless some of the apparent roots in the language with
sibilant final are akin with the desideratives in origin: e.g. `çikṣ`,
desiderative of `çak`.

a\. On account of the near relation of desiderative and future (cf. 948
b), the former is occasionally found where the latter was rather to be
expected: thus, `rājānam prayiyāsantam` (ÇB.) *a king about to depart*;
`prāṇa uccikramiṣan` (ChU.) *the breath on the point of expiring*;
`mumūrṣur ivā ’bhavat` (H.) *he was fain to die*.

IV\. Causative.

1041\. a. In the later language is allowed to be made from most roots a
complete causative conjugation. The basis of this is a causative stem,
formed by appending the causative-sign अय `áya` to the, usually
strengthened, root.

b\. But by no means all conjugation-stems formed by the sign अय `áya`
are of causative value; and the grammarians regard a part of them as
constituting a conjugation-class, the tenth or `cur`-class, according to
which roots may be inflected as according to the other classes, and
either alone or along with others (775).

c\. In RV., the proportion without causative value is fully one third.
The formation is a more obviously denominative one than any of the other
conjugation-classes, an intermediate between them and the proper
denominatives. A causative meaning has established itself in connection
with the formation, and become predominant, though not exclusive. A
number of roots of late appearance and probably derivative character are
included in the class, and some palpable denominatives, which lack only
the usual denominative accent (below, 1056).

d\. The causative formation is of much more frequent use, and more
decidedly expanded into a full conjugation, than either the intensive or
the desiderative. It is made from more than three hundred roots in the
early language (in RV., from about one hundred and fifty); but in the
oldest, its forms outside the present-system are (apart from the
attached reduplicated aorist: 1046) exceedingly few.

1042\. The treatment of the root before the causative-sign अय `aya` is
as follows:

a. Medial or initial i, u, ṛ, ḷ have the guṇa-strengthening (if capable
of it: 240; thus, vedaya from √vid, codaya from √cud, tarpaya from √tṛp;
and kalpaya from √kḷp (only example): but cintaya, gulphaya, dṛṅhaya.

b\. But a few roots lack the strengthening: these are, in the older
language, cit (citaya and cetaya), iṣ, iḷ, riṣ (riṣaya and reṣaya), vip
(vipaya and vepaya), tuj, tur, tuṣ (tuṣaya and toṣaya), dyut (dyutaya
and dyotaya), ruc (rucaya and rocaya), çuc (çucaya and çocaya), çubh
(cubhaya and çobhaya), kṛp, mṛḍ, spṛh; and grabh makes in RV. gṛbhaya.
Duṣ and guh lengthen the vowel instead. Mṛj sometimes has vṛddhi, as in
other forms: thus, mārjaya (beside marjaya). On the other hand, guṇa
appears irregularly (240 b) in srevaya (beside çrīvaya), heḍaya,
mekṣaya. Similar irregularities in the later language are giraya, tulaya
(also tolaya), churaya (also choraya), muṣaya, sphuraya. No forms
without strengthening have a causative value made in the older language.

c\. A final vowel has the vṛddhi-strengthening: thus, cāyaya, çāyaya,
cyāvaya, bhāvaya, dhāraya, sāraya.

d\. But no root in i or ī has vṛddhi in the Veda (unless pāyaya \[k,
below\] comes from pī rather than pā) — as, indeed, regular causatives
from such roots are hardly quotable: only RV. has kṣayaya (beside
kṣepaya) from √kṣi *possess*; for a few alternatively permitted forms,
see below, 1. In B. and S., however, occur çāyaya and sāyaya (√si or
sā); and later -āyaya, cāyaya, smāyaya, ḍāyaya, nāyaya.

e\. A few roots have a form also with guṇa-strengthening: thus, cyu,
dru, plu, yu *separate*, çru, pū, stu, sru; jṛ *waste away*, dṛ
*pierce*, sṛ, smṛ, hṛ; vṛ *choose* makes varaya later (it is not found
in V.: epic also vāraya).

f\. A medial or initial a in a light syllable is sometimes lengthened,
and sometimes remains unchanged: thus, bhājaya, svāpaya, ādaya; janaya,
çrathaya, anaya (but mandaya, valgaya, bhakṣaya).

g\. The roots in the older language which keep their short a are jan,
pan, svan, dhan, ran, stan, gam (gāmaya once in RV.), tam, dam, raj
(usually rañjaya), prath, çrath, çnath, vyath, svad, chad *please* (also
chandaya), nad, dhvas (also dhvaṅsaya), rah, mah (also maṅhaya), nabh
(also nambhaya), tvar, svar, hval. In the later language, further, kvaṇ,
jvar, trap, day, paṇ, rac, ran *ring*, vadh, val, vaç, çlath, skhal,
sthag. Both forms are made (either in the earlier or in the later
language, or in both taken together) by ad, kal, kram, kṣam, khan, ghaṭ,
cam, cal, jval, tvar, dal, dhvan, nad, nam, pat, bhram, math, mad, yam,
ram, lag, lal, vam, vyadh, çam *be quiet*, çram, çvas, svap. The roots
which lengthen the vowel are decidedly the more numerous.

h\. If a nasal is taken in any of the strong forms of a root, it usually
appears in the causative stem: e. g. dambhaya, daṅçaya, indhaya,
`limpaya, rundhaya, çundhaya, kṛntaya, dṛṅhaya`. From a number of
roots, stems both with and without the nasal are made: thus (besides
those mentioned above, g), `kuñcaya` and `kocaya, granthaya` and
`grathaya, bṛṅhaya` and `barhaya`, `bhraṅçaya` and `bhrāçaya, çundhaya`
and `çodhaya, sañjaya` and `sajjaya, siñcaya` and `secaya`. In a few of
these is seen the influence of present-stems.

i\. Most roots in final `ā`, and the root `ṛ`, add `p` before the
conjugation-sign: thus, `dāpaya, dhāpaya, sthāpaya`; `arpaya`.

j\. Such stems are made in the older language from the roots
`kṣā, khyā, gā` *sing* (also `gāyaya`), `glā, ghrā, jñā, dā` *give*,
`dā` *divide*, `drā` *run*, `dhā` *put* and `dhā` *suck*, `mā`
*measure*, `mlā, yā, vā` *blow*, `sthā, snā, hā` *remove*; the later
language adds `kṣmā, dhmā`, and `hā` *leave*. From `jñā` and `snā` are
found in AV. and later the shortened forms `jñapaya` and `snapaya`, and
from `çrā` only `çrapaya` (not in RV.). Also, in the later language,
`glā` forms `glapaya`, and `mlā` forms `mlapaya`.

k\. Stems from `ā`-roots showing no `p` are, earlier, `gāyaya` (also
`gāpaya`) from √`gā` *sing*, `chāyaya, pāyaya` from √`pā` *drink* (or
`pī`), `pyāyaya` from √`pyā` or `pyāy`; `sāyaya` from √`sā` (or `si`);
also, later, `hvāyaya` from √`hvā` (or `hū`); — and further, from roots
`vā` *weave*, `vyā`, and `çā` (or `çi`), according to the grammarians.

l\. The same `p` is taken also by a few `i`- and `ī`-roots, with other
accompanying irregularities: thus, in the older language, `kṣepaya`
(RV., beside `kṣayaya`) from √`kṣi` *possess*; `jāpaya` (VS. and later)
from √`ji`; `lāpaya` (TB. and later; later also `lāyaya`) from √`lī`
*cling*; `çrāpaya` (VS., once) from √`çri`; `adhyāpaya` (S. and later)
from `adhi`+√`i`; — in the later, `kṣapaya` (beside `kṣayaya`) from
√`kṣi` *destroy*; `māpaya` from √`mī`; `smāpaya` (beside `smāyaya`) from
√`smi`; `hrepaya` from √`hrī`; — and the grammarians make further
`krāpaya` from √`krī`; `cāpaya` (beside `cāyaya`) from √`ci` *gather*;
`bhāpaya` (beside `bhāyaya` and `bhīṣaya`) from √`bhī`; `repaya` from
√`rī`, and `vlepaya` from √`vlī`. Moreover, √`ruh` makes `ropaya` (B.
and later) beside `rohaya` (V. and later), and √`knū` makes `knopáya`
(late).

m\. More anomalous cases, in which the so-called causative is palpably
the denominative of a derived noun, are: `pālaya` from √`pā` *protect*;
`prīṇaya` from √`prī`; `līnaya` (according to grammarians) from √`lī`;
`dhūnaya` (not causative in sense) from √`dhū`; `bhīṣaya` from √`bhī`;
`ghātaya` from √`han`; `sphāvaya` from √`sphā` or `sphāy`.

n\. In the Prakrit, the causative stem is made from all roots by the
addition of (the equivalent of) `āpaya`; and a number (about a dozen) of
like formations are quotable from Sanskrit texts, mostly of the latest
period; but three, `krīḍāpaya, jīvāpaya`, and `dīkṣāpaya`, occur in the
epics; and two, `açāpaya` and `kṣālāpaya`, even in the Sutras.

1043\. Inflection: Present-System. The causative stem is inflected in
the present-system precisely like other stems in अ `a` (733 a): it will
be sufficient to give here in general the first persons of the different
formations, taking as model the stem धारय `dhāráya`, from √धृ `dhṛ`.
Thus:

1\. Present Indicative.

active.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

धारयामि  
`dhāráyāmi`

धारयावस्  
`dhāráyāvas`

धारयामस्  
`dhāráyāmas`

etc.

etc.

etc.

middle.

s\.

d\.

p\.

1

धारये  
`dhāráye`

धारयावहे  
`dhāráyāvahe`

धारयामहे  
`dhāráyāmahe`

etc.

etc.

etc.

a\. The 1st pl. act. in `masi` greatly outnumbers (as ten to one) that
in `mas` in both RV. and AV. No example occurs of 2d pl. act. in
`thana`, nor of 3d sing. mid. in `e` for `ate`.

2\. Present Subjunctive.

For the subjunctive may be instanced all the forms noted as occurring in
the older language:

active.

1

`dhāráyāṇi`

`dhāráyāva`

`dhāráyāma`

2

`dhāráyāsi`

`dhāráyāthas`

`dhāráyātha`

dhāráyās

3

`dhāráyāti`

`dhāráyātas`

`dhāráyān`

`dhāráyāt`

middle.

1

`dhāráyāi`

`dhāráyāvahāi`

2

`dhāráyāse`

`dhāráyādhve`

`dhāráyādhvāi`

3

`dhāráyāte`

`dhāráyāite`

`dhāráyātāi`

b\. Only one dual mid. form in `āite` occurs: `mādáyāite` (RV.). The
only RV. mid. form in `āi`, except in 1st du., is `mādayādhvāi`. The
primary endings in 2d and 3d sing. act. are more common than the
secondary.

3\. Present Optative.

  

active.

1

घारयेयम्  
`dhāráyeyam`

धारयेव  
`dhāráyeva`

धारयेम  
`dhāráyema`

etc.

etc.

etc. 

middle.

1

धारयेय  
`dhāráyeya`

धारयेवहि  
`dhāráyevahi`

धारयेमहि  
`dhāráyemahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

c\. Optative forms are very rare in the oldest language (four in RV.,
two in AV.); they become more common in the Brāhmaṇas. A 3d sing. mid.
in `īta` instead of `eta` (cf. 738 b) occurs once in B. (`kāmayīta`
AB.), is not very rare in S. (a score or two of examples are quotable),
and is also found in MBh. and later. Of a corresponding 3d pl. in `īran`
only one or two instances can be pointed out (`kāmayīran` AÇS.,
`kalpayīran` AGS.).

4\. Present Imperative.

active.

2

धारय  
`dhāráya`

धारयतम्  
`dhāráyatam`

धारयत  
`dhāráyata`

etc.

etc.

etc.

middle.

2

धारयस्व  
`dhāráyasva`

धारयेथाम्  
`dhāráyethām`

धारयध्वम्  
`dhāráyadhvam`

etc.

etc.

etc.

d\. Imperative persons with the ending `tāt` occur: `dhārayatāt` (AV.)
and `cyāvayatāt` (ÇB.) are 2d sing.; `pātayatāt` (ÇB.) is 3d sing.;
`gamayatāt` and `cyāvayatāt` (K. etc.), and `vārayatāt` (TB.) are used
as 2d pl. `Vārayadhvāt` (K. etc.) is 2d pl., and the only known example
of such an ending (see above, 549 b).

5\. Present Participle.

धारयन्त्  
`dhāráyant`

धारयमाण  
`dhāráyamāṇa`

e\. The feminine of the active participle is regularly and usually made
in `antī` (449 c). But a very few examples in `atī` are met with (one in
the older language: `namayatī` Āpast.).

f\. The middle participle in `māna` is made through the whole history of
the language, from RV. (only `yātáyamāna`) down, and is the only one met
with in the earlier language (for `ī́rayānas` \[sic!\], MS. ii. 7. 12,
is evidently a false reading, perhaps for `írayā nas`). But decidedly
more common in the epics and later is one formed with `āna`: e. g.
`kāmayāna`, `cintayāna`, `pālayāna`, `vedayāna`. It is quotable from a
larger number of roots than is the more regular participle in `māna`. As
it occurs in no accentuated text, its accent cannot be given. 

6\. Imperfect.

active.

1\.

अधारयम्  
`ádhārayam`

अधारयाव  
`ádhārayāva`

अघारयाम  
`ádhārayāma`

etc.

etc.

etc

middle.

1

अधारये  
`ádhāraye`

अधारयावहि  
`ádhārayāvahi`

अधारयामहि  
`ádhārayāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

1044\. As was above pointed out, the formations from the causative stem
in `aya` outside the present-system are in the oldest language very
limited. In RV. are found two forms of the future in `syāmi`, one
passive participle (`coditá`), and ten infinitives in `dhyāi`; also one
or two derivative nouns in `tṛ` (`bodhayitṛ́`, `codayitrī́`), five in
`iṣṇu`, seven in `itnu`, and a few in `a` (`atipārayá`, `nidhārayá`,
`vācamīnkhayá`, `viçvamejaya`), and in `u` (`dhārayú`, `bhāvayú`,
`mandayú`). In AV., also two `s`-future forms and four gerunds in `tvā`;
and a few derivative noun-stems, from one of which is made a
periphrastic perfect (`gamayā́ṁ cakāra`). In the Brāhmaṇas, verbal
derivative forms become more numerous and various, as will be noted in
detail below.

1045\. Perfect. The accepted causative perfect is the periphrastic (1071
a); a derivative noun in `ā́` is made from the causative stem, and to its
accusative, in `ā́m`, is added the auxiliary: thus,

धारयां चकार `dhārayā́ṁ cakāra` (or āsa: 1070 b)

धारयां चक्रे `dhārayā́ṁ cakre`

a\. Of this perfect no example occurs in RV. or SV. or VS., only one —
`gamayā́ṁ cakāra` — in AV., and but half-a-dozen in all the various texts
of the Black Yajur-Veda, and these not in the mantra-parts of the text.
They are also by no means frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, except in ÇB.
(where they abound: chiefly, perhaps, for the reason that this work uses
in considerable part the perfect instead of the imperfect as its
narrative tense).

1046\. Aorist. The aorist of the causative conjugation is the
reduplicated, which in general has nothing to do with the causative
stem, but is made directly from the root.

a\. It has been already fully described (above, 856 ff.).

b\. Its association with the causative is probably founded on an
original intensive character belonging to it as a reduplicated form, and
is a matter of gradual growth; in the Veda it is made from a
considerable number of roots (in RV., more than a third of its
instances; in AV., about a fifth) which have no causative stem in `aya`.

c\. The causative aorist of √धृ `dhṛ`, then, is as follows:

1

अदीधरम्  
`ádīdharam`

अदीधराव  
`ádīdharāva`

अदीधराम  
`ádīdharāma`

etc.

etc.

etc.

1

अदीधरे  
`ádīdhare`

अदीधरावहि  
`ádīdharāvahi`

अदीधरामहि  
`ádīdharāmahi`

etc.

etc.

etc.

An example was inflected in full at 864.

1047\. In a few cases, where the root has assumed a peculiar form before
the causative sign — as by the addition of a `p` or `ṣ` (above, 1042 i
ff.) — the reduplicated aorist is made from this form instead of from
the simple root: thus, `atiṣṭhipam` from `sthāp` (stem `sthāpaya` for
√`sthā`. Aorist-stems of this character from quasi-roots in `āp` are
`arpipa` (√`ṛ`), `jījapa` or `jījipa`, `jijñapa` or `jijñipa`,
`çiçrapa`, `tiṣṭhipa`, `jīhipa`; the only other example from the older
language is `bībhiṣa` from `bhīṣ` for √`bhī`.

1048\. But a few sporadic forms of an `iṣ`-aorist from causative
conjugation-stems are met with: thus, `dhvanayīt` (RV.; TS. has instead
the wholly anomalous `dhvanayit`), `vyathayīs` and `āilayīt` (AV.),
`pyāyayiaṣṭhās` and `avādayiṣṭhās` (KBU.), in the older language (RV.
has also `ūnayīs` from a `denominative` stem); in the later,
`ahlādayiṣata` (DKC.), and probably `aghātayithās` (MBh.; for -`iṣṭhās`:
cf. 904 d). The passive 3d sing, `aropi`, from the causative `ropaya`,
has a late occurrence (Çatr.).

1049\. A precative is of course allowed by the grammarians to be made
for the causative conjugation: in the middle, from the causative stem
with the auxiliary `i` substituted for its final `a`; in the active,
from the form of the root as strengthened in the causative stem, but
without the causative sign: thus,

धार्यासम् `dhāryāsam` etc.

धारयिषीय `dhārayiṣīya` etc.

This formation is to be regarded as purely fictitious.

1050\. Futures. Both futures, with the conditional, are made from the
causative stem, with the auxiliary इ `i`, which takes the place of its
final अ `a`. Thus:

S-Futures.

धारयिष्यामि `dhārayiṣyā́mi` etc.

धारयिष्ये `dhārayiṣyé` etc.

धारयिष्यन्त् `dhārayiṣyánt`

धारयिष्यमाण `dhārayiṣyámāṇa`



Conditional.

अधारयिष्यम् `ádhārayiṣyam` etc.

अधारयिष्ये `ádhārayiṣye` etc.

Periphrastic Future.

धारयितास्मि `dhārayitā́smi` etc.

  
a. It has been mentioned above that RV. and AV. contain only two
examples each of the `s`-future, and none of the periphrastic. The
former begin to appear in the Brāhmaṇas more numerously, but still
sparingly, with participles, and conditional (only `adhārayiṣyat` ÇB.;
`alāpayiṣyathās` ChU.); of the latter, ÇB. affords two instances
(`pārayitā́smi` and `janayitā́si`). Examples of both formations are
quotable from the later language (including the middle form
darçayitāhev: 947 c).

1051\. Verbal Nouns and Adjectives. These are made in two different
ways: either 1. from the full causative stem (in the same manner as the
futures, just described); or 2. from the causatively strengthened
root-form (with loss of the causative-sign).

a\. To the latter class belong the passive participle, as `dhārita`; the
gerundive and gerund in `ya`, as `dhārya`, -`dhārya`; and the gerund in
`am`, as `dhāram`; also, in the older language, the root-infinitive, as
-`dhāram` etc. (970 a). To the former class belong the infinitive and
the gerund in `tvā`, as `dhārayitum`, `dhārayitvā`, and the gerundive in
`tavya`, as `dhārayitavya` (also, in the older language, the infinitives
in `tavāi` and `dhyāi`, as `jánayitavāí`, `īrayádhyāi`, etc.). The
auxiliary `i` is taken in every formation which ever admits that vowel.

b\. Examples of the passive participle are `īritá`, `vāsita`, `çrāvitá`.
But from the quasi-root `jñap` (1042 j) is made `jñapta`, without
union-vowel.

c\. Examples of the infinitive and gerund in `tvā` are `jóṣayitum`,
`dhā́rayitum`; `kalpayitvā́`, `arpayitvā́`. But in the epics, and even
later, infinitives are occasionally made with loss of the
causative-sign: e. g. `çeṣitum`, `bhāvitum`, `dhāritum`, `mocitum`.

d\. Examples of the gerunds in ya and am are -`bhā́jya`, -`ghārya`,
-`pādya`, -`vāsya`, `nāyya`, -`sthāpya`; -`bhā́jam`, -`sthāpam`. But
stems showing in the root-syllable no difference from the root retain
`ay` of the causative-sign in the gerund, to distinguish it from that
belonging to the primary conjugation: e. g. -`kramáyya`, -`gamáyya`,
-`janáyya`, -`jvaláyya`, -`kalayya`, -`çamayya`, -`racayya`, -`āpayya`.

e\. Examples of the gerundive in `tavya` are `tarpayitavyà`,
`gamayitavya`, `hvāyayitavya`; of that in `ya`, `sthā́pya`, `hā́rya`,
`yājya`; of that in `anīya`, `sthāpanīya`, `bhāvanīya`.

f. Examples of other formations occurring in the older language are as
follows: root-infinitive, -`sthāpam`, -`vāsas`; — infinitive in `tu`,
other cases than accusative, -`janayitave`; `jánayitavāí`,
`pā́yayitavāí`, -`çcotayitavāí`; `çámayitos`; — infinitive in `dhyāi`,
`iṣayádhyāi`, `īrayádhyāi`, `taṅsayádhyāi`, `nāçayádhyāi`,
`mandayádhyāi`, `mādayádhyāi`, `riṣayádhyāi`, `vartayádhyāi`,
`vājayádhyāi`, `syandayádhyāi` (all RV.); — gerundive in `āyya`,
`panayā́yya`, `spṛhayā́yya`, `trayayā́yya` (? √`trā`).

g\. Other noun-derivatives from the causative stem are not infrequent,
being decidedly more numerous and various than from any other of the
secondary conjugation-stems. Examples (of other kinds than those
instanced in 1044) are: `árpaṇa`, `dāpana`, `prīṇana`, `bhī́ṣaṇa`;
`jñāpaka`, `ropaka`; `patayālú`, `spṛhayālu`; `jánayati`, `jñapti`.

h\. All the classes of derivatives, it will be noticed, follow in regard
to accent the analogy of similar formations from the simple root, and
show no influence of the special accent of the causative-stem.

1052\. Derivative or Tertiary Conjugations. From the causative stem are
made a passive and a desiderative conjugation. Thus:

a\. The passive-stem is formed by adding the usual passive-sign य `yá`
to the causatively strengthened root, the causative-sign being dropped:
thus, धार्यते `dhāryáte`.

b\. Such passives are hardly found in the Veda (only `bhājyá`- AV.), but
some thirty instances are met with in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras: examples
are `jñapyá`- (TS.), `sādya`- (K.), `pādya`- (AB.), `vādya`- (TB.),
`sthāpya`- (GB.); and they become quite common later.

c\. The desiderative stem is made by reduplication and addition of the
sign इष `iṣa`, of which the initial vowel replaces the final of the
causative stem: thus, दिधारयिषति `dīdhārayiṣati`.

d\. These, too, are found here and there in the Brāhmaṇas and later
(about forty stems are quotable): examples are `pipāyayiṣa` (K.),
`bibhāvayiṣa` and `cikalpayiṣa` and `lulobhayiṣa` (AB.), `dídrāpayiṣa`
and `rirādhayiṣa` and `āpipayiṣa` (ÇB.), and so on.

e\. As to causatives made from the intensive and desiderative stems, see
above, 1025, 1039.

V. Denominative.

1058\. A denominative conjugation is one that has for its basis a
noun-stem.

a\. It is a view now prevailingly held that most of the present-systems
of the Sanskrit verb, along with other formations analogous with a
present-system, are in their ultimate origin denominative; and that
many apparent roots are of the same character. The denominatives which
are so called differ from these only in that their origin is recent and
undisguised.

1054\. The grammarians teach that any noun-stem in the language may be
converted, without other addition than that of an अ `a` (as union-vowel
enabling it to be inflected according to the second general conjugation)
into a present-stem, and conjugated as such.

a\. But such formations are rare in actual use. The RV. has a few
isolated and doubtful examples, the clearest of which is `bhiṣákti` *he
heals*, from `bhiṣáj` *physician*; it is made like a form of the
root-class; `abhiṣṇak` seems to be its imperfect according to the nasal
class; and `pátyate` *he rules* appears to be a denominative of `páti`
*master*; other possible cases are `iṣaṇas` etc., `kṛpáṇanta`,
`taruṣema` etc., `vanuṣanta`, `bhurajanta`, `vánanvati`. From the other
older texts are quotable `kavyánt` (TS.), `áçlonat` (TB.), `unmūlati`
(ṢB.), `svadhāmahe` (ÇÇS.). And a considerable number of instances,
mostly isolated, are found in the later language: e. g. `kalahant`
(MBh.), `arghanti` (Pañç.), `abjati` (Çatr.), `gardabhati` (SD.),
`utkaṇṭhate` (SD.), `jagannetrati` (Pras.), `keliçvetasahasrapattrati`
(Pras.).

1055\. In general, the base of denominative conjugation is made from the
noun-stem by means of the conjugation-sign य `yá`, which has the accent.

a\. The identity of this `ya` with the `ya` of the so-called causative
conjugation, as making with the final `a` of a noun-stem the
causative-sign `aya`, is hardly to be questioned. What relation it
sustains to the `ya` of the `ya`-class (759), of the passive (768), and
of the derivative intensive stem (1016), is much more doubtful.

1056\. Intermediate between the denominative and causative conjugations
stands a class of verbs, plainly denominative in origin, but having the
causative accent. Examples, beginning to appear at the earliest period
of the language, are `mantráyate` *speaks, takes counsel*, (from
`mantra`, √`man` + `tra`), `kīrtáyati` *commemorates* (from `kīrti`,
√`kṛ` *praise*), `artháyati` or -`te` *makes an object of, seeks* (from
`ártha` *goal, object*), `varṇayati` *depicts* (from `varṇa` *color*),
`kathayati` or -`te` *gives the how of anything, relates* (from `katham`
*how?*), and so on. These, along with like forms from roots which have
no other present-system (though they may make scattering forms outside
that system from the root directly), or which have this beside other
present-systems without causative meaning, are reckoned by the
grammarians as a separate conjugation-class, the `cur`-class (above,
607, 775). 

1057\. Denominatives are formed at every period in the history of the
language, from the earliest down.

a\. They are frequent in RV., which contains over a hundred, of all
varieties; AV. has only half as many (and personal forms from hardly a
third as many: from the rest, present participles, or derivative nouns);
AB., less than twenty; ÇB., hardly more than a dozen; and so on. In the
later language they are quotable by hundreds, but from the vast majority
of stems occur only an example or two; the only ones that have won any
currency are those that have assumed the character of "`cur`-class"
verbs.

1058\. The denominative meaning is, as in other languages, of the
greatest variety; some of the most frequent forms of it are: *be like,
act as, play the part of; regard* or *treat as; cause to be, make into;
use, make application of; desire, wish for, crave* — that which is
signified by the noun-stem.

a\. The modes of treatment of the stem-final are also various; and the
grammarians make a certain more or less definite assignment of the
varieties of meaning to the varieties of form; but this allotment finds
only a dubious support in the usages of the words as met with even in
the later language, and still less in the earlier. Hence the formal
classification, according to the final of the noun-stem and the way in
which this is treated before the denominative sign `yá`, will be the
best one to follow.

1059\. From stems in `a`. a. The final a of a noun-stem oftenest remains
unchanged: thus, `amitrayáti` *plays the enemy*, *is hostile*;
`devayáti` *cultivates the gods, is pious*.

b\. But final `a` is also often lengthened: thus, `aghāyáti` *plans
mischief*; `priyāyáte` *holds dear*; `açvāyáti` *seeks for horses*;
`açanāyáti` *desires food*.

c\. While in the Veda the various modes of denominative formation are
well distributed, no one showing a marked preponderance, in the later
language the vast majority of denominatives (fully seven eighths) are of
the two kinds just noticed: namely, made from `a`-stems, and of the form
`aya` or `āya`, the former predominating. And there is seen a decided
tendency to give the denominatives in `aya` an active form and
transitive meaning, and those in `āya` a middle form and intransitive or
reflexive meaning. In not a few cases, parallel formations from the same
stem illustrate this distinction: e. g. `kaluṣayati` *makes turbid*,
`kaluṣāyate` *is* or *becomes turbid*; `taruṇayati` *rejuvenates*,
`taruṇāyate` *is rejuvenated*; `çithilayati` *loosens*, `çithilāyate`
*grows loose*. No distinct traces of this distinction are recognizable
in the Veda, although there also corresponding forms with short `a` and
with long `ā` sometimes stand side by side.

d\. Final `a` is sometimes changed to `ī` (very rarely `i`): thus,
`adhvarīyáti` *performs the sacrifice*; `taviṣīyáti` *is mighty*;
`putrīyáti` or `putriyáti` *desires a son*; `māṅsīyáti` *craves flesh*;
`sajjīyate` *is ready*; `candrakāntiīati` *is moonstonelike*. Not fifty
stems of this form are quotable.

e\. It is occasionally dropped (after `n` or `r`): thus, `turaṇyáti` *is
rapid*; `adhvaryáti` *performs the sacrifice*.

f\. Other modes of treatment are sporadic: thus, the addition of `s`, as
in `stanasyati` *seeks the breast*; the change of `a` to `e`, as in
`vareyáti` *plays the wooer*.

1060\. From stems in `ā`. Final `ā` usually remains, as in `gopāyáti`
*plays the herdsman, protects*; `pṛtanāyati` *fights*; but it is
sometimes treated in the other methods of an `a`-stem: thus, `pṛtanyati`
*fights*; `tilottamīyati` *acts Tilottama*.

1061\. From stems in `i`, `ī`, and `u`, `ū`. Such stems are (especially
those in `u`, `ū`) very rare. They show regularly `ī` and `ū` before
`ya`: thus, `arātīyáti` (also -`tiy`-) *plots injury*; `janīyáti` (also
-`niy`-) *seeks a wife*; `sakhīyáti` *desires friendship*; `nārīyate`
*turns woman*; — `çatrūyáti` *acts the foe*; `ṛjūyáti` *is straight*;
`vasūyáti` *desires wealth*; `asūyáti` *grumbles, is discontented*: with
short `u`, `gātuyáti` *sets in motion*.

a\. More rarely, `i` or `u` is treated as `a` (or else is gunated, with
loss of a `y` or `v`): thus, `dhunayáti` *comes snorting*; `laghayati`
*makes easier*. Sometimes, as to `a` (above, 1059f), a sibilant is
added: thus, `aviṣyáti` *is vehement*; `uruṣyáti` *saves*. From `dhī`,
RV. makes `dhiyāyáte`.

1062\. From other vowel-stems, a. Final `ṛ` is changed to `rī`: thus,
`mātrīyáti` *treats as a mother* (only quotable example).

b\. The diphthongs, in the few cases that occur, have their final
element changed to a semivowel: thus, `gavyáti` *seeks cattle, goes
a-raiding*.

1063\. From consonant-stems. A final consonant usually remains before
`ya`: thus, `bhiṣajyáti` *plays the physician, cures*; `ukṣaṇyáti` *acts
like a bull*; `apasyáti` *is active*; `namasyáti` *pays reverence*;
`sumanasyáte` *is favorably disposed*; `taruṣyáti` *fights*.

a\. But a final `n` is sometimes dropped, and the preceding vowel
treated as a final: thus, `rājāyáte` or `rājīyáti` *is kingly*, from
`rājan`; -`karmayati` from -`karman`; `svāmīyati` *treats as master*,
from `svāmin`: `vṛṣāyáte` from `vṛṣan` is the only example quotable from
the older language. Sporadic cases occur of other final consonants
similarly treated: thus, `ojāyáte` from `ojas`, -`manāyate` from
-`manas`; — while, on the other hand, an `a`-vowel is occasionally added
to such a consonant before `ya`: thus, `iṣayáti` from `iṣ`,
`satvanāyati` from `satvan`.

1064\. The largest class of consonantal stems are those showing a `s`
before the `ya`; and, as has been seen above, a sibilant is sometimes,
by analogy, added to a final vowel, making the denominative-sign
virtually `sya` — or even, with `a` also added after an `i`- or `u`-
vowel, `asya`; and this comes to be recognized by the grammarians as an
independent sign, forming denominatives that express desire: thus,
`sumakhasyáte` *is merry*; `jīvanasya`- (in -`syā́` *love of life*);
`vṛṣasyati` *desires the male* (the only quotable examples);
`madhuṣyati` or `madhvasyati` *longs for honey*; kṣīrasyati *craves
milk*.

1065\. The grammarians reckon as a special class of denominatives in
`kāmya` what are really only ordinary ones made from a compound
noun-stem having `kāma` as its final member: thus, `rathakāmyati` *longs
for the chariot* (K.: only example found in the older language);
`arthakāmyati` *desires wealth*; `putrakāmyati` *wishes a son* (the only
quotable examples); coming from the possessive compounds `rathakāma`
etc. And `arthāpāyati` *treats as property* is a (sole quotable) example
of a stem having the Prakritic causative form (1042 n).

a\. Stems of anomalous formation are `drāghaya` from `dīrgha`,
`draḍhaya` from `dṛḍha`, and perhaps `mradaya` from `mṛdu`.

1066\. a. A number of denominative stems occur in the Veda for which no
corresponding noun-stems are found, although for all or nearly all of
them related words appear: thus, `an̄kūyá`, `stabhūyá`, `iṣudhya`;
`dhiṣaṇyá`, `riṣaṇyá`, `ruvaṇya`, `huvanya`, `iṣaṇyá`; `ratharyá`,
`çratharyá`, `saparyá`; `iyasya` (ÇB.), `irasyá`, `daçasyá`, `makhasyá`,
`panasyá`, `sacasyá`. Those in `anya`, especially, look like the
beginnings of a new conjugation-class.

b\. Having still more that aspect, however, are a Vedic group of stems
in `āya`, which in general have allied themselves to present-systems of
the `nā`-class (732), and are found alongside the forms of that class:
thus, `gṛbhāyáti` beside `gṛbhṇāti`. Of such, RV. has
`gṛbhāyá, mathāyá, pruṣāyá, muṣāyá, çrathāya, skabhāyá, stabhāyá`. A few
others have no `nā`-class companions: thus, `damāyá, çamāyá, tudāyá`
(AV.); and `panāya, naçāya, vṛṣāya` (√`vṛṣ` *rain*), `vasāyá` (√`vas`
*clothe*), and perhaps `açāya` (√`āç` *attain*).

c\. Here may be mentioned also quasi-denominatives made from
onomatopoetic combinations of sounds, generally with repetition: e. g.
`kiṭakiṭāya, thatathatarāya, miṣamiṣāya, çaraçarāya`.

1067\. The denominative stems in RV. and AV. with causative accentuation
are: RV. `an̄kháya, artháya, iṣáya` (also `iṣayá`),
`ūrjáya, ṛtáya, kṛpáya, mantráya, mṛgáya, vavráya, vājáya` (also
`vājayá`), `vīḷáya, suṣváya` (also `suṣvayá`); AV. adds
`kīrtáya, dhūpā́ya, pāláya, vīráya, sabhāgáya`.

a\. The accent of `ánniya` and `hástaya` (RV.) is wholly anomalous.

1068\. Inflection. The denominative stems are inflected with regularity
like the other stems ending in अ `a` (733 a) throughout the
present-system. Forms outside of that system — except from the stems
which are reckoned to the causative or `cur`-class, and which follow in
all respects the rules for that class — are of the utmost rarity.

a\. In RV. occurs no form not belonging to the present-system, except
`ūnayīs` (with `mā́` prohibitive), an `iṣ`-aorist 2d sing. (cf. 1048).
Further examples of this aorist are `āsūyīt` (ÇB.), `pāpayiṣṭa` (TS.:
pl., with `mā́` prohibitive), and `avṛṣāyiṣata` (VS. etc.). The form
`ásaparyāit` (AV. xiv. 2. 20), with `āi` for `ī` (555 c), might be
aorist; but, as the metre shows, is probably a corrupt reading;
`amanasyāit`, certainly imperfect, appears to occur in TB. (ii. 3. 8³).
Other forms begin to appear in the Brāhmaṇas: e. g. the futures
`gopāyiṣyati` (ÇB.), `meghāyiṣyánt`, `kaṇḍūyiṣyánt`, `çīkāyiṣyánt`
(TS.), the participles `bhiṣajyitá` (? JB. `-jita`) and `iyasitá` (ÇB.),
`kaṇḍūyitá`, `çīkitá`, and `meghitá` (TS.), the gerund `saṁçlákṣṇya`
(ÇB.), and so on. In the later language, also, forms outside the
present-system (except the participle in `ta`) are only sporadic; and of
tertiary conjugation forms there are hardly any: examples are the
causatives `dhūmāyaya` and `asūyaya` (MBh.), and the desiderative
`abhiṣiṣenayiṣa` (Çiç.).

b\. Noun-derivatives from denominative stems follow the analogy of those
from causative stems (1051 g). In the older language, those in `u` and
`ā` (especially the former) are much the most numerous; later, that in
`ana` prevails over all others.
