+++
title = "19 Chapter XV PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION"

+++




## CHAPTER XV.

  

PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION.

1069\. ONE periphrastic formation, the periphrastic future, has been
already described (942 ff.), since it has become in the later language a
recognized part of every verbal conjugation, and since, though still
remaining essentially periphrastic, it has been so fused in its parts
and altered in construction as to assume in considerable measure the
semblance of an integral tense-formation.

By far the most important other formation of the class is — 

The Periphrastic Perfect.

1070\. This (though almost unknown in the Veda, and coming only
gradually into use in the Brāhmaṇas) is a tense widely made and
frequently used in the classical Sanskrit.

a\. It is made by prefixing the accusative of a derivative noun-stem in
आ `ā́` (accented) to the perfect tense of an auxiliary verb: namely, of
√कृ `kṛ` *make*, more often of √अस् `as` *be*, and very rarely of √भू
`bhū` *be*.

b\. In the older language (see below, 1073d), `kṛ` is almost the only
auxiliary used in making this tense, `as` occurring very few times, and
`bhū` never. Later, also, `bhū` is quite rare (it is found nine times in
MBh., six times in Rgh., and a few times elsewhere), but `as` gains very
greatly in currency, having become the usual auxiliary, while `kṛ` is
only exceptional.

c\. Somewhat similar formations with yet other auxiliaries are not
absolutely unknown in the later language: thus, `varayām pracakramus`
(MBh.), `pūrayām` (etc.) `vyadhus` (Viracaritra), `mṛgayām avāsit`
(ib.).

1071\. The periphrastic perfect occurs as follows:

a\. It is the accepted perfect of the derivative conjugations:
intensive, desiderative, causative, and denominative; the noun in आ `ā́`
being made from the present-stem which is the general basis of each
conjugation: thus, from √बुध् `budh`, intensive बोबुधाम् `bobudhā́m`,
desiderative बुभुत्साम् `bubhutsā́m`, causative बोधयाम् `bodhayā́m`;
denominative मन्त्रयाम् `mantrayā́m`.

b\. The formation from causative stems (including those denominatives
which have assumed the aspect of causatives: 1056) is by far the most
frequent. Only a few desideratives are quotable (1034 a), and of
intensives only `jāgarām āsa` (1020 a; beside `jajāgāra`).

c\. Most roots beginning with a vowel in a heavy syllable (long by
nature or long by position) make this perfect only, and not the simple
one: thus, आसाम् `āsā́m` from √आस् `ās` *sit*, ईक्षाम् `īkṣā́m` from √ईक्ष
`īkṣ` *see*; उज्झाम् `ujjhām` from √उझ् `ujh` *forsake*; `एधाम्` edhām
from √एध् `edh` *thrive* (the only examples quotable). d. Excepted are
the roots `āp` and `āñch`, and those beginning with a before two
consonants (and taking `ān` as reduplication: 788).

e\. The roots (that is, stems reckoned by the grammarians as roots) of
more than one syllable have their perfect of this formation: thus,
`cakāsā́m`. But `ūrṇu` (713) is said to form `ūrṇonāva` only; while
`jāgṛ` (1020) makes a perfect of either formation, and `daridrā` (1024
a) is said to do the same.

f\. A few other roots make the periphrastic in addition to the usual
reduplicated perfect. Thus, in the older language only are found the
stems `cāyām`, `tāyām`, `nilsyām`, `vāsām` (√`vas` *dwell*), `vidām`
(√`vid` *know*), `vyayām`, and the reduplicated stems `bibhayām` and
`juhavām`; the later language adds `ayām`, `jayām`, `dayām`, `nayām`,
`smayām`, `hvayām`, and the reduplicated `bibharām`; and the grammarians
teach like formations from `uṣ`, `kās`, and the reduplicating `hrī`. The
stem is made in every case from the present-stem, with `guṇa` of a final
vowel.

1072\. The periphrastic perfect of the middle voice is made with the
middle inflection of √कृ `kṛ`. For passive use, the auxiliaries अस् `as`
and भू `bhū` are said to be allowed to take a middle inflection.

a\. One or two late examples of `bhū` with middle inflection have been
pointed out, but none of `as`.

b\. It is unnecessary to give a paradigm of this formation, as the
inflection of the auxiliaries is the same as in their independent use:
for that of √`kṛ`, see 800 k; of √`bhū`, see 800 d; of √`as`, see 800m.

c\. The connection of the noun and auxiliary is not so close that other
words are not occasionally allowed to come between them: thus,
`mīmāṅsā́m evá cakré` (ÇB.) *he merely speculated*;
`vidāṁ vā idam ayaṁ cakāra` (JB.) *he verily knew this*;
`prabhraṅçayāṁ yo naghuṣaṁ cakāra` *who made Naghusha fall headlong*
(Rgh.).

1073\. The above is an account of the periphrastic formation with a
derivative noun in `ām` as it appears especially in the later language;
earlier, its aspect is rather that of a more general, but quite
infrequent, combination of such a noun with various forms of the root
`kṛ`. Thus:

a\. Of the periphrastic perfect occurs only a single example in the
whole body of Vedic texts (metrical): namely, `gamayā́ṁ cakāra` (AV.). In
the Brāhmaṇas examples from causative stems begin to appear more freely,
but are everywhere few in number, except in ÇB. (which has them from
twenty-four roots, and a few of these in several occurrences). From
desiderative stems they are yet rarer (only seven occurrences, five of
them in ÇB.: see 1034 a); and from intensives they are unknown. The
periphrastic perfects of primary conjugation were noted above (1071 f:
in ÇB., eight stems and about eighty occurrences, chiefly from `īkṣ`,
`bhī`, and `vid`; that from `vid` is found in the greatest number of
texts).

b\. Forms with the aorist of the auxiliary are in the oldest Brāhmaṇas
as numerous as those with the perfect. Thus, with `akar` occur `ramayām`
(K.), `janayā́m` and `sādayā́m` and `svadayā́m` and `sthāpayā́m` (MS.); and
with `akran`, `vidā́m` (TS. TB. MS.). With the aorist optative or
precative has been found only `pāvayā́ṁ kriyāt` (MS.).

c\. Like combinations with other tenses are not entirely unknown: thus,
`juhavāṁ karoti` (ÇÇS.). So also in the later language, where have been
found quotable half-a-dozen such cases as `vidāṁ karoti` (Pañc.),
`vidāṁ karotu` and `kurvantu` (Pañc. etc.).

d\. Only two or three cases of the use of `as` instead of `kṛ` as
auxiliary are met with in the older language: they are `mantrayām āsa`
(AB. GB.), `janayām āsa` (ÇvU.), and `īkṣām āsa` (ÇÇS.).

e\. A single example of an accented auxiliary is met with in the
accentuated texts: namely, `atirecayā́ṁ cakrús` (ÇB.). As was to be
expected, from the nature of the combination, the noun also retains its
accent (compare 945).

Participial Periphrastic Phrases.

1074\. The frequent use, especially in the later language, of a past or
a future passive participle with the copula (or also without it) to make
participial phrases having a value analogous to that of verb-tenses, has
been already noticed (999). But other similar combinations are not
unknown in any period of the language, as made with other auxiliaries,
or with other participles.

a\. They occur even in the Veda, but are far more common and conspicuous
in the Brāhmaṇas, and become again of minor account in the later
language.

1075\. Examples of the various formations are as follows:

a\. A (usually present) participle with the tenses of the verb `i` *go*.
This is the combination, on the whole, of widest and most frequent
occurrence. Thus: `áyajvano vibhájann éti védaḥ` (RV.) *he ever gives
away the wealth of the non-offerer*;
`yathā sūcyā vāsaḥ saṁdadhad iyād evam evāi ’tābhir yajñasya chidraṁ saṁdadhad eti`
(AB.) *just as one would mend \[habitually\] a garment with a needle, so
with these one mends any defect of the sacrifice*;
`agnir vā idaṁ vāiçvānaro dahann āit` (PB.) *Agni Vaiçvānara kept
burning this creation*;
`té ‘surāḥ párājitā yánto dyā́vāpṛthivī́ úpāçrayan` (TB.) *those Asuras,
getting beaten, took refuge with heaven and earth*;
`tè ‘sya gṛhā́ḥ paçáva upamūryámāṇā īyuḥ` (ÇB.) *the animals, his family,
would be continually destroyed*.

b. The same with the verb `car` *go* (continually or habitually),
signifying still more distinctly than the preceding a continued or
habitual action. Thus: `agnā́v agníç carati práviṣṭaḥ` (AV.) *Agni is
constantly present in the fire*; `adaṇdyaṁ daṇḍena ghnantaç caranti`
(PB.) *they make a practice of beating with a rod what is undeserving of
punishment*.

c\. The same with the verbs `ās` *sit* and `sthā` *stand*, with a like
meaning. Thus, `juhvata āsate` (K.) *they continue sacrificing*;
`te ‘pakramya prativāvadato ‘tiṣṭhan` (AB.) *they, having gone off, kept
vehemently refusing*. In the later language, `sthā` is the verb oftenest
used, with predicates of various kind, to make a verbal phrase of
continuance.

d\. A present or future or perfect participle with `as` and `bhū` *be*.
The participle is oftenest a future one; as only is used in the
optative, `bhū` usually in other forms. Thus: `yaḥ pūrvam anījānaḥ syāt`
(AB.) *whoever may not have made sacrifice before*;
`samāvad eva yajñe kurvāṇā āsan` (GB.) *they did the same thing at the
sacrifice*; `parikrī́ḍanta āsan` (MS.) *they were playing about*;
`yátra suptvā́ púnar nā̀ ’vadrāsyán bhávati` (ÇB.) *when, after sleeping,
he is not going to fall asleep again*; `havyaṁ hi vakṣyan bhavati` (AB.)
*for he is intending to carry the sacrifice*; `dāsyant syāt` (K.) *may
be going to give*; `yéna vā́hanena syantsyánt syā́t` (ÇB.) *with what
vehicle he may be about to drive*. True expressions for perfect and
pluperfect and future perfect time are capable of being made by such
means, and now and then are made, but in no regular and continued
fashion.

Composition with Prepositional Prefixes.

1076\. All the forms, personal and other, of verbal conjugation — of
both primary and secondary conjugation, and even to some extent of
denominative (so far as the denominative stems have become assimilated
in value to simple roots) — occur very frequently in combination with
certain words of direction, elements of an adverbial character (see the
next chapter), the so-called prepositions (according to the original use
of that term), or the verbal prefixes.

a\. Practically, in the later language, it is as if a compounded root
were formed, out of root and prefix, from which then the whole
conjugation (with derivatives: below, chap. XVII.) is made, just as from
the simple root. Yet, even there (and still more in the older language:
1081 a–c), the combination is so loose, and the members retain so much
of their independent value, that in most dictionaries (that of Sir
Monier Williams is an exception) the conjugation of each root with
prefixes is treated under the simple root, and not in the alphabetic
order of the prefix. Derivative words, however, are by universal
agreement given in their independent alphabetic place, like simple
words.

1077\. Those verbal prefixes which have value as such throughout the
whole history of the language are given below, in alphabetic order, with
their fundamental meanings:

अति `áti` *across, beyond, past, over, to excess;*

अधि `ádhi` *above, over, on, on to;*

अनु `ánu` *after, along, toward;*

अन्तर् `antár` *between, among, within;*

अप `ápa` *away, forth, off;*

अपि `ápi` *unto, close upon* or *on;*

अभि `abhi` *to, unto, against* (often with implied violence);

अव `áva` *down, of;*

आ `ā́` *to, unto, at;*

उद् `úd` *up, up forth* or *out;*

उप `úpa` *to, unto, toward;*

नि `ní` *down; in, into;*

निस् `nís` *out, forth;*

परा `párā` *to a distance, away, forth;*

परि `pári` *round about, around;*

प्र `prá` *forward, onward, forth, fore;*

प्रति `práti` *in reversed direction, back to* or *against, against, in
return;*

वि `ví` *apart, asunder, away, out;*

सम् `sám` *along, with, together.*

a\. Some of these, of course, are used much more widely and frequently
than others. In order of frequency in the older language (as estimated
by the number of roots with which they are found used in RV. and AV.),
they stand as follows: `pra`, `ā`, `vi`, `sam`, `abhi`, `ni`, `ud`,
`pari`, `anu`, `upa`, `prati`, `ava`, `nis`, `ati`, `apa`, `parā`,
`adhi`, `api`, `antar`. `Api` is of very limited use as prefix in the
later language, having become a conjunction, *too, also*.

b\. The meanings given above are only the leading ones. In combinations
of root and prefix they undergo much modification, both literal and
figurative — yet seldom in such a way that the steps of transition from
the fundamental sense are not easy to trace. Sometimes, indeed, the
value of a root is hardly perceptibly modified by the addition of the
prefix. An intensive force is not infrequently given by `pari`, `vi`,
and `sam`.

1078\. Prefixes essentially akin with the above, but more distinctly
adverbial, and of more restricted use, are these:

`ácha` (or `áchā`) *to, unto:* tolerably frequent in RV. (used with over
twenty roots), but already unusual in AV. (only two roots), quite
restricted in B., and entirely lost in the later language;

`āvís` *forth to sight, in view:* used only with the roots `bhū`, `as`,
and `kṛ`;

`tirás` *through, crossways; out of sight:* hardly used except with
`kṛ`, `dhā`, `bhū` (in RV., with three or four others);

`purás` *in front, forward:* used with only half-a-dozen roots,
especially `kṛ`, `dhā`, `i`;

`prādús` *forth to view:* only with `bhū`, `as`, `kṛ`.

a\. A few others, as `bahis` *outside*, `vinā` *without*, `alam` (with
`bhū` and `kṛ`) *sufficiently, properly*, `sākṣāt` *in view*, are still
less removed from ordinary adverbs.

1079\. Of yet more limited use, and of noun-rather than adverb-value,
are:

`çrad` (or `çrath`?), only with `dhā` (in RV., once also with `kṛ`):
`çraddhā` *believe, credit;*

`hin̄`, only with `kṛ` (and obsolete in the classical language): `hin̄kṛ`
*make the sound*, `hing` *low, murmur*.

a\. And beside these stand yet more fortuitous combinations: see below,
1091.

1080\. More than one prefix may be set before the same root.
Combinations of two are quite usual; of three, much less common; of more
than three, rare. Their order is in general determined only by the
requirements of the meaning, each added prefix bringing a further
modification to the combination before which it is set. But आ `ā́` is
almost never allowed, either earlier or later, to be put in front of any
of the others.

a\. The very rare cases of apparent prefixion of `ā` to another prefix
(as `āvihanti` MBh., `āvitanvānāḥ` BhP.) are perhaps best explained as
having the `ā` used independently, as an adverb.

1081\. In classical Sanskrit, the prefix stands immediately before the
verbal form.

a\. In the earlier language, however (especially in the Veda; in the
Brāhmaṇa less often and more restrictedly), its position is quite free:
it may be separated from the verb by another word or words, and may even
come after the form to which it belongs; it may also stand alone,
qualifying a verb that is understood, or conjointly with another prefix
one that is expressed.

b\. Thus, `sá devā́ṅ é ’há vakṣyati` (RV.) *he shall bring the gods
hither;* `prá ṇa ā́yūṅṣi tāriṣat` (AV.) *may he lengthen out our lives;*
`tā́v ā́ yātam úpa dravát` (RV.) *do ye two come hither quickly;*
`gámad vā́jebhir ā́ sá naḥ` (RV.) *may he come with gifts hither to us*;
`pári mā́m pári me prajā́m pári ṇaḥ pāhi yád dhánam` (AV.) *protect me, my
progeny, and what wealth we own;* `yátaḥ sadyá ā́ ca párā ca yánti` (AV.)
*from whence every day they advance and retire;*
`vy àháṁ sárveṇa pāpmánā` \[`avṛtam`\] `ví yákṣmeṇa sám ā́yuṣā` (AV.) *I
have separated from all evil, from disease, \[I have joined myself\]
with life;* `vi hy enena paçyati` (AB.) *for by it he sees;*
`ví vā́ eṣá prajáyā paçúbhir ṛdhyate` (TB.) *he is deprived of progeny
and cattle*.

c\. Three or four instances have been cited from the later language of a
prefix separated from, or following, a verb; perhaps the prefix in every
such case admits of being regarded as an adverb.

1082\. As regards the accent of verb-forms compounded with prefixes,
only the case needs to be considered in which the prefix stands (as
always in the later language) immediately before the verb; otherwise,
verb and prefix are treated as two independent words.

1083\. a. A personal verbal form, as has been seen above (592), is
ordinarily unaccented: before such a form, the prefix has its own
accent; or, if two or more precede the same form, the one nearest the
latter is so accented, and the others lose their accent.

b\. If, however, the verb-form is accented, the prefix or prefixes lose
their accent.

c\. That is, in every case, the verb along with its normally situated
prefix or prefixes so far constitutes a unity that the whole combination
is allowed to take but a single accent.

d\. Examples are: `páre ’hi nāri púnar é ’hi kṣiprám` (AV.) *go away,
woman; come again quickly;* `áthā́ ’staṁ vipáretana` (RV.) *then scatter
ye away to your home;* `samā́cinuṣvā ’nusampráyāhi` (AV.) *gather
together, go forth together after;* `yád gṛhā́n upodāíti` (AV.) *when he
goes up to the house;* `evā́ ca tvám sarama ājagántha` (RV.) *now that
you, Saramā, have thus come hither;* `yénā́ ”viṣṭitaḥ pravivéçithā ’páḥ`
(RV.) *enveloped in which thou didst enter the waters*.

1084\. A prefix, however, not seldom has a more independent value, as a
general adverb of direction, or as a preposition (in the usual modern
sense of that term), belonging to and governing a noun; in such case, it
is not drawn in to form part of a verbal compound, but has its own
accent. The two kinds of use shade into one another, and are not
divisible by any distinct and fixed line.

a. There is in RV. a considerable number of cases (some thirty) in
which the `pada`-text gives unnecessarily, and probably wrongly, an
independent accent to a prefix before an accented verb (or other
prefix): resolving, for example, `ā́rūhat` into `ā́ áruhat`, `vyácet` into
`ví ácet`, `abhyávarṣīt` into `abhí ávarṣīt`, `vyā́sarat` into
`ví ā́ asarat` (instead of `ā-áruhat` etc.).

1085\. In combination with the non-personal parts of the verb-system —
with participles, infinitives, and gerunds — the general rule is that
the prefix loses its accent, in favor of the other member of the
compound. But the prefix instead has sometimes the accent: namely, when
combined —

a\. with the passive participle in `ta` or `na`: thus, `páreta` *gone
forth;* `antárhita` *concealed;* `ávapanna` *fallen;* `sámpūrṇa`
*complete* (cf. 1284).

b\. But some exceptions to this rule are met with: e. g., in RV.,
`nicitá`, `niṣkṛtá`, `praçastá`, `niṣattá`, etc.; in AV., `apakrītá`.

c\. with the infinitive in `tu` (972), in all its cases: thus,
`sáṁhartum` *to collect;* `ápidhātave` *to cover up;* `ávagantos` *of
descending*. The doubly accented dative in `tavāí` retains its final
accent, but throws the other back upon the prefix: thus, `ánvetavāí`
*for following;* `ápabhartavāí` *for carrying off.*

1086\. The closeness of combination between the root and the prefix is
indicated not only by their unity of accent, but also by the euphonic
rules (e. g. 185, 192), which allow the mutual adaptations of the two to
be made to some extent as if they were parts of a unitary word.

1087\. A few special irregularities call for notice:

a\. In the later language, `api`, `adhi`, and `ava`, in connection with
certain roots and their derivatives, sometimes lose the initial vowel:
namely, `api` with `nah` and `dhā`, `adhi` with `sthā`, `ava` with `gāh`
etc.: e. g. `pinaddha`, `pihita`, `dhiṣṭhita`, `vagāhya`, `vataṅsa`,
`vadānya`, `vaṣṭabhya`, `vamajjana`, `vekṣaṇa`, `valepana`. In the Veda,
on the other hand, `iṣ` is in a few cases found instead (apparently) of
`nis` with √`kṛ`.

b\. The final vowel of a prefix, especially an `i`, is (oftenest in the
older language) sometimes lengthened, especially in derivative words: e.
g. `pratīkāra`, `nīvṛt`, `parīhāra`, `vīrúdh`, `adhīvāsá`, `ápīvṛta`,
`abhīvartá`; `anūrúdh`; `avāyatī́`, `prāvṛ́ṣ`, `úpāvasu`. In the Veda, the
initial of `anu` is sometimes lengthened after negative `an`: e. g.
`anānudá`, `anānukṛtyá`.

c\. In combination with √`i` *go*, the prefixes `parā`, `pari`, and
`pra` sometimes change their `r` to `l`. In this way is formed a kind of
derivative stem `palāy` *flee*, inflected according to the a-class, in
middle voice, which is not uncommon from the Brāhmaṇas down, and has so
lost the consciousness of its origin that it sometimes takes the augment
prefixed: thus, `apalāyiṣṭhās` (ÇÇS.), `apalāyata` (R.), `apalāyanta`
(MBh.); it makes the periphrastic perfect `palāyāṁ cakre`. The stem
`palyay`, similarly inflected, occurs only in one or two texts (ÇB. JB.
JUB.); and `plāy` has been found nowhere except in MS. Also the
imperfect `nílāyata` (TS. TB.: not separated in the `pada`-text) and
perfect `nilayā́ṁ cakre` (ÇB.) are doubtless a corresponding formation
from √`i` with `nis`, though nearly akin in form and meaning with forms
from √`lī`+`ni`. So also `pari` becomes `pali` in the combination
`palyan̄g` (ÇB. ÇÇS.), whether viewed as a denominative formation or as
√`an̄g`+`pari`. And MS. has once `plā́kṣārayan` (iii. 10. 2; in an
etymology).

  
d. The root `kṛ` *make* sometimes assumes (or retains from a more
original condition) an initial `s` after the prefixes `sam`, `pari`,
`nis`, and `upa`: thus, `saṁskurute`, `samaskurvan`, `saṁskṛta`, etc.;
`pariṣkṛṇvanti`, `pariṣkṛta`, etc.; `nír askṛta`; `upaskṛta`. And √`kṛ`
*scatter* is said by the grammarians to add `s` in the same manner,
under certain circumstances, after `apa` and `prati` (only
`apaskiramāṇa`, `praticaskare`, both late, are quotable).

  
e. The passive participle of the roots `dā` *give* and `dā` *cut* has
often the abbreviated form `tta` after a prefix — of which the final
vowel, if `i`, is lengthened (compare 955 f, and the derivative in `ti`,
below, 1157 c).

  
f. In a few sporadic cases, the augment is taken before a prefix,
instead of between it and the root: thus, `avaṣaṭkārṣīt` (GB.);
`udaprapatat` (AB.); `anvasaṁcarat`, `pratyasaṁharat`, `pratyavyūhat`,
`anvavīkṣetām`, `aprāiṣīt`, `asambhramat` (MBh.); `abhyanimantrayat`
(Har.); `vyāvasthāpi` (SDS.); compare also the forms from `palāy`,
above, c. And AB. has once `niniyoja` (for `niyuyoja`, as read in the
corresponding passage of ÇÇS.). Some of the apparent roots of the
language have been suspected of being results of a similar unification
of root and prefix: e. g. `āp` from `ā`+`ap`, `vyac` from `vi`+`ac`,
`tyaj` from `ati`+`aj`.

  
g. The loss of the initial `s` of `sthā` and `stambh` after the prefix
`ud` has been noticed above (233 c). Also (137 a, c), certain
peculiarities of combination of a prefix with the initial vowel of a
root.

  
1088. As to the more general adverbial uses of the prefixes, and their
prepositional uses, see the next chapter.

1089\. As to the combination of the particles `a` or `an` privative,
`dus` *ill*, and `su` *well*, with verb-forms, see 1121 b,g,i. As to the
addition of the comparative and superlative suffixes `tarām` and `tamām`
to verbs, see above, 473 c.

Other Verbal Compounds.

1090\. It has been seen above that some of the prepositional prefixes
are employed in combination with only very small classes of roots,
namely those whose meaning makes them best fitted for auxiliary and
periphrastic uses such as `kṛ` *make*, `bhū` and `as` *be*, `dhā` *put*,
`i` *go* — and that the first of these are widely used in combination
with a derivative in `ām` to make a periphrastic conjugation. Such roots
have also been, from the earliest period of the language, but with
increasing frequency, used in somewhat analogous combinations with other
elements, substantive and adjective as well as adverbial; and this has
become, in part, developed finally into a regular and indefinitely
extensible method of increasing the resources of verbal expression.

1091\. a. The older language has a number of (mostly) reduplicative
onomatopoetic compounds with roots `kṛ` and `bhū`, the prefixed element
ending in `ā` or `ī` (generally the former): thus, in RV.,
`akkhalīkṛ́tya` *croaking*, `jañjanābhávant` *flimmering*, `alalābhávant`
*making merry*, `kikirā́ kṛṇu` *tear;* in AV., `maṣmaṣā́ ’karam` *I have
crushed;* in VS., `masmasā́` (also TS.; MS. `mṛsmṛsā́`) `kuru`; in TS.,
`malmalābhávant`; in K., `manmalābhavant`, `kikkitākāra`; in MS.,
`bibibābhávant`, `bharbharā́ ’bhavat`; in AB., `bababākurvant`. The
accentuation, where shown, is like that of a verb-form with accompanying
prefix.

b\. Further, combinations with √`kṛ` of utterances used at the
sacrifice, and mostly ending in `ā`: thus, `svā́hā`, `svadhā́`, `svagā́`;
also `váṣaṭ`. In these, too, the accentuation is generally that of a
verb with prefix: e. g. `svagākaróti` (ÇB.; but `svadhā́ karóti` \[?\]
TA.), `vaṣaṭkuryā́t` (MS.); and, with another prefix, `anuváṣaṭkaroti`
(ÇB.).

c\. An instance or two also occur of ordinary words in such
combinations, put in corresponding form: thus, `çūlā́ kuryāt` (ÇB.) *may
roast on a spit* (`çū́la`); `anṛṇākartos` (AB.) *of getting clear of
debt;* `āikyābhāvayant` (AA.) *uniting*.

1092\. a. The noun `namas` *obeisance, homage*, in a still more purely
noun-value, becomes combined with √`kṛ`: in the Veda, only with the
gerund, in `namaskṛ́tya` (beside `hastagṛ́hya` and `karṇagṛ́hya`: above,
990 b).

b\. A solitary combination with √`i` *go* is shown by the accusative
`ástam` *home*; which, appearing only in ordinary phrases in RV., is in
AV. compounded with the participles — in `astaṁyánt`, `astameṣyánt`,
`ástamita` (with accent like that of ordinary compounds with a prefix) —
and in the Brāhmaṇas and the later language is treated quite like a
prefix: thus, `astaméti` (ÇB.).

c\. Other ordinary accusative forms of adjectives in combination with
verbal derivatives of `kṛ` and `bhū` are found here and there in the
older language: thus, `çṛtaṁkṛ́tya` and `nagnaṁkṛ́tya` (TS.);
`nagnambhā́vuka`, `pāmanambhā́vuka` etc. (TS. et al.); `ánaruṣkaroti`
(ÇB.).

1093\. In the early but not in the earliest language, a noun-stem thus
compounded with `kṛ` or `bhū` (and very rarely with `as`), in verbal
nouns and ordinary derivatives, and then also in verbal forms, begins to
assume a constant ending `ī` (of doubtful origin).

a\. There is no instance of this in RV., unless the `ī` of
`akkhalīkṛ́tya` (above, 109l a) is to be so explained. In AV., besides
the obscure `vātī́kṛta` and `vātīkārá`, is found only `phalīkáraṇa`. In
the Brāhmaṇa language, examples begin to occur more often: thus, in TS.,
`çyetī́`, `mithunī́`, `muṣṭī`; in TB., further, `phalī́`, `krūrī́`,
`udvāsī`; in ÇB., besides some of these, also `ekī́`, `kālvālī́`, `tīvrī`,
`daridrī`, `brāhmaṇī`, `mithunī́`, `svī́`; and `açvābhidānī́`, of which (as
of `muṣṭī`) the `ī` might be that of an ordinary grammatical form; in
K., `dvī`; in GB., `pravaṇī`; in ṢB., `vajrī`; in AB., `matī` (from
`matya`). From Upanishad and Sūtra are to be added `dvāitī` (MU.),
`samī` (KÇS.), `navī` and `kuçalī` (AGS.). The accent is in general like
that of the similar combinations treated above (1091): e. g.
`krūrīkurvánti`, `svīkṛ́tya`, `brāhmaṇībhū́ya`, `mithunībhávantyāu`,
`phalī́kartavāí`, `krūrī́kṛta`; but sometimes a mere collocation takes
place: thus, `mithunī́ bhávantīs` (TS.), `phalī́ kriyámāṇānām` (TB.),
`vajrī́ bhūtvā́` (TA.). The `ī` is variously treated: now as an
uncombinable final, as in `çyetī́ akuruta` and `mithunī́ abhavan` (TS.);
now as liable to the ordinary conversions, as in `mithuny ènaya syām`,
`mithuny ā̀bhiḥ syām`, and `svyàkurvata` (ÇB.).

b\. Out of such beginnings has grown in the later language the following
rule:

1094\. Any noun or adjective stem is liable to be compounded with verbal
forms or derivatives of the roots √कृ `kṛ` and भू `bhū` (and of अस् `as`
also; but such cases are extremely rare), in the manner of a verbal
prefix. If the final of the stem be an `a`- or `i`-vowel, it is changed
to ई `ī`; if an `u`-vowel, it is changed to ऊ `ū`.

a\. Examples are: `stambhībhavati` *becomes a post;* `ekacittībhūya`
*becoming of one mind;* `upahārīkaroṣi` *thou makest an offering;* ,
`nakhaprahārajarjarīkṛta` *torn to pieces with blows of the claws;*
`çithilībhavanti` *become loose;* `kuṇḍalīkṛta` *ring-shaped;*
`surabhīkṛta` *made fragrant;* `ādhīkaraṇa` *pawning;* `ṛjūkṛtya`
*straightening;* `hetūkaraṇa` *taking as cause*. As in the case of the
denominatives (1059 c), the combinations with `a`-stems are the immense
majority, and occur abundantly (hardly less than a thousand are
quotable) in the later language, but for the most part only once or
twice each; those made with `i`- and `u`-stems are a very small number.
In a few instances, stems in `an` and `as`, with those finals changed to
`ī`, are met with: e. g. `ātmī-kṛ`, `yuvī-bhū`; `unmanī-kṛ`,
`amanī-bhū`; final `ya` after a consonant is contracted to `ī`: e. g.
`kāṅsī-kṛ`; and anomalous cases like `kāṁdiçī-bhū` occur. Final `ṛ` is
said to become `rī`, but no examples are quotable. The combinations with
`kṛ` are about twice as frequent as those with `bhū`, and examples with
as do not appear to have been brought to light.

b\. Similar combinations are occasionally made with elements of
questionable or altogether obscure character: e. g. `urarī-kṛ`,
`urī-kṛ`.

c\. Examples are not altogether wanting in the later language of `ā` as
final of the compounded noun-stem (cf. 1091): thus, `duḥkhā-kṛ`,
`niṣkulā-kṛ`, `çambā-kṛ`, and one or two others.

1095\. Of all the forms which constitute or are attached to the verbal
system, the passive participle is the one most closely assimilated in
its treatment as a combinable element to an ordinary adjective. Next to
it come the gerund and the gerundives. Combinations of the kind above
treated of are quite common with passive participles and gerunds.

