+++
title = "21 Chapter XVII DERIVATION OF DECLINABLE STEMS"

+++




## CHAPTER XVII.

  

DERIVATION OF DECLINABLE STEMS.

1136\. THE formation from roots of conjugable stems — namely,
tense-stems, mode-stems, and stems of secondary conjugation (not
essentially different from one another, nor, it is believed, ultimately
from the formation of declined stems) — was most conveniently treated
above, in the chapters devoted to the verb. Likewise the formation of
adverbs by derivation (not essentially different from case-formation),
in the chapter devoted to particles. And the formation of those
declinable stems — namely, of comparison, and of infinitives and
participles — which attach themselves most closely to the systems of
inflection, has also been more or less fully exhibited. But the
extensive and intricate subject of the formation of the great body of
declinable stems was reserved for a special chapter.

a\. Of course, only a brief and compendious exhibition of the subject
can be attempted within the here necessary limits: no exhaustive tracing
out of the formative elements of every period; still less, a complete
statement of the varied uses of each element; least of all, a discussion
of origins; but enough to help the student in that analysis of words
which must form a part of his labor from the outset, giving a general
outline of the field, and preparing for more penetrating investigation.

b\. The material from accented texts, and especially the Vedic material,
will be had especially in view (nothing that is Vedic being
intentionally left unconsidered); and the examples given will be, so far
as is possible, words found in such texts with their accent marked. No
word not thus vouched for will be accented unless the fact is
specifically pointed out.

1137\. The roots themselves, both verbal and pronominal, are used in
their bare form, or without any added suffix, as declinable stems.

a\. As to this use of verbal roots, see below, 1147.

b\. The pronominal roots, so-called, are essentially declinable; and
hence, in their further treatment in derivation, they are throughout in
accordance with other declinable stems, and not with verbal roots.

1138\. Apart from this, every such stem is made by a suffix. And these
suffixes fall into two general classes: 

A. Primary suffixes, or those which are added directly to roots;

B. Secondary suffixes, or those which are added to derivative stems
(also to pronominal roots, as just pointed out, and sometimes to
particles).

a\. The division of primary suffixes nearly corresponds to the `kṛt`
(more regular) and `uṇādi` (less regular) suffixes of the Hindu
grammarians; the secondary, to their `taddhita`-suffixes.

1139\. But this distinction, though one of high value, theoretically and
practically, is not absolute. Thus:

a\. Suffixes come to have the aspect and the use of primary which really
contain a secondary element — that is to say, the earliest words
exhibiting them were made by addition of secondary suffixes to words
already derivative.

b\. Sundry examples of this will he pointed out below: thus, the
gerundival suffixes, `tavya, anīya`, etc., the suffixes `uka` and
`aka, tra`, and others. This origin is probable for more cases than
admit of demonstration; and it is assumable for others which show no
distinct signs of composition.

c\. Less often, a suffix of primary use passes over in part into
secondary, through the medium of use with denominative "roots" or
otherwise: examples are `yu, iman, īyas` and `iṣṭha, ta`.

1140\. Moreover, primary suffixes are added not only to more original
roots, but, generally with equal freedom, to elements which have come to
wear in the language the aspect of such, by being made the basis of
primary conjugation — and even, to a certain extent, to the bases of
secondary conjugation, the conjugation-stems, and the bases of
tense-inflection, the tense-stems.

a\. The most conspicuous examples of this are the participles, present
and future and perfect, which are made alike from tense and
conjugation-stems of every form. The infinitives (968 ff.) attach
themselves only in sporadic instances to tense-stems, and even from
conjugation-stems are made but sparingly earlier; and the same is true
of the gerundives.

b\. General adjectives and nouns are somewhat widely made from
conjugation-stems, especially from the base of causative conjugation:
see below the suffixes `a` (1148 j, k), `ā` (1149 c, d), `ana` (1150 m),
`as` (1151 f), `ani` (1159 b), `u` (1178 g–i), `ti` (1157 g), `tṛ` (1182
e), `tnu` (1196 b), `snu` (1194 b), `uka` (1180 d), `āku` (1181 d),
`ālu` (1192 b), `tu` (1161 d). 

c\. From tense-stems the examples are far fewer, but not unknown: thus,
from present-stems, occasional derivatives in `a` (1148 j), `ā` (1149 d,
e), `ana` (1150 n), `i` (1155 d), `u` (1178 f), `ta` (1176 e), `tu`
(1161 d), `uka` (1180 d), `tra` (1185 e), `ti` (1157 g), `vin` (or `in`:
1232 b, 1183 a); from stems in a `s` apparently of aoristic character
(besides infinitives and gerundives), occasional derivatives in `a`
(1148 j), `ana` (1150 j), `ani` (1159 b), `an` (1160 a), `āna` (1175),
`as` (1151 c), `ī` (1156 b), `iṣṭha` (1184 a), `u` (1178 f), `us` (1154
a), `tṛ` (1182 e), `in` (1183 a).

1141\. The primary suffixes are added also to roots as compounded with
the verbal prefixes.

a\. Whatever, namely, may have been originally and strictly the mode of
production of the derivatives with prefixes, it is throughout the
recorded life of the language as if the root and its prefix or prefixes
constituted a unity, from which a derivative is formed in the same
manner as from the simple root, with that modification of the radical
meaning which appears also in the proper verbal forms as compounded with
the same prefixes.

b\. Not derivatives of every kind are thus made; but, in the main, those
classes which have most of the verbal force, or which are most akin in
value with infinitives and participles.

c\. The occurrence of such derivatives with prefixes, and their accent,
will be noted under each suffix below. They are chiefly (in nearly the
order of their comparative frequency), besides root-stems, those in `a`,
in `ana`, in `ti`, in `tar` and `tra`, and in `in, ya, van` and `man, i`
and `u, as`, and a few others.

1142\. The suffixes of both classes are sometimes joined to their
primitives by a preceding union-vowel — that is to say, by one which
wears that aspect, and, in our ignorance or uncertainty as to its real
origin, may most conveniently and safely be called by that name. The
line between these vowels and those deserving to be ranked as of organic
suffixal character cannot be sharply drawn.

Each of the two great classes will now be taken up by itself, for more
particular consideration.

A. Primary Derivatives.

1143\. Form of root. The form of root to which a primary suffix is added
is liable to more or less variation. Thus:

a\. By far the most frequent is a strengthening change, by `guṇa-` or
`vṛddhi`-increment. The former may occur under all circumstances
(except, of course, where `guṇa`-change is in general forbidden: 235,
240): thus, `véda` from √`vid, móda` from √`mud, várdha` from √vṛdh;
`áyana` from √`i`, `sávana` from √`su`, `sáraṇa` from √`sṛ`; and so on.
But the latter is only allowed under such circumstances as leave long
`ā` as the resulting vowel: that is to say, with non-final `a`, and with
a final `i`- or `u`-vowel and `ṛ` before a vowel: thus, `nādá` from
√`nad`, `grābhá` from √`gṛbh` or `grabh`, `vāhá` from √`vah`, `nāyá`
from √`nī`, `bhāvá` from √`bhū`, `kārá` from √`kṛ`; such strengthening
as would make `vāida` and `māuda` does not accompany primary derivation.

b\. Strengthening in derivation does not stand in any such evident
connection with accent as strengthening in conjugation; nor can any
general rules be laid down as to its occurrence; it has to he pointed
out in detail for each suffix. So also with other vowel-changes, which
are in general accordance with those found in inflection and in the
formation of tense- and mode-stems.

c\. The reversion of a final palatal or `h` to a guttural has been
already noticed (216). A final `n` or `m` is occasionally lost, as in
formations already considered.

d\. After a short final vowel is sometimes added a `t`: namely, where a
root is used as stem without suffix (1147 d), and before a following `y`
or `v` of `van` (1169), `vara` and `varī` (1171), `yu` once (1165 a),
and `ya` (1213 a). The presence of `t` before these suffixes appears to
indicate an original secondary derivation from derivatives in `ti` and
`tu`.

e\. The root is sometimes reduplicated: rarely in the use without suffix
(1147 c,e); oftenest before `a` (1148 k), `i` (1155 e), `u` (1178 d);
but also before other suffixes, as `ā` (1149 e), `ana` (1150 m), `vana`
(1170 a), `van` and `varī` (1169 d, 1171 a,b), `vani` (1170 b), `vi`
(1193), `vit` (1193 b), `ani` (1159 b), `in` (1183 a), `tnu` (1196 a),
`ta` (1176 a), `ti` (1157 d), `tha` (1163 a), `tṛ` (1182 b), `tra` (1185
f), `ūka` (1180 f), `aka` (1181 a), `īka` (1186 c), `ma` (1166 b).

1144\. Accent. No general laws governing the place of the accent are to
be recognized; each suffix must in this respect be considered by itself.

a\. In connection with a very few suffixes is to be recognized a certain
degree of tendency to accent the root in case of a *nomen actionis* or
infinitival derivative, and the ending in the case of a *nomen agentis*
or participial derivative: see the suffixes `a`, `ana`, `as`, `an`, and
`man`, below, where the examples are considered. Differences of accent
in words made by the same suffix are also occasionally connected with
differences of gender: see the suffixes `as` and `man`.

1145\. Meaning. As regards their signification, the primary derivatives
fall in general into two great classes, the one indicating the action
expressed by the verbal root, the other the person or thing in which the
action appears, the agent or actor — the latter, either substantively or
adjectively. The one class is more abstract, infinitival; the other is
more concrete, participial. Other meanings may in the main be viewed as
modifications or specializations of these two.

a\. Even the words indicating recipience of action, the passive
participles, are, as their use also as neuter or reflexive shows, only
notably modified words of agency. The gerundives are, as was pointed out
above (961 ff.), secondary derivatives, originally indicating only
*concerned with the action*.

1146\. But these two classes, in the processes of formation, are not
held sharply apart. There is hardly a suffix by which action-nouns are
formed which does not also make agent-nouns or adjectives; although
there are not a few by which are made only the latter. In treating them
in detail below, we will first take up the suffixes by which derivatives
of both classes are made, and then those forming only agent-nouns.

a\. To facilitate the finding of the different suffixes is given the
following list of them, in their order as treated, with references to
paragraphs:

—

1147

`yu`

1165

`in`

1183

`a`

1148

`ma`

1166

`īyas, iṣṭha`

1184

`ā`

1149

`mi`

1167

`tra`

1185

`ana`

1150

`man`

1168

`ka`

1186

`as`

1151

`van`

1169

`ya`

1187

`tas, nas, sas`

1152

`vana, -ni, -nu`

1170

`ra`

1188

`is`

1153

`vara`

1171

`la`

1189

`us`

1154

`ant`

1172

`va`

1190

`i`

1155

`vāṅs`

1173

`ri`

1191

`ī`

1156

`māna`

1174

`ru`

1192

`ti`

1157

`āna`

1175

`vi`

1193

`ni`

1158

`ta`

1176

`snu`

1194

`ani`

1159

`na, ina, una`

1177

`sna`

1195

`an`

1160

`u`

1178

`tnu`

1196

`tu`

1161

`ū`

1179

`sa`

1197

`nu`

1162

`uka`

1180

`asi`

1198

`tha`

1163

`aka`

1181

`abha`

1199

`thu`

1164

`tṛ` or `tar`

1182

sundries

1200–1

1147\. Stems without suffix; Root-words. These words and their uses have
been already pretty fully considered above (323, 348 ff., 383 ff., 400,
401).

a\. They are used especially (in the later language, almost solely) as
finals of compounds, and have both fundamental values, as action-nouns
(frequently as infinitives: 971), and as agent-nouns and adjectives
(often governing an accusative: 271 e). As action-nouns, they are
chiefly feminines (384; in many instances, however, they do not occur in
situations that determine the gender).

b. In a small number of words, mostly of rare occurrence, the
reduplicated root is used without suffix.

c\. The Vedic cases are: with simple reduplication, `sasyád`, `cikít`,
`dadṛ́h`, `didyú` and `didyút`, `juhū́`, and perhaps `gán̄gā` and `çíçu`;
with intensive reduplication, -`nenī́`, `malimluc`, `yavīyúdh`, and
`jógū` and `vánīvan` (with the intensive instead of the usual radical
accent). In `dáridra` is seen a transfer to the `a`-declension. `Asūsū́`
is probably to be understood as a compound, `asū`-`sū́`.

d\. If the root end in a short vowel, a `t` is regularly and usually
added (383f–h).

e\. Examples have been given at the place just quoted. In `jágat` the
`t` is added to the mutilated form of √`gam` reduplicated, and `ṛṇayā́t`
(TS., once) appears to put it after a long vowel. In a single instance,
`çrútkarṇa` (RV.) *of listening ears*, a stem of this class occurs as
prior member of a compound.

f\. Words of this form in combination with verbal prefixes are very
numerous. The accent rests (as in combination of the same with other
preceding elements) on the root-stem.

g\. A few exceptions in point of accent occur: thus, `ávasā`, `úpastut`;
and, with other irregularities of form, `párijri`, `upástha`,
`uparístha`.

1148\. अ `a`. With the suffix अ `a` is made an immensely large and
heterogeneous body of derivatives, of various meaning and showing
various treatment of the root: `guṇa`-strengthening,
`vṛddhi`-strengthening, retention unchanged, and reduplication.

In good part, they are classifiable under the two usual general heads;
but in part they have been individualized into more special senses.

1\. a. With `guṇa`-strengthening of the root (where that is possible:
235, 240). These are the great majority, being more than twice as
numerous as all others together.

b\. Many *nomina actionis*: as, `çráma` *weariness*, `gráha` *seizure*,
`áya` *movement*, `véda` *knowledge*, `háva` *call*, `kródha` *wrath*,
`jóṣa` *enjoyment*, `tára` *crossing*, `sárga` *emission*.

C. Many *nomina agentis*: as, `kṣamá` *patient*, `svajá` *constrictor*,
`jīvá` *living*, `meghá` *cloud*, `codá` *inciting*, `plavá` *boat*,
`sará` *brook*, `sarpá` *serpent*, `bhojá` *generous*, `khādá`
*devouring*.

d\. Of the examples here given, those under b accent the radical
syllable, and those under c the ending. And this is in perhaps a
majority of cases the fact as regards the two classes of derivatives; so
that, taken in connection with kindred facts as to other suffixes, it
hints at such a difference of accent as a general tendency of the
language. A few sporadic instances are met with of the same form having
the one or the other value according to its accent: thus, `éṣa` *haste*,
`eṣá` *hasting;* `çā́sa` *order*, `çāsá` *orderer* (other examples are
`coda`, `çāka`, `çoka`: compare a similar difference with other
derivatives in `as`, `ana`, `an`, `man`). But exceptions are numerous —
thus, for example, `jayá`, `javá`, `smará`, action-nouns; `çráva`,
`mógha`, `stáva`, agent-nouns — and the subject calls for a much wider
and deeper investigation than it has yet received, before the
accentuation referred to can be set up as a law of the language in
derivation.

2\. e. With `vṛddhi`-strengthening of the root — but only where `ā` is
the resulting radical vowel: that is, of medial `a`, and of final `ṛ`
(most often), `u` or `ū`, `i` or `ī` (rare).

f\. Examples of action-nouns are: `kā́ma` *love*, `bhāgá` *share*, `nādá`
*noise*, `dāvá` *fire*, `tārá` *crossing*. Very few forms of clear
derivation and meaning are quotable with accent on the root-syllable.

g\. Examples of agent-nouns are: `grābhá` *seizing*, `vāhá` *carrying*,
`nāyá` *leading*, `jārá` *lover*.

3\. h. With unstrengthened root, the examples are few: e. g. `kṛçá`
*lean*, `turá` *rapid*, `yugá` *yoke*, `sruvá` *spoon*, `priyá` *dear*,
`vrá` *troop*, `çucá` bright.

i\. A number of words of this class, especially as occurring in
composition, are doubtless results of the transfer of root-stems to the
a-declension: e. g. -`ghuṣa`, -`sphura`, -`tuda`, -`dṛça`, -`vida`,
-`kira`.

j\. A few `a`-stems are made, especially in the older language, from
conjugation-stems, mostly causative: thus, -`āmaya`, `ilaya`,
-`in̄khaya`, -`ejaya`, -`dhāraya`, -`pāraya`, -`mṛḍaya`, -`çamaya`
(compare the `ā`-stems, 1149 c,d); also desiderative, as `bībhatsa`
(compare 1038). Occasional examples also occur from tense-stems: thus,
from `nu`-stems, or secondary stems made from such, `hinvá`, -`inva`,
-`jinva`, -`pinva`, -`sinva`, -`sunva`, -`açnuva`; from others, -`pṛṇa`,
-`mṛṇa`, -`stṛṇa`, -`puna`, -`jāna`, -`paçya`, -`manya`, -`dasya`,
-`jurya`, -`kṣudhya`, -`sya`, -`tiṣṭha`, -`jighra`, -`piba`; from
future-stems, `kariṣya` (JB.), `janiṣya`, `bhaviṣya`, `ruciṣya` (?);
apparently from aorist-stems, `jeṣá`, `néṣa`-, `parṣá`, `pṛkṣá` (?),
-`hoṣa`.

4\. k. Derivatives in a from a reduplicated root-form are a considerable
class, mostly occurring in the older language. They are sometimes made
with a simple reduplication: thus, `cacará`, `cikita`, `dṛdhrá`,
`dadhṛṣá`, `babhasa`, -`babhra`, `vavrá`, `çiçayá`, `çiçnátha` (an
action-noun), `sasrá`; but oftener with an intensive reduplication:
thus, merely strengthened, `cākṣmá`, -`cācala`, `jāgara`, `nānada`,
`lālasa`, `vīvadhá` (?), -`memiṣa`, `rerihá` and `leliha`, `vevijá`,
`nonuva`, `momughá`, -`roruda`, `lolupa`; with consonant added,
-`can̄kaça`-, -`can̄krama`, `jan̄gama`, `cañcala`, -`jañjapa`, `dandhvana`,
-`nannama`, -`jarjalpa`, `jarjara`, -`tartura`, -`dardira`, `múrmura`,
`gadgada`; dissyllabic, -`karikra`, `kanikradá`, `carācará` and
`calācalá`, `marīmṛçá`, `malimlucá`, `varīvṛtá`, `sarīsṛpá`,
`paniṣpadá`, `saniṣyadá`, `sanisrasá`, `patāpata`, `madāmada`,
-`vadāvada`, `` `ghanāghaná`. Many of these are to be regarded as from
an intensive conjugation-stem; but some of them show a form not met with
in intensive conjugation.

5\. l. Derivatives with this suffix from roots as compounded with the
verbal prefixes are quite common, in all the modes of formation (in
each, in proportion to the frequency of independent words):
constituting, in fact, considerably the largest body of derivative stems
with prefixes. They are of both classes as to meaning. The accent is,
with few exceptions, on the ending — and that, without any reference to
the value of the stem as action-noun or agent-noun.

m\. Examples are: `saṁgamá` *assembly*, `nimeṣá` *wink*, `abhidrohá`
*enmity*, `anukará` *assistance*, `udāná` *inspiration*, `pratyāçrāvá`
*response*; — `paricará` *wandering*, `saṁjayá` *victorious*, `vibodhá`
*wakeful*, `atiyājá` *over-pious*, `udārá` *inciting, elevated*,
`uttudá` *rousing*, `saṁgirá` *swallowing*, `ādardirá` *crushing*,
`adhican̄kramá` *climbing*.

n\. The only definite class of exceptions in regard to accent appears to
be that of the adverbial gerunds in `am` (above, 995), which are
accented on the root-syllable. A very few other stems have the same
tone: for example, `utpā́ta` *portent*, `āçréṣa` *plague*. A few others,
mostly agent-nouns, have the accent on the prefix: for example, `vyòṣa`
(i. e. `ví-oṣa`) *burning*, `prátiveça` *neighbor*, `ā́bhaga` *sharing*;
but also `sáṁkāça` *appearance*.

o\. For the remaining compounds of these derivatives, with the
inseparable prefixes and with other elements, see the next chapter. It
may be merely mentioned here that such compounds are numerous, and that
the `a`-derivative has often an active participial value, and is
frequently preceded by a case-form, oftenest the accusative.

p\. Many words in the language appear to end with a suffix `a`, while
yet they are referable to no root which can be otherwise demonstrated as
such.

1149\. आ `ā`. The vast majority of stems in आ `ā` are feminine
adjectives, corresponding to masculines and neuters in अ `a` (332, 334).
But also many suffixes ending in अ `a` have corresponding feminine forms
in long आ `ā`, making a greater or less number of action-nouns. These
will be given under the different suffixes below.

a\. There is further, however, a considerable body of feminine
action-nouns made by adding `ā` to a root, and having an independent
aspect; though they are doubtless in part transfers from the root-noun
(1147). Usually they show an unstrengthened form of root, and (such as
occur in accented texts) an accented suffix.

b. Examples are `īçā́` *lordship*, `krīdā́` *play*, `dayā́` *pity*,
`nindā́` *reproach*, `çan̄kā́` *doubt*, `hiṅsā` *injury*, `kṣamā`
*patience*, `kṣudhā` *hunger*, `bhāṣā` *speech*, `sevā` *service*,
`spṛhā` *eagerness*.

c\. But especially, such nouns in `ā` are made in large numbers, and
with perfect freedom, from secondary conjugation-stems.

d\. Thus, especially from desiderative stems, as `jigīṣā́`, `bhikṣā́`,
`vīrtsā́`, `bībhatsā́`, etc. (see 1038); in the formation of periphrastic
perfects, especially from causative stems, but also from desiderative
and intensive, and even from primary present-stems (1071 c–f); from
denominative stems, in the older language, as `açvayā́`, `sukratūyā́`,
`apasyā́`, `uruṣyā́`, `asūyā́`, `açanayā́`, `jīvanasyā́`, etc., and quite
rarely in the later, as `mṛgayā`.

e\. The only example from a reduplicated stem is the late `paspaçā`; for
`sūṣā́`, `ján̄ghā`, and `jihvā́`, which have a reduplicated aspect, are of
doubtful origin. From present-stems come `icchā` and probably -`ṛcchā`.

1150\. अन `ana`. With this suffix (as with अ `a`) are formed innumerable
derivatives, of both the principal classes of meaning, and with not
infrequent specializations. The root has oftenest `guṇa`-strengthening,
but not seldom `vṛddhi` instead; and in a few cases it remains
unstrengthened. Derivatives of this formation are frequent from roots
with prefixes, and also in composition with other elements.

a\. The normal and greatly prevalent accent is upon the root-syllable,
without regard to the difference of meaning; but cases occur of accented
final, and a few of accented penult. The action-nouns are in general of
the neuter gender. The feminine of adjectives is made either in `ā` or
in `ī` (for details, see below). And a few feminine action-nouns in
`anā` and `anī` occur, which may be ranked as belonging to this suffix.

1\. b. With strengthened and accented root-syllable. Under this head
fall, as above indicated, the great mass of forms.

c\. With `guṇa`-strengthening: examples of action-nouns are `sádana`
*seat*, `rákṣaṇa` *protection*, `danā́` *giving*, `cáyana` *collection*,
`védana` *property*, `hávana` *call*, `bhójana` *enjoyment*, `káraṇa`
*deed*, `várdhana` *increase;* — of agent-nouns, `tápana` *burning*,
`cétana` *visible*, `códana` *impelling*.

d\. With `vṛddhi`-strengthening (only in such circumstances that `ā`
remains as vowel of the radical syllable): examples are -`cā́tana`,
`nā́çana`, `mā́dana`, -`vā́cana`, -`vā́sana`, -`vā́hana`, `sā́dana`,
-`spā́çana`, `svā́dana`, -`ā́yana`, -`yā́vana`, -`srāvaṇa`, -`pā́raṇa`.

e\. From roots with prefixes, the derivatives of this formation are very
numerous, being exceeded in frequency only by those made with the
suffix `a` (above, 1148 l, m). A few examples are: `ākrámaṇa` *striding
on*, `udyā́na` *upgoing*, `nidhā́na` *receptacle*, `prā́ṇana` *expiration*,
`vimócana` *release* and *releasing*, `saṁgámana` *assembly* and
*assembler*, `adhivikártana` *cutting off*, `avaprabhráṅçana` *falling
away down*. For other compounds of these derivatives, showing the same
accent (and the same feminine stem), see the next chapter (below, 1271).
A few exceptions occur: `vicakṣaṇá`, `upariçayaná`, and the feminines
`pramandanī́` and `nirdahanī́`.

f\. The adjectives of this formation, simple or compound, make their
feminine usually in `ī`: thus, `códanī`, `pécanī`, `spáraṇī`,
`jámbhanī`; `prajñā́nī`, `prókṣaṇī`, `saṁgráhaṇī`, `abhiṣávaṇī`,
`vidháraṇī` (`cetanī́` is of doubtful meaning: below, i). An adjective
compound, however, having a noun in `ana` as final member, makes its
feminine in `ā`: thus, `sūpasarpaṇā́` *of easy approach*, `ṣáḍvidhānā`
*of sextuple order*, `anapavācanā́` *not to be ordered away*.

2\. The more irregular formations may be classed as follows:

g\. With accent on the final: a number of agent-nouns and adjectives, as
`karaṇá` *active* (against `káraṇa` *act*), `kṛpaṇá` *miserable*
(against `kṛpáṇa` *misery*), `tvaraṇá` *hasting*, `rocaná` *shining*,
`kroçaná` *yelling*, `svapaná` *sleepy*, `kṣayaṇá` *habitable*.

h\. These, unlike the preceding class, make their feminine in `ā`: e. g.
`tvaraṇā́`, `spandanā́`. A few feminine action-nouns in the older language
have the same form: thus, `açanā́`, `asanā́`, `mananā́`, `dyotanā́`,
`rodhanā́`, `çvetanā́`, `hasanā́` (and compare `kapanā́`, `raçanā́`); those
of the later language in `anā` (rather numerous) are doubtful as regards
accent.

i\. Beside these may be mentioned a few feminines in `anī́`, of more or
less doubtful character: `arṣaṇī́`, `cetanī́` (to `cétana`), `tapanī́` (to
`tápana`), `pṛçanī́`, `vṛjanī́` (with `vṛjána`), `rajanī`, `tedanī́`.

j\. With accent on the penult: a small number of adjectives: as `turáṇa`
*hasting*, `dohána` *milking*, `manána` *considerate*, `bhandánā` and
`mandána` *rejoicing*, `sakṣáṇa` *overcoming*, and perhaps `vakṣáṇa`
*carrying* (the last two with aoristic `s`); and a still smaller number
of neuter action-nouns: `daṅsána` *great deed*, `vṛjána` *enclosure,
town*, `veṣáṇa` *service*, `kṛpáṇa` *misery* (against `kṛpaṇá`
*miserable*), with the masculine `kiráṇa` *dust*.

k\. The only noticed example of a feminine is in `ā`: `turáṇā`. And a
few feminine nouns have the same form: `arháṇā`, `jaráṇā`, `barháṇā`,
`bhandánā`, `maṅhánā`, `mehánā`, `vadhánā`, `vanánā`, `vakṣáṇā`. (And
compare the anomalous masc. name `uçánā`: 355 a.)

l\. Without strengthening of the root are made a small number of
derivatives: thus (besides those already noted, `kṛpáṇa` and `kṛpaṇá`,
`vṛjána` and `vṛjanī́`, `kiráṇa`, `turáṇa`), further accented examples
are `úraṇa`, `dhúvana`, `pṛ́çana`, `bhúvana`, `vṛ́jana`, `vṛ́ṣaṇa`,
-`súvana`; and later are found `sphuraṇa`, `sphuṭana`, `spṛhaṇa`,
-`hnuvana`, `likhana`, `rudana`, etc. RV. makes denominatives from
`riṣaṇa`-, `ruvaṇa`-, `vipana`-, `huvana`-.

m. Stems in `ana` are made also from secondary conjugation-stems: thus,
from desideratives, as `cikitsana` (see 1038); from causatives, as
`hāpana`, `bhīṣaṇa` (see 1051 g); from denominatives, with great
freedom, in the later language, as `ākarṇana`, `unmūlana`, `çlakṣṇana`,
`cihnana`; from intensives and other reduplicated stems, only
`can̄kramaṇa`, `jan̄gamana`, `jāgaraná`, `yoyupana`.

n\. A few isolated cases may be further mentioned: from tense-stems,
-`jighraṇa`, -`ūrṇavana`, -`paçyana`, `yacchana`, -`siñcana`; from
prepositions, `antaraṇa` and `sámana`; `astamana` from the quasi-prefix
(1092 b) `astam`. Feminines in `anā` of doubtful connection are `yóṣaṇā`
*woman* (beside `yóṣan`, `yoṣā`, etc.) and `pṛ́tanā`.

1151\. अस् `as`. By this suffix are made (usually with
`guṇa`-strengthening of the root- vowel) especially a large class of
neuter nouns, mostly abstract (action-nouns), but sometimes assuming a
concrete value; and also, in the older language, a few agent-nouns and
adjectives, and a considerable number of infinitives.

a\. The accent in words of the first class is on the root, and in the
second on the ending; and in a few instances words of the two classes
having the same form are distinguished by their accent; the infinitives
have for the most part the accent on the suffix.

1\. b. Examples of the first and principal class are: `ávas` *aid,
favor*, `tápas` *warmth*, `práyas` *pleasure*, `téjas` *splendor*,
`çrávas` *fame*, `dóhas` *milking*, `káras` *deed*, `práthas` *breadth*,
`cétas` and `mánas` *mind*, `cákṣas` *eye*, `sáras` *pond*, `vácas`
*speech*.

c\. A few words of this class are of irregular formation: thus, without
strengthening of the root, `júvas` *quickness* (beside `jávas`), `úras`
*breast*, `mṛ́dhas` *contempt;* and `iras`- (`irasy`-) and `vipas`-, and
the adverbs `tirás`, `mithás`, `huras`-, also `çíras` *head*, are to be
compared; — with `vṛddhi`-strengthening, -`vā́cas`, `vā́sas`, `vā́has`,
-`svādas`, and, of doubtful connections, `pā́jas`, `pā́thas`, and
-`hāyas`; — perhaps with an aoristic `s`, `héṣas` *missile;* — `pī́vas`
contains a `v` apparently not radical.

d\. After final `ā` of a root is usually inserted y before the suffix
(258): thus, `dhā́yas`, -`gā́yas`. But there are in the oldest language
apparent remains of a formation in which `as` was added directly to
radical `ā`: thus, `bhā́s` and -`dās` (often to be pronounced as two
syllables), `jñā́s`, `mā́s`; and -`dhas` and -`das`, from the roots `dhā`
and `dā`.

2\. e. The instances in which an agent-noun is differentiated by its
accent from an action-noun are: `ápas` *work*, and `apás` *active;*
`yáças` *beauty*, and `yaçás` *beauteous;* `táras` *quickness*, and
`tarás` (VS., once) *quick;* `távas` *strength*, and `tavás` *strong;*
`dúvas` *worship*, and `duvás` *lively (?);* `máhas` *greatness*, and
`mahás` *great;* between `rákṣas` n. and `rakṣás` m., both meaning
*demon*, and between `tyájas` n. *abandonment (?)* and `tyajás` m.
*descendant (?)*, the antithesis is much less clear.

f\. Adjectives in `ás` without corresponding abstracts are: `toçás`
*bestowing*, `yajás` *offering*, `vedhás` *pious*, probably `āhanás`
*heady;* and a few other words of isolated occurence, as `veçás`,
`dhvarás`. From a denominative stem is made `mṛgayás` *wild animal*
(RV., once).

g\. But there are also a very few cases of abstract nouns, not neuter,
accented on the ending: thus, `jarás` *old age*, `bhiyás` *fear;* and
doubtless also `havás` *call*, and `tveṣás` *impulse*. The feminine
`uṣás` *dawn*, and `doṣás` *night*, might belong either here or under
the last preceding head.

h\. Apparently containing a suffix `as` are the noun `upás` *lap*, and
certain proper names: `án̄giras`, `nodhás`, `bhalānás`, `arcanānás`,
`naciketas`. The feminine `apsarás` *nymph* is of doubtful derivation.

i\. The irregular formation of some of the words of this division will
be noticed, without special remark.

3\. j. The infinitives made by the suffix `as` have been explained above
(973): they show various treatment of the root, and various accent
(which last may perhaps mark a difference of gender, like that between
`sáhas` and `jarás`).

4\. k. The formation of derivatives in `as` from roots compounded with
prefixes is very restricted — if, indeed, it is to be admitted at all.
No infinitive in `as` occurs with a prefix; nor any action-noun; and the
adjective combinations are in some instances evidently, and in most
others apparently, possessive compounds of the noun with the prefix used
adjectively: the most probable exceptions are -`nyókas` and
`víṣpardhas`. As in these examples, the accent is always on the prefix.

l\. Certain Vedic stems in `ar` may be noticed here, as more or less
exchanging with stems in `as`, and apparently related with such. They
were reported above, at 169 a.

In connection with this, the most common and important suffix ending in
`s`, may be best treated the others, kindred in office and possibly also
in origin, which end in the same sibilant.

1152\. तस् `tas`, नस् `nas`, सस् `sas`. With these suffixes are made an
extremely small number of action-nouns. Thus:

a\. With `tas` are made `rétas` *seed*, and `srótas` *stream*.

b\. With `nas` are made `ápnas` *acquisition*, `árṇas` *wave*,
-`bhárṇas` *offering*, `rékṇas` *riches;* and in `dráviṇas` *wealth*,
and `párīṇas` *fulness* is apparently to be seen the same suffix, with
prefixed elements having the present value of union-vowels. Probably the
same is true of `dámūnas` *house-friend*, and `ṛ́jūnas` (RV.) n. pr.,
`uçánas` (or -nā) n. pr.

c\. With `sas` is perhaps made `vápsas` *beauty;* and `tárūṣas` may be
mentioned with it (rather `tarus`-`a`?). 1153. इस् `is`. With the
suffix `is` is formed a small number (about a dozen) of nouns.

a\. They are in part nouns of action, but most are used concretely. The
radical syllable has the `guṇa`-strengthening, and the accent is on the
suffix (except in `jyótis` *light*, `vyáthis`, and `ā́mis`, *raw meat*).
Examples are: `arcís`, `rocís`, and `çocís` *light*, `chadís` or
`chardís` *cover*, `barhís` *straw*, `vartís` *track*, `sarpís`
*butter*, `havís` *oblation*, `dyotis` *light*, and `kravís` *raw
flesh*. `Avis`-, `pā́this`, `bhrājis`-, and `máhis`- are isolated
variants of stems in `as`; and `túvis`-, `çucis`-, and `surabhis`-
appear inorganically for `tuvi` etc. in a few compounds or derivatives.

1154\. उस् `us`. With this suffix are made a few words, of various
meaning, root-form, and accent.

a\. They are words signifying both action and agent. A few have both
meanings, without difference of accent: thus, `tápus` *heat* and *hot;*
`árus` *wound* and *sore;* `cákṣus` *brightness* and *seeing, eye;*
`vápus` *wonderful* and *wonder*. The nouns are mostly neuter, and
accented on the root-syllable: thus, `ā́yus`, `tárus`, `púrus`, `múhus`
(? only adverbial), `míthus` (do.), `yájus`, `çā́sus`; exceptions are: in
regard to accent, `janús` *birth;* in regard to gender, `mánus` *man*,
and `náhus`, proper name. Of adjectives, are accented on the ending
`jayús`, `vanús`, and `dakṣús` *burning* (which appears to attach itself
to the aorist-stem).

1155\. इ `i`. With this suffix are formed a large body of derivatives,
of all genders: adjectives and masculine agent-nouns, feminine
abstracts, and a few neuters. They show a various form of the root:
strong, weak, and reduplicated. Their accent is also various. Many of
them have meanings much specialized; and many (including most of the
neuters) are hardly to be connected with any root elsewhere
demonstrable.

1\. a. The feminine action-nouns are of very various form: thus, with
weak root-form, `rúci` brightness, `tvíṣi` *sheen;* `kṛṣí` *ploughing*,
`nṛtí` *dance;* — with `guṇa`-strengthening (where possible), `rópi`
*pain*, `çocí` *heat*, `vaní` and `saní` *gain;* — with
`vṛddhi`-strengthening, `grā́hi` *seizure*, `dhrā́ji` *course*, `ājí`
*race;* from √`duṣ` comes `dū́ṣi` (compare `dūṣayati`, 1042 b). The
variety of accent, which seems reducible to no rule, is illustrated by
the examples given. The few infinitively used words of this formation
(above, 975 b) have a weak root-form, with accent on the ending.

2\. b. The adjectives and masculine agent-nouns exhibit tho same
variety. Thus:

c\. With unstrengthened root: `çúci` *bright*, `bhṛ́mi` *lively*
(√`bhram`), `gṛ́bhi` *container*. d. With unstrengthened root (or root
incapable of `guṇa`-change): `arí` *enemy*, `máhi` *great*, `arcí`
*beam*, `granthí` *knot*, `krīḍí` *playing;* with `vṛddhi`-increment,
`kā́rṣi`, `jā́ni`, -`dhāri`, `çā́ri`, `sācí`, `sādi`, -`sāhi`, and a few
words of obscure connections: thus, `drāpí` *mantle*, `rāçí` *heap*,
`pāṇí` *hand*, etc. The isolated -`ānaçi` appears to come from the
perfect-stem (788) of √`aç`.

e\. With reduplicated root. This is in the older language a considerable
class, of quite various form. Thus: with weak or abbreviated root,
`cákri`, `jághri` (√`ghar`), `pápri`, `sásri`, -`amri`, `babhrí`,
`vavrí`, `jágmi`, -`jájñi` (√`jan`), -`tatni`, `jághni`, `sásni`,
`súṣvi`, -`çiçvi`; and, with displacement of final `ā` (or its weakening
to the semblance of the suffix), `dadí`, `papí`, `yayí` (with a case or
two from `yayī́`), -`jajñi`, `dádhi`; — from the `ur`-form of roots in
changeable `ṛ`, `jáguri`, `táturi`, `pápuri` (`púpuri` SV.); — with
simple reduplication, `cíkiti`, `yúyudhi`, `vívici`; — with strengthened
reduplication, -`cācali`, `tā́tṛpi`, `dā́dhṛṣi`, `vā́vahi`, `sāsahí`,
`tū́tuji` and `tūtují`, `yū́yuvi`, `yū́yudhi`; and `jarbhári` and
`bámbhāri`. And `karkarí` *lute* and `dundubhí` *drum* have the aspect
of belonging to the same class, but are probably onomatopoetic. The
accent, it will be noticed, is most often on the reduplication, but not
seldom elsewhere (only once on the root). It was noticed above (271 f)
that these reduplicated derivatives in `i` not seldom take an object in
the accusative, like a present participle.

f\. Formations in `i` from the root compounded with prefixes are not at
all numerous. They are accented usually on the suffix. Examples arc:
`āyají`, `vyānaçí`, `nijaghní`, `parādadí`, `viṣāsahí`; but also
`ājā́ni`, `āmúri`, `vívavri`. As compounded with other preceding words,
the adjectives or agent-nouns in `i` are not rare, and are regularly
accented on the root: see the next chapter, 1276.

g\. From √`dhā` comes a derivative -`dhi`, forming many masculine
compounds, with the value both of an abstract and a concrete: thus, with
prefixes, `antardhí`, `uddhí`, `nidhí`, `paridhí`, etc. From √`dā` is
made in like manner `ādi` *beginning*, and from √`sthā`, `pratiṣṭhí`
*resistance*. Opinions are at variance as to whether such forms are to
be regarded as made with the suffix `i`, displacing the radical `ā`, or
with weakening of `ā` to `i`.

3\. h. Neuter nouns in `i` are few, and of obscure derivation: examples
are `ákṣi` *eye*, `ásthi` *bone*, `dádhi` *curds*, etc.

1156\. ई `ī`. Stems in ई `ī` (like those in आ `ā`, above, 1149) are for
the most part feminine adjectives, corresponding to masculines and
neuters of other terminations.

a\. Thus, feminines in `ī` are made from `a`-stems (332, 334: and see
also the different suffixes), from `i`-stems (344, 346), from `u`-stems
(344 b), from `ṛ`-stems (376 a), and from various consonant-stems (378
a).

b\. But there are also a few stems in `ī` wearing the aspect of
independent derivatives. Examples are `dakṣī`, `dehī́`, `nadī́`, `nāndī́`,
`péṣī`, `vakṣī́` (apparently with aoristic `a`), `veçī́`, `çā́kī`, `çácī`,
`çámī`, `çímī`, `tarī`, `vāpī`; they are either action-nouns or
agent-nouns. In the later language (as noticed at 344 a) there is very
frequent interchange of `i`- and `ī`-stems and the forms from them.

c\. In the oldest language there are even a few masculines in `ī`. They
were noticed, and their inflection illustrated, above, at 355 b, 356.

1157\. ति `ti`. This suffix forms a large class of frequently used
feminine nouns of action; and also a few agent-nouns (masculine) and
adjectives. The root has in general the same form as before the suffix त
`ta` of the passive participle (952 ff.) — that is to say, a weak, and
often a weakened or abbreviated, form.

a\. The accent ought, it would appear, in analogy with that of the
participle, to rest always upon the suffix; but in the recorded
condition of the language it does so only in a minority of cases:
namely, about fifty, against sixty cases of accent an the radical
syllable, and a hundred and forty of undetermined accent; a number of
words — `iti`, `ṛti`, `citti`, `tṛpti`, `pakti`, `puṣṭi`, `bhūti`,
`bhṛti`, `vṛṣṭi`, `çakti`, `çruṣṭi`, `sṛṣṭi`, `sthiti` — have both
accentuations.

1\. b. Examples of the normal formation are: `rātí` *gift*, `ūtí` *aid*,
`rītí` *flow*, `stutí` *praise*, `bhaktí` *division*, `viṣṭí` *service*,
`stutí` *praise*, `kīrtí` *fame*, `pūrtí` *bestowal*, `matí` *thought*,
`pītí` *drink* (√`pā`; pple `pīta`), `dhāutí` *stream* (√`dhāv`; pple
`dhāuta`); — and with accented root, `gáti` *motion*, `çā́ṁti` *repose*,
`díti` *division* (√`dā`; pple `ditá`), `dṛ́ṣṭi` *sight*, `íṣṭi`
*offering* (√`yaj`: pple `iṣṭá`), `úkti` *speech* (√`vac`: pple `uktá`),
`vṛ́ddhi` *increase*.

c\. The roots which form their participle in `ita` (956) do not have the
`i` also before `ti`: thus, only `gúpti`, -`dṛpti`. A few roots having
their participle in `na` instead of `ta` (957) form the abstract noun
also in `ni` (below, 1158). And from the roots `tan` and `ran` occur
`tantí` and `ránti`, beside the more regular `tati` and `ráti`; also
`áhanti` (once; VS.) beside `áhati`. From roots having the form `dā`,
the derivative in composition is sometimes -`tti` (for `dāti`, with loss
of radical vowel: compare the participle-form -`tta`, above, 955 f):
thus, `niravatti` (K.), `samprátti` (ÇB.), `páritti` (TB.), `vásutti`,
`bhágatti`, `maghátti` (all RV.).

d\. A few derivatives are made from reduplicated roots; their accent is
various: thus, `carkṛtí`, `dī́dhiti` and -`dī́diti`, `jígarti`, and
perhaps the proper name `yayā́ti`; also `jágdhi` from √`jakṣ` (233 f).

e\. Derivatives from roots with prefixes are numerous, and have (as in
the case of the participles in `ta`, and the action-nouns in `tu`) the
accent on the prefix: examples are `ánumati`, `abhī̀ti`, `ā́huti`,
`nírṛti`, `vyā̀pti`, `sáṁgati`. The only exceptions noticed are `āsaktí`
and `āsutí`, and `` `abhiṣṭí` (beside `abhíṣṭi`). In other combinations
than with prefixes, the accentuation is in general the same: see the
next chapter (1274).

2\. f. The adjectives and agent-nouns — which, as masculines, are to be
connected with these rather than with the feminine abstracts — are very
few: thus, `pū́ti` *putrid*, `váṣṭi` *eager*, `dhū́ti` *shaker*, `jñātí`
*relative*, `pattí` *footman*, `páti` *master;* and a few others, of
more or less dubious character. The accent is various, as in the other
class.

3\. g. A few words show the suffix ti preceded by various vowels, union-
or stem-vowels. The ordinary intermediate `i` of the `ta`-participle
etc. is seen in `sániti`, `ujhiti`, -`gṛhīti` (`ī`, as usual with this
root: 900 b), `paṭhiti`, `bhaṇiti`; and with them may be mentioned the
adjective `ṛ́jīti`, the proper names `turvī́ti` and `dabhī́ti`, and
`snī́hitī` and `snéhitī`, notwithstanding their long final. With `ati`
are made a few derivatives, variously accented: thus, the action-nouns
`aṅhatí`, `dṛçatí`, `pakṣatí`, `mithatí`, `vasatí`, `ramáti`, `vratáti`,
`amáti` and `ámati`, -`dhrajati`; and the agent-words `aratí`,
`khalatí`, `vṛkáti`, `rámati`, `dahati`. In some of these is to be seen
with probability a stem-vowel, as also in `jánayati` and `rasayati` (and
RV. has `gopayátya`). The grammarians' method of representing a root by
its 3d sing. pres. indic., declining this as a `ti`-stem, begins in the
older language: e. g. `étivant` (TB.), `kṣetivant` (AB.), `yajati` and
`juhoti` and `dadāti` (S.), `nandati` (MBh.). The feminine `yúvati`
*young, maiden* is of isolated character.

h\. In some of the words instanced in the last paragraph, `ti` is
perhaps applied as a secondary suffix. A kindred character belongs to it
in the numeral derivatives from pronominal roots, `káti`, `táti`,
`yáti`, and from numerals, as `daçati`, `viṅçatí`, `ṣaṣṭí`, etc., with
`pan̄ktí` (from `páñca`); in `padāti`; and in `addhātí`, from the
particle `addhā́`.

1158\. नि `ni`. This suffix agrees in general in its uses and in the
form of its derivatives with the preceding; but it makes a very much
smaller number of words, among which the feminine abstracts are a
minority.

a\. As was noticed above (1157 c), a few verbs (ending in vowels) making
their passive participle in `na` instead of `ta` make their action-noun
in `ni` instead of `ti`. From the older language are quotable `jyāní`
*injury*, `jūrní` *heat*, `hāni` *abandonment* (and the masculines
`ghṛ́ṇi` and `jī́rṇi`); later occur `glāni`, -`mlāni`, `sanni`-.

b\. Words of the other class are: `açni` *eating*, -`uṣṇi` *burning*,
`váhni` *carrying*, `jū́rṇi` *singing*, `tū́rṇi` *hasty*, `bhū́rṇi`
*excited*, `dharṇí` *sustaining*, `preṇí` *loving*, `vṛṣṇí` and `vṛ́ṣṇi`
*virile;* and with them may be mentioned `pṛ́çni` *speckled*.

c\. In `preṇí`, `yóni`, `mení`, `çréṇi`, `çróṇi` is seen a strengthening
of the radical syllable, such as does not appear among the derivatives
in `ti`.

d\. Derivatives in `ni` from roots with prefixes do not appear to occur.

e. In `hrādúni` and `hlāduni` we have a prefixed `u`. In the words
ending in `ani`, the `a` has probably the same value with that of `ati`
(above, 1157 g); but `ani` has gained a more independent status, and may
be best treated as a separate suffix.

1159\. अनि `ani`. The words made by this suffix have the same double
value with those made by the preceding suffixes. Their accent is
various. Thus:

a\. Feminine action-nouns, sometimes with concreted meaning: as, `iṣáṇi`
*impulse*, `çaráṇi` *injury*, `dyotaní` *brightness*, `kṣipaṇí` *blow*,
`açáni` *missile*, `vartaní` *track;* and -`arçani`, `udani`-,
`jaraṇi`-.

b\. Adjectives and other agent-words are: `aráṇi` *fire-stick*, `caráṇi`
*movable*, `cakṣáṇi` *enlightener*, `taráṇi` *quick*, `dhamáni` *pipe*,
`dhvasáni` *scattering*, `vakṣáṇi` *strengthener*, `saraṇi` *track*.
`Dharaṇi` and one or two other late words are probably variants to stems
in `anī`. From a reduplicated root-form comes -`paptani`. From
desiderative stems are made `rurukṣáṇi`, `siṣāsáni`, and (with prefix)
`ā-çuçukṣáṇi`. And a small number of words appear to attach themselves
to an `s`-aorist stem: thus, `parṣáṇi`, `sakṣáṇi`, `carṣaṇí`.

c\. It is questionable whether the infinitives in `ṣaṇí` (978) are to be
put here, as accusatives of a formation in `ani`, or under the next
suffix, as locatives of a formation in `an`, from roots and stems
increased by an aoristic `s`.

1160\. अन् `an`. Not many words are made with a suffix of this form, and
of these few are plainly to be connected with roots. Certain rare
neuters (along with the doubtful infinitives) are nouns of action; the
rest are masculine and neuter agent-nouns. The accent is various.

a\. The infinitives which admit of being referred to this suffix, as
locative cases, are those in `ṣáṇi`, of which the sibilant may be the
final of a tense-stem. They are all given above (978).

b\. The other action-nouns in `an` are `mahán` *greatness*, `rāján`
*authority* (RV., once: compare `rā́jan`; the accent-relation is the
reverse of the usual one), and `gámbhan` *depth* (VS., once); and PB.
has `kṣepṇā` once.

c\. Agent-nouns (in part of doubtful connection) are: `ukṣán` *ox*,
`cákṣan` *eye*, `tákṣan` *carpenter*, `dhvasán` proper name, `pūṣán`
name of a god, `majján` *marrow*, `rā́jan` *king*, `vṛ́ṣan` *virile,
bull*, `sághan`, `snīhán` (`snūhan` Āpast.); also -`gman`, `jmán`,
-`bhvan`, -`çvan`, with `çván`, `yúvan`, `yóṣan`, and the stems `áhan`,
`ū́dhan`, etc. (430–4), filling up the inflection of other defective
stems.

d\. With prefixes occur `pratidī́van` and `átidīvan`, `vibhván`,
`níkāman`.

1161. तु `tu`. The great mass of the words of this formation are the
infinitives — accusatives in the later language, in the earlier likewise
datives and ablative-genitives: see above, 970 b, 972, But a few are
also used independently, as action-nouns or with concreted meaning; and
an extremely small number, of somewhat questionable character, appear to
have the value of agent-words. They are of all genders, but chiefly
masculine. The root has the `guṇa`-strengthening.

a\. The infinitive words are accented on the radical syllable when
simple, and most of the others have the same accent; but a few have the
tone on the ending.

b\. Examples are: of the regular formation, masc. `dā́tu` *share*,
`jātu`- *birth*, `dhā́tu` *element*, `tántu` *thread*, `mántu` *counsel*,
`ótu` *weft*, `sātu` *receptacle*, `sétu` *tie*, `sótu` *pressure*, also
`krátu` *capacity*, and `sáktu`*grits;* fem. `vástu` *morning;* neut,
`vastu` *thing*, `vā́stu` *abode;* — with accent on the ending, `aktú`
*ray*, `jantú`*being*, `gātú` *way* and *song*, `yātú` (?) *demon*,
`hetú` *cause*, `ketú` *banner* (all masc.); — with unstrengthened root,
`ṛtú` *season*, `pitú` *drink*, `sū́tu` *birth*, and apparently `kṛ́tu`
(in `kṛ́tvas` *times*): with `vṛddhi`-strerigthening, `vā́stu` (above).
Agent-nouns appear to be `dhā́tu` *drinkable* and `kroṣṭu` *jackal*.

c\. The infinitives in `tu` have (968) often the union-vowel `i` before
the suffix, and this in a few cases is lengthened to `ī`. In other use
occur also -`stárītu` and -`dhárītu` (both with `dus`), -`hávītu` (with
`su`); `turphárītu` seems of the same formation, but is obscure.

d\. In a few instances, the suffix `tu` appears to be added to a tense-
or conjugation-stem in `a`; thus, `edhatú` and `vahatú`; `tamyatú` and
`tapyatú`; and `siṣāsátu`. The accent of the last is paralleled only by
that of `jīvā́tu` *life*, which is further exceptional in showing a long
`ā`; it is used sometimes in the manner of an infinitive.

1162\. नु `nu`. This suffix forms a comparatively small body of words,
generally masculine, and having both the abstract and the concrete
value.

a\. The accent is usually on the ending, and the root unstrengthened.

b\. Thus: `kṣepnú` *jerk*, `bhānú` *light* (later *sun*), `vagnú`
*sound*, `sūnú` *son*, `dā́nu` (with irregular accent) m. f. *demon*, n.
*drop, dew;* — `dhenú` f. *cow;* — `gṛdhnú` *hasty*, `tapnú` *burning*,
`trasnu` *fearful*, `dhṛṣṇú` *bold;* — and `víṣṇu` *Vishnu*, and perhaps
`sthāṇú` *pillar*. Compare also suffix `tnu`, 1196 a.

c. This also (like `tu`) appears sometimes with a prefixed `a`: thus,
`kṣipaṇú` *missile*, `krandanú` and `nadanú` *roaring*, `nabhanú` (and
-`nū́`, f.) *fountain*, `vibhañjanú` (only instance with prefix)
*breaking to pieces;* and perhaps the proper names `dāsanu` and `kṛçā́nu`
belong here.

1163\. थ `tha`. The words made with this suffix are almost without
exception action-nouns (though some have assumed a concrete value). They
are of all genders. The root is of a weak (or even weakened) form, and
the accent usually on the suffix.

a\. Thus: masc., -`itha` *going*, `ártha` *goal*, -`kṛtha` *making*,
`gāthá` *song*, `pakthá` n. pr., `bhṛthá` *offering*, -`yātha` *road*,
-`çītha` *lying down*, `çotha` *swelling*, `sīktha` *sediment;* and, of
less clear connections, `yūthá` *herd*, `rátha` *chariot;* — neut.,
`ukthá` *saying*, `tīrthá` *ford*, `nīthá` *song*, `rikthá` *heritage*,
and apparently `pṛṣṭhá` *back;* — fem. (with `ā`), `gā́thā` *song*,
`nī́thā` *way*. Radical `ā` is weakened to `ī` in `gī́tha` *song* and
-`pītha` *drink* and -`pītha` *protection;* a final nasal is lost in
-`gatha` *going* and `hathá` *slaying*. In `vijigīthá` (ÇB.; but BAU.
-`īta`) is apparently seen a formation from a reduplication of √`jī`,
*victorious*.

b\. A few examples of combination with prefixes occur, with accent on
the final: thus, `nirṛthá` *destruction*, `saṁgathá` *union*, etc.

c\. Still more common in the older language is a form of this suffix to
which has become prefixed an `á`, which is probably of thematic origin,
though become a union-vowel. Thus: -`anátha` *breathing*, `ayátha`
*foot*, `carátha` *mobility*, `tveṣátha` *vehemence*, and so
`prothátha`, `yajátha`, `ravátha`, `vakṣátha`, `ucátha`, `vidátha`,
`çaṅsatha`, `çapátha`, `çayátha`, `çvayátha`, `çvasátha`, `sacátha`,
`stanátha`, `stavátha`, `sravátha`, and, with weak root-form, `ruvátha`;
the later language adds `karatha`, `taratha`, `çamatha`, `savatha`. With
a prefix, the accent is thrown forward upon the final: thus, `āvasathá`
*abode*, `pravasathá` *absence;* but `prāṇátha` *breath* is treated as
if prān were an integral root.

d\. Isolated combinations of `tha` with other preceding vowels occur:
thus, `várūtha` *protection*, `járūtha` *wasting* (?); and `matútha`
(√`man`?).

1164\. थु `thu`. This suffix (like थ `tha`, above) has an अ `á` attached
to it, and, in the very few derivatives which it makes, appears only as
अथु `áthu`.

a\. The only Vedic examples are `ejáthu` *quaking*, `vepáthu`
*trembling*, `stanáthu` *roaring*. Later cases are `nandáthu` (TS.),
`nadathu` (U.), `kṣavathu` (S.), `davathu`, `bhraṅçathu`, `majjathu`,
`vamathu`, `çvayathu`, `sphūrjathu`.

1165\. यु `yu`. With this suffix are made a very few nouns, both of
agent and of action, with unstrengthened root and various accent. Thus:

a\. Abstracts (masc.) are manyú *wrath*, mṛtyú *death* (with t added to
the short final of the root).

b\. Adjectives etc. are druhyú n. pr., bhujyú *pliable*, mucyu (GB. i.
1.7), çundhyú *pure;* yájyu *pious*, sáhyu *strong*, dásyu *enemy;* and,
with vṛddhi-strengthening, jāyú *victorious*.

c\. For other derivatives ending in yu, see the suffix u, below, 1178 h,
i.

1166\. म ma. The action-nouns made by this suffix are almost all
masculine; and they are of various root-form and accent, as are also the
agent-nouns and adjectives.

a\. Examples of action-nouns are: ajmá *course*, gharmá *heat;* éma
*progress*, bhā́ma *brightness*, sárna *flow*, stóma *song of praise*.

b\. Examples of agent-nouns etc. are: tigmá *sharp*, bhīmá *terrible*,
çagmá *mighty*, idhmá *fuel*, yudhmá *warrior*. A single instance from a
reduplicated root is tūtumá *powerful*. Sarámā f., with a before the
suffix, is of doubtful connection.

c\. A number of stems in ma have stems in man beside them, and appear,
at least in part, to be transfers from the an- to the a-declension. Such
are ajma, oma, ema, arma, tókma, darmá, dhárma, narmá, yā́ma, yugma,
vema, çuṣma, sóma, sárma, hóma.

1167\. मि mi. A very small number of nouns, masculine and feminine,
formed with mi, may be conveniently noticed here.

Thus, from ṛ-roots, ūrmí *wave*, -kūrmi *action*, sūrmī́ f. *tube;* from
others, jāmí *relation*, bhū́mi or bhū́mī f. *earth*, lakṣmī́ *sign;* also
probably raçmí *line, ray;* and the adjective krúdhmi (? RV., once).

1168\. मन् man. The numerous derivatives made with this suffix are
almost only action-nouns. The great majority of them are neuter, and
accented on the root-syllable; a much smaller number are masculine, and
accented on the suffix. The few agent-words are, if nouns, masculine,
and have the latter accent: in several instances, a neuter and a
masculine, of the one and the other value and accent, stand side by
side. The root has in general the guṇa-strengthening.

1\. a. Examples of regularly formed neuters are: kárman *action*, jánman
*birth*, nā́man *name*, vártman *track*, véçman *dwelling*, hóman
*sacrifice*, -dyótman *splendor*.

b. Examples of masculine abstracts are: `omán` *favor*, `ojmán`
*strength*, `jemán` *conquest*, `svādmán` *sweetness*, `hemán`
*impulse*.

c\. Corresponding neuter action-nouns and masculine agent-nouns are:
`bráhman` *worship* and `brahmán` *priest;* `dā́man` *gift* and `dāmán`
*giver;* `dhárman` *rule* and `dharmán` *orderer;* `sádman` *seat* and
`sadmán` *sitter*. But `óman` *friend* stands in the contrary relation
to `omán` m. *favor*. Very few other agent-nouns occur; and all, except
`brahmán`, are of rare occurrence.

d\. On the other hand, `jeman` and `varṣman` and `svādman` (and
`variman`) have the difference of gender and accent without a
corresponding difference of meaning.

e\. The noun `áçman` *stone*, though masculine, is accented on the
radical syllable; and two or three other questionable cases of the same
kind occur.

f\. The derivatives in `man` used as infinitives (974) have for the most
part the accent of neuters: the only exception is `vidmáne`.

g\. A few words, of either class, have an irregular root-form: thus,
`údman`, `ūṣmán` or `uṣman`, `bhū́man` *earth*, `bhūmán` *abundance*,
`syū́man`, `sīmán`, `bhujmán`, `vidmán`, `çíkman`, `çuṣman`, `sidhman`;
and `kā́rṣman`, `bhā́rman`, `çā́kman`.

h\. Derivatives in `man` from roots with prefixes are not numerous. They
are usually accented on the prefix, whether action-nouns or adjectives:
thus, `prábharman` *forthbringing*, `práyáman` *departure;* `ánuvartman`
*following after:* the exceptions, `vijā́man`, `prativartmán`,
`visarmán`, are perhaps of possessive formation.

2\. i. The same suffix, though only with its abstract-making value, has
in a number of cases before it a union-vowel, `i` or `ī`; and `imán`
comes to be used as a secondary suffix, forming abstract nouns
(masculine) from a considerable number of adjectives.

j\. The neuters in `iman` and `īman` are primary formations, belonging
almost only to the older language: thus, `jániman`, `dhariman` (M.),
`váriman` (beside `varimán`, as noticed above); and `dárīman`,
`dhárīman`, `párīman` (and `páreman` SV., once), `bhárīman`, `várīman`,
`sárīman`, `stárīman`, `sávīman`, and `hávīman`. Those in `īman` are
hardly met with outside the Rig-Veda.

k\. The masculines in `imán` are in the oldest language less frequent
than the neuters just described: they are `tániman` (?), `jarimán`,
`prathimán`, `mahimán`, `varimán` (beside the equivalent `váriman` and
`várīman`), `varṣimán` (beside the equivalent `várṣman` and `varṣmán`),
`harimán`, and `drāghimán` (VS.) beside `drāghmán` (V.B.). Some of
these, as well as of the derivatives in simple `man`, attach themselves
in meaning, or in form also, to adjectives, to which they seem the
accompanying abstracts: compare the similar treatment of the primary
comparatives and superlatives (above, 468): such are `pāpmán` (to
`pāpá`, `pā́pīyas` etc.); `drāghmán` etc. (to `dīrghá`, `drā́ghīyas`,
etc.); `váriman` etc. (to `urú`, `várīyas`, etc.); `práthiman` (to
`pṛthú`, `práthiṣṭha`); `harimán` (to `hári` or `hárita`); `várṣman`
etc. (to `várṣīyas` etc.); `svā́dman` etc. (to `svādú`, `svā́dīyas`,
etc.). Then in the Brāhmaṇa language are found further examples: thus,
`dhūmrimán` (TS. K.), `draḍhimán` (MS. K.: to `dṛdhá`, `dráḍhīyas`,
etc.), `aṇimán` (ÇB.; and `áṇiman` n. *bit*), `sthemán`, `stháviman` (n.
*big piece*), `taruṇiman` (K.), `paruṣiman` (AB.), `abaliman` (ChU.),
`lohitiman` (KB.); and still later such as `laghiman`, `kṛṣṇiman`,
`pūrṇiman`, `madhuriman`, `çoṇiman`, etc., etc.

1169\. वन् `van`. By this suffix are made almost only agent-words,
adjectives and nouns, the latter chiefly masculines. The root is
unstrengthened, and to a short final vowel is added a त् `t` before the
suffix. The accent is almost always on the root, both in the simple
words and in their compounds.

a\. The insertion of `t` is an intimation that the words of this form
are originally made by the addition of `an` to derivatives in `u` and
`tu`; yet `van` has the present value of an integral suffix in the
language, and must be treated as such.

b\. Examples of the usual formation are: masc. `yájvan` *offering*,
`drúhvan` *harming*, `çákvan` *capable*, -`ríkvan` *leaving*, -`jítvan`
*conquering*, `sútvan` *pressing*, `kṛ́tvan` *active*, -`gátvan` (like
-`gat`, -`gatya`) *going*, `sátvan` (√`san`) *warrior;* neut. `párvan`
*joint*, `dhánvan` *bow*. Irregular, with strengthened root, are `árvan`
*courser*, -`yāvan` (? AV.) *driving off;* and, with accent on the
suffix, `dṛván` (? VS.) and `vidván` (? AV.).

c\. Examples from roots with prefixes (which are not rare) are:
`atītvan` *excelling*, `upahásvan` *reviler*, `sambhṛ́tvan` *collecting;*
and perhaps `vivásvan` *shining:* `abhísatvan` is a compound with
governing preposition (1310). For the compounds with other elements,
which, except in special cases, have the same accent, see below, 1277.

d\. The stems `muṣīván` *robber* and `sanítvan` (each RV., once) are the
only ones with a union-vowel, and are perhaps better regarded as
secondary derivatives — of which a few are made with this suffix: see
below, 1234. From a reduplicated root are made `rárāvan` and `cikitván`
(and possibly `vivásvan`).

e\. Action-nouns made with the suffix `van` are only the infinitival
words mentioned at 974 — unless `bhurváṇi` (RV., once) is to be added,
as locative of `bhurván`.

f\. The feminines corresponding to adjectives in `van` are not made
(apparently) directly from this suffix, but from `vara`, and end in
`varī`; see below, 1171 b.

1170\. वन `vana`, वनि `vani`, वनु `vanu`. The very few words made with
these suffixes may best be noticed here, in connection with वन् `van`
(of which the others are probably secondary extensions).

a\. With `vana` are made `vagvaná` *talkative*, `satvaná` warrior
(beside `sátvan`, above); and, from a reduplicated root, `çuçukvaná`
*shining*.

b\. With `vani` are made from simple roots `turváṇi` *excelling*, and
`bhurváṇi` *restless*, and, from reduplicated roots, `çuçukváni`
*shining*, `dadhṛṣváṇi` *daring*, `tuturváṇi` *striving after*, and
`jugurváṇi` *praising;* `arhariṣváṇi` is obscure.

c\. With `vanu` is made only `vagvanú` *tone, noise*.

1171\. वर `vara`. With this suffix are made a few derivatives, of all
genders, having for the most part the value of agent-nouns and
adjectives. Much more common are the feminine stems in वरी `varī`,
which, from the earliest period, serve as corresponding feminines to the
masculine stems in वन् `van`.

a\. A few masculine adjectives in `vará` occur, formally accordant
(except in accent) with the feminines: thus, `itvará` *going*, -`advara`
*eating;* and so, further, in the older language, `īçvará`, -`jāvara`,
`phárvara`, `bhārvará`, `bhāsvará`, `vyadhvará` (?), -`sadvara`,
`sthāvará`, and doubtless with them belongs `vidvalá`; later,
-`kasvara`, `gatvara`, `ghasvara` (also `ghasmara`), -`jitvara`,
`naçvara`, `pīvara`, `madvara`, -`sṛtvara`; from a reduplicated root,
`yāyāvará` (B. and later). Many of these have feminines in `ā`.

b\. The feminines in `varī` accord in treatment of the root and in
accent with the masculines in `van` to which they correspond: thus,
`yájvarī`, -`jítvarī`, `sṛ́tvarī`, -`çī́varī`, -`yāvarī`, and so on (about
twenty-five such formations in RV.); from a reduplicated root,
-`çiçvarī`.

c\. A very small number of neuters occur, with accent on the root: thus,
`kárvara` *deed*, `gáhvara` (later also `gabhvara`) *thicket;* and a
feminine or two, with accent on the penult: `urvárā` *field*, and
`urvárī` *tow* (both of doubtful etymology).

We take up now the suffixes by which are made only stems having the
value of agent-nouns and adjectives; beginning with a brief mention of
the participial endings, which in general have been already sufficiently
treated.

1172\. अन्त् `ant` (or अत् `at`). The office of this suffix, in making
present and future participles active, has been fully explained above,
in connection with the various tense-stems and conjugation-stems (chaps.
VIII.–XIV.), in combination with which alone it is employed (not
directly with the root, unless this is also used as tense-stem).

a\. A few words of like origin, but used as independent adjectives, were
given at 450. With the same or a formally identical suffix are made from
pronominal roots `íyant` and `kíyant` (451, 517 a). And `ádvayant` *not
double-tongued* (RV., once), appears to contain a similar formation from
the numeral `dvi` — unless we are to assume a denominative verb-stem as
intermediate.

1173\. वांस् `vāṅs` (or वस् `vas`). For the (perfect active) participles
made with this suffix, see above, 802–6, and 458 ff.

a\. A few words of irregular and questionable formation were noticed at
462, above. Also, apparent transfers to a form `us` or `uṣa`. RV.
vocalizes the `v` once, in `jujuruā́n`.

b\. The oldest language (RV.) has a very few words in `vas`, of doubtful
relations: `ṛ́bhvas` and `çíkvas` *skilful* (beside words in `va` and
`van`), and perhaps `khidvas` (√`khād`). The neuter abstract `várivas`
*breadth, room* (belonging to `urú` *broad*, in the same manner with
`várīyas` and `varimán`), is quite isolated. MBh. makes a nominative
`pīvān`, as if from `pīvāṅs` instead of `pīvan`.

1174\. मान `māna`. The participles having this ending are, as has been
seen (584 b), present and future only, and have the middle, or the
derived passive, value belonging in general to the stems to which the
suffix is attached.

1175\. आन `āna`. The participles ending in आन `āna` are of middle and
passive value, like those just noticed, and either present, perfect, or
(partly with the form सान `sāna`: above, 897 b) aorist.

a\. A few other words ending in the same manner in the old language may
be mentioned here. The RV. has the adjectives `tákavāna`, `bhṛ́gavāṇa`,
`vásavāna`, `ūrdhvasāná`, apparently made on the model of participial
stems. Also the proper names `ápnavāna`, `pṛ́thavāna`, and `cyávāna` and
`cyávatāna`. `Párçāna` *abyss* is doubtful; `rujā́nā` (RV., once) is
probably a false reading; `ā́pnāna` is of doubtful character.

1176\. त `ta`. The use of this suffix in forming participles directly
from the root, or from a conjugational (not a tense) stem, was explained
above, 952–6. The participles thus made are in part intransitive, but in
great part passive in value (like those made by the two preceding
suffixes, but in much larger measure, and more decidedly).

a\. A few general adjectives, or nouns with concrete meaning, are
adaptations of this participle. Examples are: `tṛṣṭá` *rough*, `çītá`
*cold*, `dṛḍhá` (for `dṝḍhá`: 224 a) *firm;* `dūtá` *messenger*, `sūtá`
*charioteer;* `ṛtá` *right*, `gḥṛtá` *ghee*, `jātá` *kind*, `dyūtá`
*gambling*, `nṛttá` *dance*, `jīvitá` *life*, `caritá` *behavior*,
`smita` *smile*. The adjective `tigitá` (RV.) *sharp* shows anomalous
reversion of palatal to guttural before the `i` (216 d). `Vāvā́ta` *dear*
is a single example from a reduplicated root.

b\. Doubtless after the example and model of participles from
denominative stems (of which, however, no instances are quotable from
the Veda — unless `bhāmita` RV.), derivatives in `ita` are in the later
language made directly from noun and adjective-stems, having the meaning
of *endowed with, affected by, made to be*, and the like (compare the
similar English formation in *ed*, as *horned*, *barefooted*,
*bluecoated*). Examples are `rathita` *furnished with a chariot*,
`duḥkhita` *pained*, `kusumita` *flowered*, `durbalita` *weakened*,
`niḥsaṁçayita` *indubitable*, etc. etc.

c\. A few words ending in `ta` are accented on the radical syllable, and
their relation to the participial derivatives is very doubtful: such are
`ásta` *home*, `márta` *mortal*, `vā́ta` *wind;* and with them may be
mentioned `gárta` *high seat*, `nákta` *night*, `hásta` *hand*. `Vratá`
is commonly viewed as containing a suffix `ta`, but it doubtless comes
from √`vṛt` (`vrat`-`á`, like `tradá`, `vrajá`) and means originally
*course*.

d\. Several adjectives denoting color end in `ita`, but are hardly
connectible with roots of kindred meaning: thus, `palitá` *gray*,
`ásita` *black*, `róhita` and `lóhita` *red*, `hárita` *green;* akin
with them are `éta` *variegated*, `çyetá` *white*. The feminines of
these stems are in part irregular: thus, `énī` and `çyénī`; `róhiṇī` and
`lóhinī`, and `háriṇī` (but the corresponding masc. `háriṇa` also
occurs); and `ásiknī`, `páliknī`, and `háriknī`.

e\. A small number of adjectives in the older language ending in `ata`
are not to be separated from the participial words in `ta`, although
their specific meaning is in part gerundive. They are: `pacatá`
*cooked*, `darçatá` and `paçyata` *seen, to be seen, worth seeing;* and
so `yajatá`, `haryatá`, `bharatá`. The `y` of `paçyata` and `haryatá`
indicates pretty plainly that the `a` also is that of a present
tense-stem. `Rajatá` *silvery* is of more obscure relation to √`raj`
*color;* `párvata` *mountain* must be secondary.

1177\. न `na` (and इन `ina`, उन `una`). The use of the suffix न `na` in
forming from certain roots participles equivalent to those in त `ta`,
either alongside the latter or instead of them, was explained above, at
957.

a\. With the same suffix are made a number of general adjectives, and of
nouns of various gender (fem. in `nā`). The accent is on the suffix or
on the root. A few examples are: `uṣṇá` *hot*, `çuná` *fortunate*,
`áçna` *ravenous*, `çvítna` *white;* masc., `praçná` *question*, `yajñá`
*offering*, `ghṛṇá` *heat*, `várṇa` *color*, `svápna` *sleep;* neut.,
`parṇá` *wing*, `rátna` *jewel* (?); fem. `tṛ́ṣṇa` *thirst*, `yācn̄ā́`
*supplication*. But many of the stems ending in `na` are not readily
connectible with roots. An antithesis of accent is seen in `kárṇa` *ear*
and `karṇá` *eared*.

b\. The few words ending in `ina` are of doubtful connection, but may be
mentioned here: thus, `aminá` *violent*, `vṛjiná` *crooked*, `dákṣiṇa`
*right*, `dráviṇa` *property*, `druhiṇa`, `çreṣiṇa`, `hariṇá`; and
`kanī́na` may be added.

c\. The words ending in `una` are of various meaning and accent, like
those in `ana`: they are `árjuna`, `karúṇa`, -`cetúna`, `táruṇa`,
`dāruṇá`, `dharúṇa`, `narúṇa`, `píçuna`, `mithuná`, `yatúna`, `vayúna`,
`varuṇa`, `çalúna`, and the feminine `yamúnā`; and `bhrūṇá` may be
added.

d\. These are all the proper participial endings of the language. The
gerundives, later and earlier, are in the main evident secondary
formations, and will be treated under the head of secondary derivation.

We take up now the other suffixes forming agent-nouns and adjectives,
beginning with those which have more or less a participial value.

1178\. उ `u`. With this suffix are made a considerable body of
derivatives, of very various character — adjectives, and agent-nouns of
all genders, with different treatment of the root, and with different
accent. It is especially used with certain conjugational stems,
desiderative (particularly later) and denominative (mainly earlier),
making adjectives with the value of present participles; and in such use
it wins in part the aspect of a secondary suffix.

a\. The root has oftenest a weak (or weakened) form; but it is sometimes
vriddhied; least often (when capable of `guṇa`), it has the
`guṇa`-strengthening — all without any apparent connection with either
accent or meaning or gender. After final radical `ā` is usually added
`y` (258) before the suffix. A few derivatives are made from the
reduplicated root. But many words ending in `u` are not readily, or not
at all, connectible with roots; examples will be given especially of
those that have an obvious etymology.

b\. Examples of ordinary adjectives are: `urú` *wide*, `ṛjú` *straight*,
`pṛthú` *broad*, `mṛdú` *soft*, `sādhú` *good*, `svādú` *sweet*, `tápu`
*hot*, `vásu` *good;* `jāyú` *conquering*, `dārú` *bursting;* `çayú`
*lying*, `réku` *empty;* `dhāyú` *thirsty*, `pāyú` *protecting*. Final
`ā` appears to be lost before the suffix in -`sthu` (`suṣṭhú`,
`anuṣṭhú`), and perhaps in `yú`, -`gu` (`agregú`), and -`khu` (`ākhú`).

c\. Examples of nouns are: masc., `aṅçú` *ray*, `ripú` *deceiver*,
`vāyú` *wind-god*, `ásu` *life*, `mánu` *man, Manu;* fem., `íṣu` (also
masc.) *arrow*, `síndhu` (also masc.) *river*, `tanū́` or `tanú` *body;*
neut., `kṣú` *food*.

d\. Derivatives from reduplicated roots are: `cikitú`, `jágmu`, `jigyú`,
`jijñu`, `siṣṇu`, -`tatnu` (unless this is made with `nu` or `tnu`),
`didyu` (?), `dadru`, `yáyu` or `yayú` and `yíyu` (with final `ā` lost),
`pípru` (proper name), -`dīdhayu`; and `títaü`, `babhrú`, -`raru`
(`aráru`), `malimlú` (?) have the aspect of being similar formations.

e\. A few derivatives are made from roots with prefixes, with various
accentuation: for example, `upāyú` *on-coming*, `pramayú` *going to
destruction*, `viklíndu` a certain disease, `abhī́çu` *rein (director)*,
`sáṁvasu` *dwelling together*.

f\. From tense-stems, apparently, are made `tanyú` *thundering*,
`bhindú` *splitting*, -`vindu` *finding*, and (with aoristic `s`)
`dákṣu` and `dhákṣu` (all RV.).

g\. Participial adjectives in `ú` from desiderative "roots" (stems with
loss of their final `a`) are sufficiently numerous in the ancient
language (RV. has more than a dozen of them, AV. not quite so many) to
show that the formation was already a regular one, extensible at will;
and later such adjectives may be made from every desiderative. Examples
(older) are: `ditsú`, `dipsú`, `cikitsú`, `titikṣú`, `pipīṣu`,
`mumukṣú`, `iyakṣú`, `çiçlikṣú`; with prefix, `abhidipsú`; with
anomalous accent, `didṛ́kṣu`. These adjectives, both earlier and later,
may take an object in the accusative (271 a).

h\. A few similar adjectives are made in the older language from
causatives: thus, `dhārayú` (persistent), `bhājayú`, `bhāvayú`,
`maṅhayú`, `mandayú`, `çramayú`; and `mṛgayú` from the caus.-denom.
`mṛgáya`.

i\. Much more numerous, however, are such formations from the more
proper denominatives, especially in the oldest language (RV. has toward
eighty of them; AV. only a quarter as many, including six or eight which
are not found in RV.; and they are still rarer in the Brāhmaṇas, and
hardly met with later). In a majority of cases, personal verbal forms
from the same denominative stem are in use: thus, for example, to
`aghāyú`, `arātīyú`, `ṛjūyú`, `caraṇyú`, `manasyú`, `saniṣyú`, `uruṣyú`,
`saparyú`; in others, only the present participle in `yánt`, or the
abstract noun in `yā́` (1149 d), or nothing at all. A few are made upon
denominative stems from pronouns: thus, `tvāyú` (beside `tvāyánt` and
`tvāyā́`), `yuvayú` or `yuvāyú`, `asmayú`, `svayú`, and the more
anomalous `ahaṁyú` and `kiṁyú`. Especially where no other denominative
forms accompany the adjective, this has often the aspect of being made
directly from the noun with the suffix `yu`, either with a meaning of
*seeking* or *desiring*, or with a more general adjective sense: thus,
`yavayú` *seeking grain*, `varāhayú` *boar-hunting*, `stanasyú`
*desiring the breast;* `ūrṇāyú` *woolen*, `yuvanyú` *youthful*,
`bhīmayú` *terrible*. And so the "secondary suffix `yu`" wins a degree
of standing and application as one forming derivative adjectives (as in
`ahaṁyú` and `kiṁyú`, above, and doubtless some others, even of the RV.
words). In three RV. cases, the final `as` of a noun-stem is even
changed to `o` before it: namely, `aṅhoyú`, `duvoyú` (and `duvoyā́`;
beside `duvasyú`), `áskṛdhoyu`. j. The words in `yu` do not show in the
Veda resolution into `iu` (except `dhāsiús` AV., once).

1179\. ऊ `ū`. Stems in ऊ `ū` are very few, even as compared with those
in ई `ī` (1156). They are for the most part feminines corresponding to
masculines in `u` (344 b), with half-a-dozen more independent feminines
(see 355 c).

a\. To those already mentioned above are to be added `karṣū́` *pit*,
-`calū` (in `puṁçcalū́`), -`janū` (in `prajanū́`), `çumbhū́`.

1180\. उक `uka`. With this suffix are made derivatives having the
meaning and construction (271 g) of a present participle. The root is
strengthened, and has the accent.

a\. The derivatives in `uka` are hardly known in the Veda; but they
become frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, of whose language they are a marked
characteristic (about sixty different stems occur there); and they are
found occasionally in the older language. In all probability, they are
originally and properly obtained by adding the secondary suffix `ka`
(1222) to a derivative in `u`; but they have gained fully the character
of primary formations, and in only an instance or two is there found in
actual use an `u`-word from which they should be made.

b\. The root is only so far strengthened that the radical syllable is a
heavy (79) one; and it has the accent, whether the derivative is made
from a simple root or from one with prefix.

c\. Examples, from the Brāhmaṇa language, are: `vā́duka`, `nā́çuka`,
`upakrā́muka`, `prapā́duka`, `upasthāyuka` (258), `vyāyuka`, `véduka`,
`bhā́vuka`, `kṣódhuka`, `hā́ruka`, `várṣuka`, `samárdhuka`, `dáṅçuka`,
`ālambuka`, `çikṣuka` (GB.: RV. has `çikṣú`), `pramā́yuka` (ṢB. has
`pramāyu`).

d\. Exceptions as regards root-form are: `nirmā́rguka` (with
`vṛddhi`-strengthening, as is usual with this root: 627), -`kasuka`,
`ṛdhnuka` (from a tense-stem; beside `árdhuka`). AV. accents `sáṁkasuka`
(ÇB. has `saṁkásuka`) and `víkasuka`; RV. has `sānuká` (which is its
only example of the formation, if it be one; AV. has also `ghā́tuka` from
√`han`, and `ápramāyuka`); `vasuká` (TS. et al.) is probably of another
character. `Açanāyuka` (PB. et al.) is the only example noticed from a
conjugation-stem.

e\. Of later occurrence are a few words whose relation to the others is
more or less doubtful: `kārmuka` and `dhārmuka`, `tsāruka`, `tarkuka`,
`nānduka`, `pādukā`, `pecuka`, `bhikṣuka`, `lāṣuka`, `seduka`,
`hiṇḍuka`, `hreṣuka`. Of these, only `lāṣuka` appears like a true
continuer of the formation; several are pretty clearly secondary
derivatives.

f\. A formation in `ūka` (a suffix of like origin, perhaps, with `uka`)
may be mentioned here: namely, `indhūka`, `majjūka`, and, from plicated
roots, `jāgarū́ka` *wakeful*, `jañjapūka` (later) *muttering*,
`dandaçū́ka` *biting*, `yāyajū́ka` *sacrificing much*, `vāvadūka` (later)
*talkative;* `salalū́ka` is questionable.

1181\. अक `aka`. Here, as in the preceding case, we doubtless have a
suffix made by secondary addition of क `ka` to a derivative in अ `a`;
but it has, for the same reason as the other, a right to be mentioned
here. Its free use in the manner of a primary suffix is of still later
date than that of `uka`; it has very few examples in the older language.

a\. In RV. is found (besides `pāvaká`, which has a different accent, and
which, as the metre shows, is really `pavāka`) only `sā́yaka` *missile;*
AV. adds `pī́yaka` and `vádhaka`, and VS. `abhikróçaka`. But in the later
language, such derivatives are common, more usually with raising of the
root-syllable by strengthening to heavy quantity: thus, `nāyaka`,
`dāyaka` (258), `pācaka`, `grāhaka`, `bodhaka`, `jāgaraka`; but also
`janaka`, `khanaka`. They are declared by the grammarians to have the
accent on the radical syllable. They often occur in copulative
composition with gerundives of the same root: thus, `bhakṣyabhakṣaka`
*eatable and eater*, `vācyavācaka` *designated and designation*, and so
on.

b\. That the derivatives in `aka` sometimes take an accusative object
was pointed out above (271 c).

c\. The corresponding feminine is made sometimes in `akā` or in `akī`,
but more usually in `ikā`: thus, `nāyikā` (with `nāyakā`), `pācikā`,
`bodhikā`; compare secondary `aka`, below, 1222.

d\. Derivatives in `āka` are made from a few roots: thus, `jalpāka`,
`bhikṣāka`; but very few occur in the older language: thus, `pavāka`
(above, a), `nabhāka`, `smayā́ka`, `jáhāka` (?), -`calāka`, `patākā`.
With `āku` is made in RV. `mṛḍayā́ku`, from the causative stem: `pṛ́dāku`
and the proper name `íkṣvāku` are of obscure connection.

e\. Derivatives in `ika` and `īka` will be treated below, in connection
with those in `ka` (1186 c).

1182\. तृ `tṛ` (or तर् `tar`). The derivatives made by this suffix, as
regards both their mode of formation and their uses, have been the
subject of remark more than once above (see 369 ff., 942 ff.).
Agent-nouns are freely formed with it at every period of the language;
these in the oldest language are very frequently used participially,
governing an object in the accusative (271 d); later they enter into
combination with an auxiliary verb, and, assuming a future meaning,
make a periphrastic future tense (942). Their corresponding feminine is
in `trī`.

a\. The root has regularly the `guṇa`-strengthening. A union-vowel `i`
(very rarely, one of another character) is often taken: as regards its
presence or absence in the periphrastic future forms, see above (943 a).

b\. Without `guṇa`-change is only `úṣṭṛ` *plough-ox* (no proper
agent-noun: apparently `úkṣ`-`tṛ`: compare the nouns of relationship
further on). The root `grah` has, as usual, `ī` — thus, `grahītṛ́`; and
the same appears in -`tarītṛ́`, -`pavītṛ́`, -`marītṛ́`, -`varītṛ`,
-`savītṛ`. An `u`-vowel is taken instead by `tárutṛ` and `tarutṛ́`,
`dhánutṛ`, and `sánutṛ`; long in `varūtṛ́`; strengthened to `o` in
`manótṛ` and `manotṛ́`. From a reduplicated root comes `vāvā́tṛ`.

c\. The accent, in the older language, is sometimes on the suffix and
sometimes on the root; or, from roots combined with prefixes, sometimes
on the suffix and sometimes on the prefix.

d\. In general, the accent on the root or prefix accompanies the
participial use of the word; but there are exceptions to this: in a very
few instances (four), a word with accented suffix has an accusative
object; very much more often, accent on the root appears along with
ordinary noun value. The accent, as well as the form, of `manótṛ` is an
isolated irregularity. Examples are: `jétā dhánāni` *winning treasures;*
`yūyám mártaṁ çrótāraḥ` *ye listen to a mortal;* but, on the other hand,
`yaṁtā́ vásūni vidhaté` *bestowing good things on the pious;* and
`jétā jánānām` *conqueror of peoples*.

e\. The formation of these nouns in `tṛ` from conjugation-stems, regular
and frequent in the later language, and not very rare in the Brāhmaṇas,
is met with but once or twice in the Veda (`bodhayitṛ́` and `codayitrī́`,
RV.). In `néṣṭṛ` a certain priest (RV. and later), is apparently seen
the aoristic `s`.

f\. The words of relationship which, in whatever way, have gained the
aspect of derivatives in `tṛ`, are `pitṛ́`, `mātṛ́`, `bhrā́tṛ`, `yā́tṛ`,
`duhitṛ́`, `náptṛ`, `jā́mātṛ`. Of these, only `mātṛ́` and `yā́tṛ` are in
accordance with the ordinary rules of the formation in `tṛ`.

g\. Instead of `tṛ` is found `tur` in one or two RV. examples: `yaṁtúr`,
`sthātúr`.

h\. Apparently formed by a suffix `ṛ` (or `ar`) are `usṛ́`, `savyaṣṭhṛ`,
`nánāndṛ`, `devṛ́`, the last two being words of relationship. For other
words ending in `ṛ`, see 369.

1183\. इन् `in`. This is another suffix which has assumed a primary
aspect and use, while yet evidently identical in real character with the
frequent secondary suffix of the same form denoting possession (below,
1230). 

a\. How far it had gained a primary value in the early language is not
easy to determine. Most of the words in `in` occurring in RV. and AV.
are explainable as possessives; in many the other value is possible, and
in a few it is distinctly suggested: thus,
`kevalādín, bhadravādín, nitodín, āçārāiṣín, ánāmin, vivyādhín`; from a
tense-stem, `-açnuvin, -paçyin` (late); with aoristic `s, -sakṣín`; and,
with reduplication, `niyayín`, `vadāvadin`. As the examples indicate,
composition, both with prefixes and with other elements, is frequent;
and, in all cases alike, the accent is on the suffix.

b\. Later, the primary employment is unquestionable, and examples of it,
chiefly in composition, are frequent. The radical syllable is usually
strengthened, a medial `a` being sometimes lengthened and sometimes
remaining unchanged. Thus, `satyavādin` *truth-speaking*, `abhibhāṣin`
*addressing*, `manohārin` *soul-winning*. In `bhāvin` has established
itself a prevailingly future meaning, *about to be*.

c\. The use of an accusative object with words in `in` was noticed above
(271 b).

1184\. ईयस् `īyas` and इष्ठ `iṣṭha`. These suffixes, which, from forming
intensive adjectives corresponding to the adjective of root-form, have
come to be used, within somewhat narrow limits, as suffixes of adjective
comparison, have been already sufficiently treated above, under the head
of comparison (466–470).

a\. It may be further noticed that `jyéṣṭha` has in the older language
(only two or three times in RV.) the accent also on the final,
`jyeṣṭhá`, and that its correlative also is `kaniṣṭhá` in the oldest
language; `párṣiṣṭha` is made from a secondary form of root, with
aoristic `s` added.

b\. When the comparative suffix has the abbreviated form `yas` (470 a),
its `y` is never to be read in the Veda as `i`.

c\. No other suffixes make derivatives having participial value
otherwise than in rare and sporadic cases; those that remain, therefore,
will be taken up mainly in the order of their frequency and importance.

1185\. त्र `tra`. With this suffix are formed a few adjectives, and a
considerable number of nouns, mostly neuter, and often having a
specialized meaning, as signifying the means or instrument of the action
expressed by the root. The latter has usually the `guṇa`-strengthening,
but sometimes remains unchanged. The accent is various, but more often
on the radical syllable.

a\. Here, as in certain other cases above, we have doubtless a suffix
originally secondary, made by adding a to the primary `tṛ` or `tar`
(1182); but its use is in great part that of a primary suffix.

b\. Examples of neuter nouns are: `gā́tra` *limb*, `páttra` *wing*,
`pā́tra` *cup*, `yóktra` *bond*, `vástra` *garment*, `çrótra` *ear;*
`astrá` *missile*, `stotrá` *song of praise*, `potrá` *vesel;* of more
general meaning, `dáttra` *gift*, `kṣétra` *field*, `mū́tra` *urine*,
`hotrá` *sacrifice*. The words accented on the final have often an
abstract meaning: thus, `kṣatrá` *authority*, `rāṣṭrá` *kingdom*,
`çāstrá` *doctrine*, `sattrá` *sacrificial session* (also `jñā́tra`
*knowledge*).

c\. Masculines are: `dáṅṣṭra` *tusk*, `mántra` *prayer*, `attrá` (or
`atrá`: 232) *devourer*, `úṣṭra` *buffalo, camel*, and a few of
questionable etymology, as `mitrá` *friend*, `putrá` *son*, `vṛtrá` foe.
`Mitrá` and `vṛtrá` are sometimes neuters even in the Veda, and `mitra`
comes later to be regularly of that gender.

d\. Feminines (in `trā`) are: `áṣṭrā` *goad*, `mā́trā` *measure*, `hótrā`
*sacrifice* (beside `hotrá`), `daṅṣṭrā` (later, for `dáṅṣṭra`); `nāṣṭrā́`
*destroyer*.

e\. Not seldom, a "union-vowel" appears before the suffix; but this is
not usually the equivalent of the union-vowel used with `tṛ` (above,
1182 a). For the words in `itra` have the accent on `i`: thus, `arítra`
(`áritra` AV., once) *impelling, oar*, `khanítra` *shovel*, `pavítra`
*sieve*, `janítra` *birth-place*, `sanítra` *gift;* and so -`avitra`,
`açítra`, `carítra`, -`taritra`, `dhamitra`, `dhavítra`, `bhavítra`,
`bharítra`, `vāditra` (with causative root-strengthening), `vahitra`:
the combination `ítra` has almost won the character of an independent
suffix. The preceding vowel is also in a few cases `a` (sometimes
apparently of the present-stem): thus, `yájatra` *venerable*, `kṛntátra`
*shred*, `gāyatrá` (f. -`trī́`) *song*, -`damatra`, `pátatra` *wing;* but
also `ámatra` *violent*, `vádhatra` *deadly weapon;* and `varatrā́` f.
*strap*. `Tárutra` *overcoming* corresponds to `tarutṛ́`. `Nákṣatra`
*asterism* is of very doubtful etymology. `Saṁskṛtatrá` (RV., once)
seems of secondary formation.

f\. The words still used as adjectives in `tra` are mostly such as have
union-vowels before the suffix. A single example from a reduplicated
root is `johū́tra` *crying out*.

g\. A word or two in `tri` and `tru` may be added here, as perhaps of
kindred formation with those in `tra`: thus, `áttri` *devouring*,
`arcátri` *beaming*, `rā́tri` or `rā́trī` *night;* `çátru` (`çáttru`: 232)
*enemy*.

1186\. क `ka`. The suffix क `ka` is of very common use in secondary
derivation (below, 1222); whether it is directly added to roots is
almost questionable: at any rate, extremely few primary derivatives are
made with it.

a\. The words which have most distinctly the aspect of being made from
roots are `puṣka`-, -`meka` (√`mi` *fix*), `yaska` n. pr., `çúṣka`
*dry*, `çlóka` (√`çru` *hear*} *noise, report*, etc., and -`sphāka`
*teeming;* and `stúkā` *flake* and `stoká` *drop* seem to belong
together to a root `stu`; `rākā́` f., n. pr., may be added.

b. But `ka` enters, in its value as secondary, into the composition of
certain suffixes reckoned as primary: see `aka` and `uka` (above, 1180,
1181).

c\. A few words in which `ika` and `īka` seem added to a root, though
they are really of a kindred formation with the preceding, may be most
conveniently noticed here: thus, `vṛ́çcika` (√`vraçc`) *scorpion;*
`ánīka` (?) *face*, `dṛ́çīka` *aspect*, `dṛ́bhīka` n. pr., `mṛḍīká`
*grace*, vṛdhīká *increaser*, `ā́çarīka` and `víçarīka` *gripes*,
-`ṛjīka` *beaming*, `ṛṣīka`; `ṛkṣī́kā`; and, from reduplicated root,
`parpharī́ka` *scattering* (?). Compare secondary suffix `ka` (below,
1222).

1187\. य `ya`. It is altogether probable that a part of the derivatives
made with this suffix are not less entitled to be ranked as primary than
some of those which are above so reckoned. Such, however, are with so
much doubt and difficulty to be separated from the great mass of
secondary derivatives made with the same suffix that it is preferred to
treat them all together under the head of secondary formation (below,
1210–13).

1188\. र `ra`. With this suffix are made a large number of adjectives,
almost always with weak root-form, and usually with accent on the
suffix. Also, a few words used as nouns, of various gender. In some
cases, the suffix is found with a preceding vowel, having the aspect of
a union-vowel.

a\. Examples of adjectives in `ra` are: `kṣiprá` *quick*, `chidrá`
*split*, `turá` *strong*, `bhadrá` *pleasing*, `çakrá` *mighty*, `çukrá`
*bright*, `hiṅsrá` *injurious;* with accent on the root, only `gṛ́dhra`
*greedy*, `túmra` *stout*, `dhī́ra` *wise* (secondary?), `vípra`
*inspired*, `túgra` n. pr.

b\. From roots with prefixes come only an example or two: thus, `nicirá`
*attentive*, `nímṛgra` *joining on*.

c\. Nouns in `ra` are: masc., `ájra` *field*, `vīrá` *man*, `vájra`
*thunderbolt*, `çū́ra` *hero;* neut., `ágra` *point*, `kṣīrá` *milk*,
`rándhra` *hollow*, `riprá` *defilement;* fem., `dhā́rā` *stream*,
`çíprā` *jaw*, `súrā` *intoxicating drink*.

The forms of this suffix with preceding vowel may best be considered
here, although some of them have nearly or quite gained the value of
independent endings. Thus:

d\. With `ara` are made a few rare words: the adjectives `dravará`
*running*, `patará` *flying*, (with prefix) `nyocará` *suiting;* and the
nouns `gambhára` *depth*, `tásara` and `trasara` *shuttle*, `sánara`
*gain*, -`ṛkṣara` *thorn;* `bhārvará` and `vāsará` are doubtless of
secondary formation; and the same thing may be plausibly conjectured of
others. As made with `āra` may be mentioned `mandāra` a tree, `mārjāra`
*cat*.

e\. With `ira` are made a few words, some of which are in common use:
thus, `ajirá` *quick*, `khadirá` a tree, `timira` *dark*, `dhvasirá`
*stirring up*, `madirá` *pleasing*, `mudira` *cloud*, `badhirá` *deaf*,
`rucira` *bright*, `iṣirá` *lively*, ásira *missile*, sthávira *firm;*
and sthira *hard*, and sphirá *fat*, with displacement of final radical
ā; also sarirá *wave* (usually salilá). With īra are made gabhīrá or
gambhīrá *profound* and çávīra *mighty*, and perhaps çárīra *body*.

f\. With ura are made a few words, of some of which the secondary
character is probable: thus, aṅhurá (aṅhu-ra?) *narrow*, ásura (ásu-ra?)
*living*, chidura *tearing*, bhan̄gurá *breaking*, bhāsura *shining*,
bhidura *splitting*, medura *fat*, yādura *uniting*, vithura
*tottering*, vidura *knowing*, vidhura *lacking*. With ūra, apparently,
are made sthūrá *stout* (compare sthávira), kharjū́ra a tree, mayū́ra
*peacock* (or imitative?).

1189\. ल la. This suffix is only another form of the preceding,
exchanging with it in certain words, in others prevalently or solely
used from their first appearance.

a\. Conspicuous examples of the interchange are çuklá, sthūlá, -miçla,
çithilá, salilá.

b\. Examples of the more independent use are: pālá *protecting*, ánila
(or aníla) *wind*, tṛpála *joyous;* later capala and tarala (said to be
accented on the final), and harṣula (the same). Many words ending in la
are of obscure etymology.

1190\. व va. Very few words of clear derivation are made with this
suffix — too few to be worth classifying. They are of various meaning
and accent, and generally show a weak root-form.

a\. Thus: ṛkvá *praising*, ṛṣvá *lofty*, takvá *quick*, dhruvá *fixed*,
pakvá *ripe*, padva *going*, yahvá *quick* (?), çarvá n. pr., hrasvá
*short*, çikvá *artful*, raṇvá *joyful*, ūrdhvá *lofty*, vákva
*twisting*, ūrvá *stall;* éva *quick, course*, áçva *horse*, srákva or
sṛkva *corner;* and perhaps úlba *caul;* a feminine is prúṣvā (TS.
pṛ́ṣvā, AV. pruṣvā́); with union-vowel are made saciva *companion*, ámīva
*disease*, and vidhávā *widov*.

b\. The words in va exhibit only in sporadic cases resolution of the
ending into ua.

1191\. रि ri. With this suffix are formed, directly or with preceding u,
a small number of derivatives.

a\. Thus: án̄ghri or aṅhri *foot*, áçri *edge*, úsri *dawn*, tandri or
-drī́ *weariness*, bhū́ri *abundant*, ván̄kri *rib*, sūrí *patron*, -takri
*quick*, vádhri *eunuch*, çubhrí *beautiful*, sthúri *single (team);*
and, with uri, jásuri *exhausted*, dā́çuri *pious*, bhāguri n. pr.,
sáhuri *mighty;* an̄gúri (or an̄gúli) *finger*.

1192\. रु ru. This suffix makes a few adjectives and neuter nouns,
either directly or with a preceding vowel.

a. Thus: `áçru` '*tear*, `cā́ru` *dear*, `dhārú` *sucking*, `bhīrú`
*timid;* — with preceding `a`-vowel: `aráru` *inimical*, `patáru`
*flying*, `vandā́ru` *praising*, `píyāru` *scoffing*, `çarā́ru` *harming;*
— with preceding `e`, `tameru` *relaxed*, `maderú` *rejoicing*, `sanéru`
*obtaining*, `himerú` *chilly*, the evidently secondary `mitréru`
*ally*, and `péru` (of doubtful meaning).

b\. The secondary suffix `lu` (see 1227 b) is apparently added to
certain nouns in `ā` from conjugation-stems, making derivatives that
have a primary aspect: thus, `patayālú` *flying*, `spṛhayālu`
*desiring*.

1193\. वि `vi`. By this suffix are made:

a\. Two or three derivatives from reduplicated roots: `jā́gṛvi` *awake*,
`dā́dhṛvi` *sustaining*, `dī́divi` *shining;* and a very few other words;
`ghṛ́ṣvi` *lively*, `dhruví` *firm*, `jírvi` *worn out* (AV.; elsewhere
`jívri`); -`pharvī` is doubtful.

b\. Here may be mentioned `cikitvít` (RV., once), apparently made with a
suffix `vit` from a reduplicated root-form.

1194\. स्नु `snu`. With this suffix, with or without a union-vowel, are
made a few adjective derivatives from roots, but also from causative
stems.

a\. From simple roots: direct, `kṣeṣṇú` *perishable*, -`glāsnu` *sick*,
`jiṣṇú` *victorious*, `dan̄kṣṇú` *biting*, `bhūṣṇu` *thriving*,
`ni`-`ṣatsnú` *sitting down*, `sthāsnu` *fixed;* with union-vowel `i`,
`kariṣṇu, kāçiṣṇu, kṣayiṣṇu, gamiṣṇú, grasiṣṇu, grahiṣṇu, cariṣṇú, -janiṣṇu, jayiṣṇu, tapiṣṇu, -trapiṣṇu, -patiṣṇu, -bhaviṣṇu, bhrājiṣṇu, madíṣṇu, -maviṣṇu, yajiṣṇu, yāciṣṇu, -vadiṣṇu, vardhiṣṇu, -sahiṣṇu`.

b\. From secondary conjugation-stems:
`kopayiṣṇu, kṣapayiṣṇu, cyāvayiṣṇú, janayiṣṇu, tāpayiṣṇu, namayiṣṇu, patayiṣṇu, poṣayiṣṇú, pārayiṣṇú, bodhayiṣṇu, mādayiṣṇú, yamayiṣṇú, ropayiṣṇu, -vārayiṣṇu, -çocayiṣṇú`;
and `jāgariṣṇu`. An anomalous formation is `ulbaniṣṇu`.

c\. These derivatives are freely compounded with prefixes: e. g.
`niṣatsnú, prajaniṣṇú, abhiçocayiṣṇú, saṁvārayisṇu`.

d\. It is not unlikely that the s of this suffix is originally that of a
stem, to which `nu` was added. Such a character is still apparent in
`kraviṣṇú` *craving raw flesh* (`kravis`); and also in `vadhasnú`,
`vṛdhasnú` (?), and `prathasnu` (?).

1195\. स्न `sna`. Extremely few words have this ending.

a\. It is seen in `tīkṣṇá` *sharp*, and perhaps in
`çlakṣṇá, -rūkṣṇá, mārtsna`; and in `geṣṇa` and `deṣṇá` (usually
trisyllabic: `daīṣṇa`) *gift*. Unless in the last, it is not found
preceded by `i`; but it has (like `snu`, above) `a` before it in
`vadhasná` *deadly weapon*, `karásna` *fore-arm;* `nadīṣṇa` *skilled*
seems to be secondary. Feminines are `mṛtsnā` *loam*, `jyotsnā`
*moonlight*.

1196. त्नु `tnu`. This suffix is used in nearly the same way with स्नु
`snu` (above, 1194).

a\. As used with simple roots, the `t` is generally capable of being
considered the adscititious `t` after a short root-final, to which `nu`
is then added: thus, `kṛtnú` *active*, `gatnú` (? RV.), `hatnú`
*deadly*, -`tatnu` (?) *stretching;* and, from reduplicated roots,
`jigatnú` *hasting*, and `jighatnú` *harming;* but also `dartnú`
*bursting*. Also, with union-vowel, `dravitnú` *running*, `dayitnu` (?
LÇS.).

b\. With causative stems: for example, `drāvayitnú` *hasting*,
`poṣayitnú` *nourishing*, `mādayitnú` *intoxicating*, `tanayitnú` and
`stanayitnú` *thunder*, `sūdayitnú` *flowing*, -`āmayitnú` *sickening*.

c\. With preceding `a`, in `pīyatnú` *scoffing*, `mehatnú` a river,
`ā-rujatnú` *breaking into;* and `kavatnú` *miserly* (obscure
derivation).

1197\. स `sa`. The words ending in suffixal स `sa`, with or without
preceding union-vowel, are a heterogeneous group, and in considerable
part of obscure derivation. Thus:

a\. With `sa` simply: `gṛtsa` *clever*, `jeṣá` *winning* (rather,
aoristic `s`? 1148j), -`dṛkṣa` *looking*, `rukṣá` *shining*, `rūkṣá`
*rough;* `útsa` n. *fountain;* `bhīṣā́` f. *fear* (or from the secondary
root `bhīṣ`).

b\. With preceding `i`-vowel: `taviṣá` (f. `táviṣī`) *strong*, `mahiṣá`
(f. `máhiṣī`) *mighty*, `bhariṣá` (?) *seeking booty;* `ṛjīṣá`
*rushing*, `púrīṣa` *rubbish*, `manīṣā́` f. *devotion;* and compare
`rayīṣín` (? SV.).

c\. With preceding `u`-vowel: `aruṣá` (f. `áruṣī`) *red*, `açúṣa`
*ravenous*, `táruṣa` *overcomer*, `púruṣa` and `mánuṣa` (-`us`-`a`?)
*man;* `pīyū́ṣa` *biestings*.

1198\. असि `asi`. A few words in the oldest language are made with a
suffix having this form (perhaps produced by the addition of `i` to
`as`).

a\. Thus, `atasí` *vagabond*, `dharnasí` *firm*, `sānasí` *winning;* and
`dhāsí` m. *drink*, f. *station*, `sarasí` (?) *pool*.

1199\. अभ `abha`. A few names of animals, for the most part of obscure
derivation, show this ending.

a\. Thus, `vṛṣabhá` and `ṛṣabhá` *bull*, `çarabhá` a certain fabulous
animal, `çerabha` a certain snake, `gardabhá` and `rā́sabha` *ass;*
further, `kanabha`, `karabha` and `kalabha`, `laṭabha`, `çalabha`; and,
with other union-vowels, `tuṇḍibha`, `nuṇḍibha`, and `kukkubha`. The
feminine, if occurring, is in `ī`; and `kaṭabhī` is found without
corresponding masculine. AV. has the adjective `sthūlabhá`, equivalent
to `sthūlá`.

1200\. A few words ending in the consonants `t`, `d`, `j`, etc., and for
the most part of doubtful root-connections, were given above, at 383k
(3–5, 7); it is unnecessary to repeat them here. Certain of those in
`at` are perhaps related to the participles in `ant` (1172).

1201\. A number of other primary suffixes are either set up by the
grammarians and supported with examples of questionable value, or are
doubtfully deducible from isolated words traceable to known roots, or
from words of obscure connection.

a\. A few such may be mentioned here: `aṇḍa` in `karaṇḍa` and `váraṇḍa`
and certain unquotable words (prakritized `a`-forms from the present
participle); `era` and `ora` in unquotable words, and `elima` (above,
966 d: perhaps a further derivative with secondary `ima` from `era`);
`mara` (`ma` or `man` with secondary `ra` added) in `ghasmara`,
`sṛmará`, etc.; — `sara` in `matsará`, `kara` in `púṣkara` and other
obscure words, `pa` in `púṣpa`, `stupá`, `stū́pa`, and a number of other
obscure words; and so on.

B. Secondary Derivatives.

1202\. Words of secondary derivation are made by the addition of further
suffixes to stems already ending in evident suffixes.

a\. But also, as pointed out above (1137 b), to pronominal roots.

b\. Further, in exceptional cases, to indeclinables, to case-forms, and
to phrases: e. g.
`antarvant, apitvá, paratastva, sahatva, sārvatrika, āikadhya, mā́maka, āmuṣmika, āmuṣyāyaṇá, apsumánt, apsavyà, kiṁcanya, kiṁkartavyatā, kvācitka, nāstika, akiṁcinmaya`.

1203\. Changes of the stem. The stem to which the suffix is added is
liable to certain changes of form.

a\. Before a suffix beginning with a vowel or with `y` (which in this
respect is treated as if it were `i`), final `a`- and `i`-vowels are
regularly lost altogether, while a final `u`-vowel has the
`guṇa`-strengthening and becomes `av`; `ṛ` and `o` and `āu` (all of rare
occurrence) are treated in accordance with usual euphonic rule.

b\. An `u`-vowel also sometimes remains unstrengthened: see 1208 e.

c\. A final `n` is variously treated, being sometimes retained, and
sometimes lost, even along with a preceding `a`; and sometimes an `a` is
lost, while the `n` remains: thus,
`vṛṣaṇvant, vṛṣaṇa, vṛṣa, vrṛṣatva, vṛṣṇya`, from `vṛṣan`. Of a stem
ending in `ant`, the weak form, in `at`, is regularly taken: thus,
`vāivasvata` (`vivasvant`).

d\. In general, the masculine form of a primitive stem is that from
which a further secondary derivative is made. But there are not very
rare cases in which the feminine is taken instead; examples are
`satītva, bhāryātva, pranītātvá, bhāratīvant, rakṣāvant, priyāvant`. On
the other hand, a final long vowel — `ī`, much more rarely `ā` —
generally of a feminine stem, is sometimes shortened in derivation:
thus,
`yājyàvant, praçākhavant, goṣátama, vaçátamā, sadhanitvá, jaratikā, `
`annādítamā` (cf. 471 b), `rohinitvá` (TB.; -`nītvá` ÇB.),
`pṛhivitvá, pratipatnivat, sárasvativant`.

e\. As was pointed out above (111 c, d), the combination of a secondary
suffix with a stem is sometimes made according to the rules of external
combination. Such cases are pointed out under the suffixes `īya` (1215
e), `ka` (1222 m), `maya` (1225 a), `min` (1231 b), `vin` (1232 c),
`vant` (1233 i), `van` (1234 c), `mant` (1235 f), `tva` (1239 c), `taya`
(1245 a), `tya` (1245 c), `tana` (1245 i).

1204\. The most frequent change in secondary derivation is the
`vṛddhi`-strengthening of an initial syllable of the stem to which a
suffix is added.

a\. The strengthened syllable may be of any character: radical, of a
prefix, or of the first member of a compound: thus, `āçviná` (`açvín`),
`sāumyá` (`sóma`), `pā́rthiva` (`pṛthivī́`), `āmitrá` (`amítra`),
`sā́mrājya` (`samrā́j`), `sāúkṛtya` (`sukṛtá`), `māitrāvaruṇá`
(`mitrā́váruṇā`), `āuccāiḥçravasá` (`uccāíḥçravas`). As to the
accompanying accent, see the next paragraph.

b\. If a stem begins with a consonant followed by `y` or `v`, the
semivowel is sometimes vriddhied, as if it were `i` or `u`, and the
resulting `āi` or `āu` has `y` or `v` further added before the
succeeding vowel.

c\. This is most frequent where the `y` or `v` belongs to a prefix — as
`ni, vi, su` — altered before a following initial vowel: thus,
`nāiyāyika` from `nyāya` (as if `niyāya`), `vāiyaçvá` from `vyàçva` (as
if `viyaçva`), `sāúvaçvya` from `sváçva` (as if `suvaçva`); but it
occurs also in other cases, as `sāuvará` from `svára`, `çāuva` from
`çvan`, against `svāyambhuva` (`svayambhū`), and so on. AV. has
irregularly `kāveraká` from `kúvera` (as if from `kvéra`, without the
euphonic `y` inserted).

d\. This strengthening takes place especially, and very often, before
the suffixes `a` and `ya`; also regularly before `i, āyana, eya` (with
`ineya`), and later `īya`; before the compound `aka` and `ika`, and
later `aki`; and, in single sporadic examples before, `na, ena, ra`, and
`tva` (?): see these various suffixes below.

e\. Sometimes an unstrengthened word is prefixed to one thus
strengthened, as if the composition were made after instead of before
the strengthening: e. g. `indradāivatya` *having Indra as divinity*
(instead of `āindradevatya`), `caramaçāirṣika` *with head to the west*,
`jīvalāukika` *belonging to the world of the living*, `antarbhāuma`
*within the earth*, `somārāudra, gurulāghava` (cf.
`tāmasaṁ guṇalakṣaṇam` M. xii. 35). But especially when the first word
is of numeral value: as `çatáçārada` *of a hundred years*,
`pañcaçāradī́ya, trisāṁvatsara, bahuvārṣika, aṣṭavārṣika, anekavarṣasāhasra, daçasāhasra, trisāhasrī, tripāuruṣa, caturādhyāyī`
or -`yikā` *of four chapters*, etc. etc.

f. More often, both members of a compound word have the initial
strengthening: e. g.
`sāumapāuṣṇá, kāúrupāñcāla, cāturvāidya, āihalāukika, āikabhāutika, trāisṭubjāgata, yājurvāidika`.
Such cases are not rare.

g\. The `guṇa`-strengthening (except of a final `u`-vowel: 1203 a) is
only in the rarest cases an accompaniment of secondary derivation.
Exceptions are `dvayá` and `trayá` and `náva` (1200 i), `bheṣajá` and
`devá` (1209 j), `dróna` (1223 g), `çekhara` (1226 a).

1205\. Accent. a. The derivatives with initial `vṛddhi`-strengthening
always have their accent on either the first or the last syllable. And
usually it is laid, as between these two situations, in such a way as to
be furthest removed from the accent of the primitive; yet, not rarely,
it is merely drawn down upon the suffix from the final of the latter;
much less often, it remains upon an initial syllable without change.
Only in the case of one or two suffixes is the distinction between
initial and final accent connected with any difference in the meaning
and use of the derivatives (see below, suffix `eya`: 1216).

b\. No other general rules as to accent can be given. Usually the suffix
takes the tone, or else this remains where it was in the primitive;
quite rarely, it is thrown back to the initial syllable (as in
derivation with initial `vṛddhi`); and in a single case (`tā`: 1237) it
is drawn down to the syllable preceding the suffix.

1206\. Meaning. a. The great mass of secondary suffixes are
adjective-making: they form from nouns adjectives indicating
appurtenance or relation, of the most indefinite and varied character.
But, as a matter of course, this indefiniteness often undergoes
specialization: so, particularly, into designation of procedure or
descent, so that distinctive patronymic and metronymic and gentile words
are the result; or, again, into the designation of possession. Moreover,
while the masculines and feminines of such adjectives are employed as
appellatives, the neuter is also widely used as an abstract, denoting
the quality expressed attributively by the adjective; and neuter
abstracts are with the same suffixes made from adjectives. There are
also special suffixes (very few) by which abstracts are made directly,
from adjective or noun.

b\. A few suffixes make no change in the part of speech of the
primitive, but either change its degree (diminution and comparison), or
make other modifications, or leave its meaning not sensibly altered.

1207\. The suffixes will be taken up below in the following order.
First, the general adjective-making suffixes, beginning with those of
most frequent use (`a, ya` and its connections, `i, ka`); then, those of
specific possessive value (`in, vant` and `mant`, and their
connections); then, the abstract-making ones (`tā` and `tva`, and their
connections); then, the suffixes of comparison etc.; and finally, those
by which derivatives are made only or almost only from particles.

a. For convenience of reference, a list of them in their order as
treated is here added:

`a`

1206–9

`ya`

1210–13

`iya`

1214

`īya`

1215

`eya, eyya`

1216

`enya`

1217

`āyya`

1218

`āyana`

1219

`āyī`

1220

`i, aki`

1221

`ka, aka, ika`

1222

`na, āna, īna, ina, ena`

1223

`ma, ima, mna`

1224

`maya`

1225

`ra, ira`, etc.

1226

`la, lu`

1227

`va, vala, vaya, vya`

1226

`ça`

1229

`in`

1230

`min`

1231

`vin`

1232

`vant`

1233

`van`

1234

`mant`

1235

`tā`

1237

`tāti, tāt`

1238

`tva, tvatā`

1239

`tvana`

1240

`tara, tama`

1242

`ra, ma`

"

`tha`

"

`titha`

"

`taya`

1245

`tya`

"

`ta`

"

`na`

"

`tana, tna`

"

`vat`

"

`kaṭa`

"

`vana, ā`

"

1208\. अ `a`. With this suffix are made an immensely large class of
derivatives, from nouns or from adjectives having a noun-value. Such
derivatives are primarily and especially adjectives, denoting *having a
relation* or *connection* (of the most various kind) *with* that denoted
by the more primitive word. But they are also freely used substantively:
the masculine and feminine as appellatives, the neuter, especially and
frequently, as abstract. Often they have a patronymic or gentile value.

a\. The regular and greatly prevailing formation is that which is
accompanied with `vṛddhi`-strengthening of the first syllable of the
primitive word, simple or compound. Examples of this formation are:

b\. From primitives ending in consonants: with the usual shift of
accent, `āyasá` *of metal* (`áyas`), `mānasá` *relating to the mind*
(`mánas`), `sāumanasá` *friendliness* (`sumánas`), `brāhmaṇá` *priest*
(`bráhman`), `hāimavatá` *from the Himalaya* (`himávant`), `ān̄girasá`
*of the Angiras family* (`án̄giras`); `hā́stina` *elephantine* (`hastín`),
`mā́ruta` *pertaining to the Maruts* (`marút`); — with accent thrown
forward from the final upon the suffix, `çāradá` *autumnal*, `vāirājá`
*relating to the `virā́j`*`, pāuṣṇá` *belonging to Pūshán;* `gāirikṣitá`
*son of Girikshít;* — with accent unchanged, `mā́nuṣa` *descendant of
Mánus*.

c\. The suffix is added (as above instanced) to the middle stem-form of
stems in `vant`; it is added to the weakest in `mā́ghona` and
`vā́rtraghna`; the ending in remains unchanged; an usually does the same,
but sometimes loses its `a`, as in `pāuṣṇá, trāivṛṣṇá, dāçarājñá`; and
sometimes its `n`, as in `brāhmá, āukṣá, bārhatsāma`.

d\. From primitives in `ṛ`: `jāítra` *victorious* (`jetṛ́` or `jétṛ`
*conqueror*), `tvāṣṭrá` *relating to Tváshtar*, `sāvitrá` *descendant of
the sun* (`savitṛ́`), `āúdbhetra, pāitra`.

e\. From primitives in `u`: usually with `guṇa`-strengthening of the
`u`, as `vāsavá` *relating to the Vásus*, `ārtavá` *concerning the
seasons* (`ṛtú`), `dānavá` *child of Dānu* (`dā́nu`), `sāindhavá` *from
the Indus* (`síndhu`); — but sometimes without, as `mā́dhva` *full of
sweets* (`mádhu`), `pārçva` *side* (`párçu` *rib*), `pāidvá` *belonging
to Pedú*, `tā́nva` *of the body* (`tanū́`), `yā́dva` *of Yádu*.

f\. From primitives in `i` and `ī`, which vowels are supplanted by the
added suffix: `pā́rthiva` *earthly* (`pṛthivī́`), `sārasvatá` *of the
`Sárasvatī`*, `āindrāgná` *belonging to Indra and Agni* (`indrāgnī́`);
`pā́n̄kta` *five-fold* (`pan̄ktí`), `nāirṛtá` *belonging to Nírṛti*,
`pārthuraçmá` *of Pṛthuraçmi*, `pāçupatá` *of Paçupáti*.

g\. From primitives in `ā`, which in like manner disappears: `yāmuná`
*of the Yamúnā*, `sāraghá` *honey* etc. (`sarághā` *bee*), `kānīná`
*natural child* (`kanī́nā` *girl*).

h\. A large number (more than all the rest together) from primitives in
`a`, of which the final is replaced by the suffix: for example, with the
usual shift of accent, `āmitrá` *inimical* (`amítra` *enemy*), `vāruṇá`
*of Váruṇa*, `vāiçvadevá` *belonging to all the gods* (`viçvádeva`),
`nāirhastá` *handlessness* (`nírhasta`), `vāiçvadevá` *descendant of
Vyàçva;* `gā́rdabha` *asinine* (`gardabhá`), `dāíva` *divine* (`devá`),
`mā́dhyaṁdina` *meridional* (`madhyáṁdina`), `pāútra` *grandchild*
(`putrá` *son*), `sāúbhaga` *good fortune* (`subhága`), `vā́dhryaçva` *of
Vadhryaçvá's race;* with unchanged accent (comparatively few), `vāsantá`
*vernal* (`vasantá` *spring*), `māitrá` *Mitrá's*, `ātithigvá` *of
Atithigvá's race*, `dāívodāsa` *Dívodāsa's*. In a few instances, `ya` is
replaced by the suffix: thus, `sāura, pāuṣá, yājñavalka`.

i\. The derivatives of this last form are sometimes regarded as made by
internal change, without added suffix. Considering, however, that other
final vowels are supplanted by this suffix, that `a` disappears as
stem-final also before various other suffixes of secondary derivation,
and that no examples of derivation without suffix are quotable from
primitives of any other final than `a`, it seems far too violent to
assume here a deviation from the whole course of Indo-European
word-making.

j\. Adjectives of this formation make their feminines in `ī` (see 332
a).

1209\. The derivatives made by adding अ `a` without `vṛddhi`-change of
the initial syllable are not numerous, and are in considerable part,
doubtless, of inorganic make, results of the transfer to an
`a`-declension of words of other finals.

a. A number of examples of stems in `a` made by transfer were noticed
above (399). The cases of such transition occur most frequently in
composition (1315): thus, further, `apa`- (for `ap` or `āp` *water*),
-`ṛca`, -`nara`, etc.; from stems in `an`, -`aha`, -`vṛṣa`, etc., but
also -`ahna` and -`vṛṣṇa` and `vṛ́ṣaṇa`; from stems in `i`, -`an̄gula`,
-`rātra`, etc.; from the weakest forms of `añc`-stems (407)
`uccá, nīcá, parācá`, etc.

b\. Also occurring especially in composition, yet likewise as simple
words often enough to have an independent aspect, are derivatives in `a`
from nouns in `as` (rarely `is, us`): thus, for example,
`tamasá, rajasá, payasá, brahmavarcasá, sarvavedasá, devāinasá, paruṣá, tryāyuṣá`,
and probably `mánuṣa`.

c\. Similar derivatives from adjectives in `in` are reckoned by the
grammarians as made with the suffix `ina`: thus, `malina` *polluted*,
`parameṣṭhína` etc. (see 441 b).

d\. A number of words formed with the so-called suffix `anta` are
evident transfers from stems in `ant`. A few of them are found even from
the earliest period: thus, `pā́nta` *draught*, `çvāntá` (?), `vasantá`
*spring*, `hemantá` *winter*, `veçantá` etc. *tank*, `jīvantī`́ a
certain healing plant; and others occur later, as
`jayanta, taranta, madhumanta`, etc. They are said to be accented on the
final.

e\. From `añc`-stems (407) are made a few nouns ending in `k-a`: thus,
`ánūka, ápāka, upā́ka, prátīka, parāká`, etc.

f\. From stems in `ṛ`, `hotrá, netrá, neṣṭrá, potrá, praçāstrá`, etc.,
from titles of priests; also `dhātrá, bhrātrá`, etc.

g\. Other scattering cases are:
`savidyutá, āvyuṣá, vī́rudha, kákuda, kakubhá, açúṣa, bhūmyá, sakhyá, ádhipatya, jāspatyá, araṭvá, pānḍvá`.

h\. The Vedic gerundives in `tva` (`tua`), made by addition of `a` to
abstract noun-stems in `tu`, have been already (966 a) fully given.

i\. `Trayá` and `dvayá` come with `guna`-strengthening from numeral
stems; `náva` *new* in like manner from `nú` *now;* and `ántara`
apparently from `antár`.

j\. `Bheṣajá` *medicine* is from `bhiṣáj` *healer*, with `guṇa`-change;
and probably `devá` *heavenly, divine, god*, in like manner from `div`
*sky, heaven* (there is no "root `div` *shine*" in the language).

1210\. य `ya`. With this suffix are made a very large class of words,
both in the old language and later.

a\. The derivatives in `ya` exhibit a great and perplexing variety of
form, connection, and application; and the relations of the suffix to
others containing a `ya`-element — `iya, īya, eya, āyya, eyya, enya` —
are also in part obscure and difficult. In the great majority of
instances in the oldest language, the `ya` when it follows a consonant
is dissyllabic in metrical value, or is to be read as `ia`. Thus, in
RV., 266 words (excluding compounds) have `ia`, and only 75 have `ya`
always; 46 are to be read now with `ia` and now with `ya`, but many of
these have `ya` only in isolated cases. As might be expected, the value
`ia` is more frequent after a heavy syllable: thus, in RV., there are
188 examples of `ia` and 27 of `ya` after such a syllable, and 78 of
`ia` and 96 of `ya` after a light syllable (the circumflexed `yà` — that
is to say, `ía` — being, as is pointed out below, 1212 l, more liable to
the resolution than `ya` or `yá`). It must be left for further
researches to decide whether in the `ya` are not included more than one
suffix, with different accent, and different quantity of the
`i`-element; or with an `a` added to a final `i` of the primitive. It is
also matter for question whether there is a primary as well as a
secondary suffix `ya`; the suffix at least comes to be used as if
primary, in the formation of gerundives and in that of action-nouns: but
it is quite impossible to separate the derivatives into two such
classes, and it has seemed preferable therefore to treat them ail
together here.

b\. The derivatives made with `ya` may be first divided into those which
do and those which do not show an accompanying `vṛddhi`-increment of the
initial syllable.

c\. Adjectives in `ya`, of both these divisions, make their feminines
regularly in `yā`. But in a number of cases, a feminine in `ī` is made,
either alone or beside one in `yā`: e. g.
`cāturmāsī, āgniveçī, çāṇḍilī, ā́rī` (and `ā́ryā`), `dāívī` (and
`dāívyā`), `sāumī` (and `sāumyā`); `dhīrī́, çīrṣaṇī, svarī`, etc.

1211\. Derivatives in य `ya` with initial `vṛddhi`-strengthening follow
quite closely, in form and meaning, the analogy of those in अ `a`
(above, 1208). They are, however, decidedly less common than the latter
(in Veda, ahout three fifths as many).

a\. Examples are: with the usual shift of accent, `dāívya` *divine*
(`devá`), `pā́litya` *grayness* (`palitá`), `grāívya` *cervical*
(`grīvā́`), `ā́rtvijya` *priestly office* (`ṛtvíj`), `gā́rhapatya`
*householder's* (`gṛhápati`), `jā́narājya` *kingship* (`janarā́j`),
`sā́ṁgrāmajitya` *victory in battle* (`saṁgrāmajít`), `sāúvaçvya` *wealth
in houses* (`sváçva`), `āúpadraṣṭrya` *witness* (`upadraṣṭṛ́`); `ādityá`
*Aditya* (`áditi`), `sāumyá` *relating to sóma*, `ātithyá` *hospitality*
(`átithi`), `prājāpatyá` *belonging to Prajā́pati*, `vāimanasyá`
*mindlessness* (`vímanas`), `sā́hadevya` *descendant of Sahádeva;* — with
accent thrown forward from the final upon the ending, `lāukyá` *of the
world* (`loká`), `kāvyá` *of the Kaví-race*, `ārtvyá` *descendant of
Ritú*, `vāyavyá` *belonging to the wind* (`vāyú`), `rāivatyá` *wealth*
(`revánt`); with unchanged accent (very few), `ā́dhipatya` *lordship*
(`ádhipati`), `çrāíṣṭhya` *excellence* (`çréṣṭha`), `vāíçya` *belonging
to the third class* (`víç` *people*), `pāúṁsya` *manliness* (`púṁs`).

b. The AV. has once `nāirbādhyà`, with circumflexed final; if not an
error, it is doubtless made through `nāirbādha`; `vāiṣṇavyāú` (VS. i.
12) appears to be dual fem. of `vāiṣṇavī́`.

1212\. Derivatives in य `ya` without initial `vṛddhi`-strengthening are
usually adjectives, much less often (neuter, or, in या `yā`, feminine)
abstract nouns. They are made from every variety of primitive, and are
very numerous (in Veda, three or four times as many as the preceding
class).

a\. The general mass of these words may be best divided according to
their accent, into: 1. Words retaining the accent of the primitive; 2.
Words with retracted accent; 3. Words with acute `yá` (`iá`); 4. Words
with circumflexed `yà` (`ía`). Finally may be considered the words,
gerundives and action-nouns, which have the aspect of primary
derivatives.

1\. b. Examples of derivatives in `ya` retaining the accent of their
primitives are: `áçvya` *equine* (`áçva`), `án̄gya` *of the limbs*
(`án̄ga`), `múkhya` *foremost* (`múkha` *mouth*), `ávya` *ovine* (`ávi`),
`gávya` *bovine* (`gó`), `víçya` *of the people* (`víç`), `dúrya` *of
the door* (`dúr`), `nárya` *manly* (`nṛ́`), `vṛ́ṣṇya` *virile* (`vṛ́ṣan`),
`svarā́jya` *autocracy* (`svarā́j`), `suvī́rya` *wealth in retainers*
(`suvī́ra`), `viçvájanya` *of all men*, `viçvádevya` of all the gods
(`viçvádeva`), `mayū́raçepya` *peacock-tailed*.

c\. In the last words, and in a few others, the `ya` appears to be used
(like ka, 1222 h: cf. 1212 m) as a suffix simply helping to make a
possessive compound: and so further `suhástya` (beside the equivalent
`suhásta`),
`mádhuhastya, dáçamāsya, miçrádhānya, anyódarya, samānodarya`.

2\. d. Examples with retraction of the accent to the first syllable (as
in derivation with `vṛddhi`-increment) are: `káṇṭhya` *guttural*
(`kaṇṭhá`), `skándhya` *humeral* (`skandhá`), `vrátya` *of a ceremony*
(`vratá`), `méghya` *in the clouds* (`meghá`), `pítrya` *of the Fathers*
(`pitṛ́`), `prátijanya` *adverse* (`pratijaná`). `Hiraṇyáya` *of gold*
(`híraṇya`), is anomalous both in drawing the accent forward and in
retaining the final `a` of the primitive; and `gavyáya` and `avyáya`
(also `ávyaya`) are to be compared with it as to formation.

3\. e. Examples with acute accent on the suffix are: `divyá` *heavenly*
(`dív`), `satyá` *true* (`sánt`), `vyāghryá` *tigrine* (`vyāghrá`),
`kavyá` *wise* (`kaví`), `grāmyá` *of the village* (`grā́ma`), `somyá`
*relating to the sóma*, `anenasyá` *sinlessness* (`anenás`), `adakṣiṇyá`
*not fit for* `dákṣiṇā`.

4\. f. Of derivatives ending in circumflexed `yà` (which in the Veda are
considerably more numerous than all the three preceding classes
together), examples are as follows:

g. From consonant-stems: `viçyà` *of the clan* (RV.: `víç`), `hṛdyá`
*of the heart* (`hṛ́d`), `vidyutyà` *of the lightning* (`vidyút`),
`rājanyà` *of the royal class* (`rā́jan`), `doṣaṇyà` *of the arm*
(`doṣán`), `çīrṣaṇyà` *of the head* (`çīrṣán`), `karmaṇyà` *active*
(`kárman`), `dhanvanyà` *of the plain* (`dhánvan`), `namasyà` *reverend*
(`námas`), `tvacasyà` *cuticular* (`tvácas`), `barhiṣyà` *of barhís*,
`āyuṣyà` *giving life* (`ā́yus`), `bhasadyà` *of the buttocks*
(`bhasád`), `prācyà` *eastern* (`prā́ñc`), etc. Of exceptional formation
is `aryamyà` *intimate* (`aryamán`), with which doubtless belong
`sātmya` (`sātman`) and `sākṣya` (`sākṣin`).

h\. From `u`-stems: `hanavyà` *of the jaws* (`hánu`), `vāyavya`
*belonging to Vāyú*, `paçavyà` *relating to rattle* (`paçú`), `iṣavyà`
*relating to arrows* (`íṣu`), `madhavyà` *of the sweet* (`mádhu`),
`apsavyà` *of the waters* (`apsú` lo.), `rajjavyà` *of rope* (`rájju`);
`çaravyā̀` f. *arrow* (`çáru`, do.); and there may be added `nāvyà`
*navigable* (especially in fem., `nāvyā̀` *navigable stream:* `nāú`
*boat*). The RV. has `prāçavyà` *to be partaken of* (`pra`+√`aç`),
without any corresponding noun `prāçu`; and also `ūrjavyà` *rich in
nourishment* (`ūrj`), without any intermediate `ūrju`.

i\. Under this head belong, as was pointed out above (964), the
so-called gerundives in `tavyà`, as made by the addition of `yà` to the
infinitive noun in `tu`. They are wholly wanting in the oldest language,
and hardly found in later Vedic, although still later `tavya` wins the
value of a primary suffix, and makes numerous verbal derivatives.

j\. From `i`- and `ī`-stems hardly any examples are to be quoted. VS.
has `dundubhyà` from `dundubhí`.

k\. From a-stems: `svargyà` *heavenly* (`svargá`), `devatyà` *relating
to a deity* (`devátā`), `prapathyà` *guiding* (`prapathá`), `budhnyà`
*fundamental* (`budhná`), `jaghanyà` *hindmost* (`jaghána`), `varuṇyà`
*Váruna's*, `vīryà` *might* (`vīrá`), `udaryà` *abdominal* (`udára`),
`utsyà` *of the fountain* (`útsa`); and from `ā`-stems, `urvaryà` *of
cultivated land* (`urvárā`), `svāhyà` relating to the exclamation
`svā́hā`.

l\. The circumflexed `yà` is more generally resolved (into `ía`) than
the other forms of the suffix: thus, in RV. it is never to be read as
`ya` after a heavy syllable ending with a consonant; and even after a
light one it becomes `ía` in more than three quarters of the examples.

m\. There are a few cases in which `yà` appears to be used to help make
a compound with governing preposition (next chapter, 1310: of. 1212 c):
thus, `apikakṣyà` *about the arm-pit*, `upapakṣyà` *upon the sides*,
`udāpyà` *up-stream;* and perhaps `upatṛṇyà` *lying in the grass*
(occurs only in voc.). But, with other accent, `ánvāntrya` *through the
entrails*, `úpamāsya` *in each month*, `abhinabhyá` *up to the clouds*,
`antaḥparçavyá` *between the ribs*, `ádhigartya` *on the chariot sent;*
of unknown accent, `adhihastya, anupṛṣṭhya, anunāsikya, anuvaṅçya`.

1213\. The derivatives in य `ya` as to which it may be questioned
whether they are not, a least in part, primary derivatives from the
beginning, are especially the gerundives, together with action-nouns
coincident with these in form; in the later language, the
gerundive-formation (above, 963) comes to be practically a primary one.

a\. In RV. occur about forty instances of gerundives in `ya`, of
tolerably accordant form: the root usually unstrengthened (but
`cétya, bhávya, -hávya, márjya, yódhya`; also `-mā́dya, -vā́cya, bhāvyá`);
the accent on the radical syllable when the word is simple, or
compounded with prepositions: thus, `praçásya, upasádya, vihávya` (but
usually on the final after the negative prefix: thus,
`anāpyá, anapavṛjyá`) — exceptions are only `bhāvyá` and the doubtful
`ākāyyà`; the `ya` resolved into `ia` in the very great majority of
occurrences; a final short vowel followed by `t` (in
-`ítya, -kṛtya, -çrútya, -stútya`, and the reduplicated `carkṛ́tya`,
beside `carkṛ́ti`: not in `návya` and -`hávya`), and `ā` changed to `e`
(in -`deya` only). If regarded as secondary, they might be made with
`ya`, in accordance with other formations by this suffix, in part from
the root-noun, as `anukṛ́t-ya`, in part from derivatives in `a`, as
`bhāvyá` (from `bhāva`).

b\. The AV. has a somewhat smaller number (about twenty-five) of words
of a like formation; but also a considerable group (fifteen) of
derivatives in `yà` with the same value: thus, for example, `ādyà`
*eatable*, `kāryà` *to be done*, `samāpyà` *to be obtained*, `atitāryà`
*to be overpassed*, `nīvibhāryà` *to be carried in the apron*,
`prathamavāsyà` *to be first worn*, These seem more markedly of
secondary origin: and especially such forms as `parivargyà` *to be
avoided*, `avimokyá` *not to be gotten rid of*, where the guttural
reversion clearly indicates primitives in `ga` and `ka` (216 h).

c\. Throughout the older language are of common occurrence neuter
abstract nouns of the same make with the former of these classes. They
are rarely found except in composition (in AV., only `cítya` and `stéya`
as simple), and are often used in the dative, after the manner of a
dative infinitive. Examples are:
`brahmajyéya, vasudéya, bhāgadhéya, pūrvapéya, çataséya, abhibhū́ya, devahū́ya, mantraçrútya, karmakṛ́tya, vṛtratū́rya, hotṛvū́rya, ahihátya, sattrasádya, çirṣabhídya, brahmacárya, nṛṣáhya`.
Of exceptional form are `ṛtódya` (√`vad`) and `sahaçéyya` (√`çī`); of
exceptional accent, `sadhástutya`. And AV. has one example, `raṇyà`,
with circumflexed final.

d\. Closely akin with these, in meaning and use, is a smaller class of
feminines in `yā́`: thus,
`kṛtyā́, vidyā́, ityā́, agnicityā́, vājajityā́, muṣṭihatyā́, devayajyā́`, etc.

e\. There remain, of course, a considerable number of less classifiable
words, both nouns and adjectives, of which a few from the older language
may be mentioned, without discussion of their relations: thus, `sū́rya`
(with fem. `sūryā́`), `ā́jya, púṣya, nábhya`; `yújya, gṛ́dhya, írya, aryá`
and `ā́rya, márya, mádhya`.

The suffixes apparently most nearly akin with `ya` may best be next
taken up.

1214\. इय `iya`. This suffix is virtually identical with the preceding,
being but another written form of the same thing. It is used only after
two consonants, where the direct addition of य `ya` would create a
combination of difficult utterance. It has the same variety of accent
with `ya`. Thus:

a\. With accent `íya` (= `ía` or `yà`): for example, `abhríya` (also
`abhriyá`) *from the clouds* (`abhrá`), `kṣatríya` *having authority*
(`kṣatrá`), `yajñíya` *reverend* (`yajñá`), `hotríya` *libational*
(`hótrā`), `amitríya` *inimical* (`amítra`).

b\. With accent `iyá` (= `ía` or `yà`): for example, `agriyá` (also
`agríya`) *foremost* (`ágra`), `indriyá` *Indra's* (later, *sense:*
`índra`), `kṣetriyá` *of the field* (`kṣétra`).

c\. With accent on the primitive: `çrótriya` *learned* (`çrótra`),
`ṛ́tviya` (also `ṛtvíya`) *in season* (`ṛtú`).

1215\. ईय `īya`. This suffix also is apparently by origin a `ya` (`īa`)
of which the first element has maintained its long quantity by the
interposition of a euphonic `y`. It is accented always on the `ī́`.

a\. In RV. occur, of general adjectives, only `ārjikī́ya` and
`gṛhamedhī́ya`, and examples in the later Vedic are very few: e. g.
`parvatī́ya` *mountainous* (AV., beside RV. `parvatyà`). In the Brāhmaṇas
are found a number of adjectives, some of them from phrases (first words
of verses and the like): thus,
`anyarāṣṭrī́ya, pan̄cavātī́ya, mārjālī́ya, kayāçubhīya, svāduṣkilīya, apohiṣṭhīya`,
etc.

b\. It was pointed out above (965) that derivative adjectives in `īya`
from action-nouns in `ana` begin in later Veda and in Brāhmaṇa to be
used gerundivally, and are a recognized formation as gerundives in the
classical language. But adjectives in `anīlya` without gerundive
character are also common.

c\. Derivatives in `īya` with initial `vṛddhi` are sometimes made in the
later language: e. g.
`pārvatīya, pāitāputrīya, āparapaksīya, vāirakīya`.

d\. The pronominal possessives `madīya` etc. (516 a) do not occur either
in Veda or in Brāhmaṇa; but the ordinals `dvitī́ya` etc. (487 b, c: with
fractional `tṛ́tīya` and `túrīya`: 488 a) are found from the earliest
period.

e\. The possessives `bhagavadīya` and `bhavadīya`, with the final of the
primitive made sonant, have probably had their form determined by the
pronominal possessives in -`dīya`.

1216. एय `eya`. With this suffix, accompanied by `vṛddhi`-increment of
an initial syllable, are made adjectives, often having a patronymic or
metronymic value. Their neuter is sometimes used as abstract noun. The
accent rests usually on the final in adjectives of descent, and on the
first syllable in others.

a\. Examples are: `ārṣeyá` *descendant of a sage* (`ṛ́ṣi`), `jānaçruteyá`
*son of Jānacruti*, `sārameyá` *of Sarámā's race*, `çātavaneyá`
*Çatavani's descendant*, `rāthajiteyá` *son of Rathajít;* `ā́sneya` *of
the blood* (`asán`), `vā́steya` *of the bladder* (`vastí`), `pāúruṣeya`
*coming from man* (`púruṣa`), `pāitṛsvaseya` *of a paternal aunt*
(`pitṛsvasṛ`), etc.

b\. A more than usual proportion of derivatives in `eya` come from
primitives in `i` or `ī`; and probably the suffix first gained its form
by addition of `ya` to a gunated `i`, though afterward used
independently.

c\. The gerundive etc. derivatives in `ya` (above, 1213) from `ā`-roots
end in `éya`; and, besides such, RV. etc. have `sabhéya` from `sabhā́`,
and `didṛkṣéya` *worth seeing*, apparently from the desiderative noun
`didṛkṣā́`, after their analogy. M. has once `adhyeya` as gerund of √`i`.

d\. Derivatives in the so-called suffix `ineyá` — as
`bhāgineyá, jyāiṣṭhineya, kāniṣṭhineya` — are doubtless made upon
proximate derivatives in -`inī` (fem.).

e\. In `eyya` (i. e. `eyia`) end, besides the neuter abstract
`sahaçéyya` (above, 1213 c), the adjective of gerundival meaning
`stuṣéyya` (with aoristic `s` added to the root), and `çapatheyyà`
*curse-bringing* (or *accursed*), from `çapátha`.

1217\. एन्य `enya`. This suffix is doubtless secondary in origin, made
by the addition of य `ya` to derivatives in a `na`-suffix; but, like
others of similar origin, it is applied in some measure independently,
chiefly in the older language, where it has nearly the value of the
later `anīya` (above, 1215 b), as making gerundival adjectives.

a\. The `y` of this suffix is almost always to be read as vowel, and the
accent is (except in `váreṇya`) on the `e`: thus -`énia`.

b\. The gerundives have been all given above, under the different
conjugations to which they attach themselves (966 b, 1019 b, 1038). The
RV. has also two non-gerundival adjectives, `vīréṇya` *manly* (`vīrá`),
and `kīrténya` *famous* (`kīrtí`), and TS. has `anabhiçastenyá`
(`abhíçasti`); `vijenyà` (RV.) is a word of doubtful connections;
`çikṣeṇya` *instructive* is found in a Sūtra; `prāvṛṣeṇya` *of the rainy
season* occurs later.

1218. आय्य `āyya`. With this suffix are made gerundival adjectives,
almost only in RV. They have been noticed above (966 c). The ending is
everywhere to be read as `ā́yia`.

a\. A few adjectives without gerundival value, and neuter abstracts,
also occur: thus, `bahupā́yya` *protecting many*, `nṛpā́yya`
*men-guarding;* `kuṇḍapā́yya`, and `purumā́yya`, proper names;
`pūrvapā́yya` *first drink*, `mahayā́yya` *enjoyment;* — and `rasā́yya`
*nervous*, and `uttamā́yya` *summit*, contain no verbal root. `Alā́yya` is
doubtful; also `ākāyyà`, which its accent refers to a different
formation, along with `prahāyyà` (AV.: √`hi`) *messenger*, and
`pravāyyà` (AV.), of doubtful value.

1219\. आयन `āyana`. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, patronymics made by this
suffix are not rare. They come from stems in, अ `a`, and have
`vṛddhi`-strengthening of the first syllable, and accent on the final.

a\. In RV., the only example of this formation is `kāṇvāyana` (voc.:
`káṇva`); AV. has in metrical parts `dākṣāyaṇá` and the fem. `rāmāyaṇī́`;
and `āmuṣyāyaṇá` *son of so-and-so* (516) in its prose; ÇB. has
`rājastambā́yana` beside -`bāyaná`. The RV. name `ukṣaṇyā́yana` is of a
different make, elsewhere unknown.

1220\. आयी `āyī`. Only a very few words are made with this suffix,
namely `agnā́yī` (`agní`) *Agni's wife*, `vṛṣākapāyī` *wife of
Vrishā́kapi;* and later `pūtakrātayī`, and `manāyī` *Manu's wife* (but
`manāvī́` ÇB.).

a\. They seem to be feminines of a derivative in `a` made with
`vṛddhi`-increment of the final `i` of the primitive.

1221\. इ `i`. Derivatives made with this suffix are patronymics from
nouns in `a`. The accent rests on the initial syllable, which has the
`vṛddhi`-strengthening.

a\. In RV. are found half-a-dozen patronymics in `i`: for example,
`ā́gniveçi, pāúrukutsi, prā́tardani, sā́ṁvaraṇi`; AV. has but one,
`prā́hrādi`; in the Brāhmaṇas they are more common: thus, in AB.,
`sāuyavasi, jānaṁtapi, āruṇi, jānaki`, etc. A single word of other value
— `sā́rathi` *charioteer* (`sarátham`) — is found from RV. down.

b\. The words made with the so-called suffix `aki` — as `vāiyāsaki`
*descendant of Vyāsa* — are doubtless properly derivatives in `i` from
others in `ka` or `aka`. That the secondary suffix `ika` is probably
made by addition of `ka` to a derivative in `i` is pointed out below
(1222 j).

c\. RV. has `tápuṣi`, apparently from `tápus` with a secondary `i`
added, and the n. pr. `çucantī́`; `bhuvantí` is found in B., and
`jīvanti` later.

1222\. क `ka`. This is doubtless originally one of the class of suffixes
forming adjectives of appurtenance. And that value it still has in
actual use; yet only in a small minority of occurrences. It has been, on
the one hand, specialized into an element forming diminutives; and, on
the other hand, and much more widely, attenuated into an element without
definable value, added to a great many nouns and adjectives to make
others of the same meaning — this last is, even in the Veda, and still
more in the later language, its chief office.

a\. Hence, `ka` easily associates itself with the finals of derivatives
to which it is attached, and comes to seem along with them an integral
suffix, and is further used as such. Of this origin are doubtless, as
was seen above (1180, 1181), the so-called primary suffixes `uka` and
`aka`; and likewise the secondary suffix `ika` (below; j).

b\. The accent of derivatives in `ka` varies — apparently without rule,
save that the words most plainly of diminutive character have the tone
usually on the suffix.

c\. Examples (from the older language) of words in which the suffix has
an adjective-making value are: `ántaka` (`ánta`) *end-making*, `bálhīka`
(`bálhi`) *of Balkh*, `āṇḍī́ka` (`āṇḍá`) *egg-bearing*, `sūcī́ka` (`sūcī́`)
*stinging*, `urvāruká` *fruit of the gourd* (`urvārú`), `paryāyiká`
(`paryāyá`) *strophic;* from numerals, `ekaká, dvaká, triká, áṣṭaka`;
`tṛ́tīyaka` *of the third day;* from pronoun-stems, `asmā́ka` *ours*,
`yuṣmā́ka` *yours*, `mámaka` *mine* (516 d); from prepositions, `ántika`
*near*, `ánuka` *following*, `ávakā` a plant (later `adhika, utka`);
and, with accent retracted to the initial syllable (besides `áṣṭaka` and
`tṛ́tīyaka`, already given), `rū́paka` (`rūpá`) *with form*, `bábhruka`
(`babhrú` *brown*) a certain lizard. `Bhāvatka` *your worship's* has an
anomalous initial `vṛddhi`.

d\. Of words in which a diminutive meaning is more or less probable:
`açvaká` *nag*, `kanī́naka` and `kumāraká` *boy*, `kanīnakā́` or
`kanī́nikā` *girl*, `pādaká` *little foot*, `putraká` *little son*,
`rājaká` *princeling*, `çakuntaká` *birdling*. Sometimes a contemptuous
meaning is conveyed by such a diminutive: for formations with this value
from pronominal stems, see above, 521; other examples are `anyaká`
(RV.), `álakam` (RV.: from `álam`), and even the verb-form `yāmaki` (for
`yāmi`: KB.).

e\. The derivatives in `ka` with unchanged meaning are made from
primitives of every variety of form, simple and compound, and have the
same variety of accent as the adjective derivatives (with which they are
at bottom identical). Thus:

f\. From simple nouns and adjectives: `ástaka` *home*, `nā́sikā`
*nostril*, `mákṣikā` *fly*, `avikā́` *ewe*, `iṣukā́` *arrow*, `dūraká`
*distant*, `sarvaká` *all*, `dhénukā` (`dhenú`) *cow*, `nágnaka`
(`nagná`) *naked*, `báddhaka` (`baddhá`) *captive*, `abhinnataraka` *by
no means different*, `anastamitaké` before sunset, `vamraká` *ant*,
`arbhaká` *small*, `çiçuká` *young*, `aṇīyaska` *finer*, `ejatká`
*trembling*, `abhimādyatká` *intoxicated*, `patayiṣṇuká` *flying*. Such
derivatives in the later language are innumerable; from almost any given
noun or adjective may be made an equivalent, ending in `ka` or `kā`
(according to the gender).

g\. From compound primitives: `svalpaká` *very small*, `vímanyuka`
*removing wrath*, `vikṣiṇatká` *destroying*, `pravartamānaká` *moving
forward*, `viksīṇaká` *destroyed*.

h\. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, `ka` is often added to a possessive
adjective compound (1307), sometimes redundantly, but usually in order
to obtain a more manageable stem for inflection: thus, `anakṣíka`
*eyeless*, `atvakká` *skinless*, `aretáska` *without seed*, `vyasthaka`
*boneless*, `saçiraska` *along with the head*, `ekagāyatrīka`
*containing a single* `gāyatrī`*-verse*, `gṛhītávasatīvarīka` *one who
has taken yesterday's water*, `sapatnīka` *with his spouse*,
`bahuhastíka` *having many elephants*, `sadīkṣopasátka` *with* `dīkṣā`
*and* `upasad`, `āhitasamitka` *with his fuel laid on*,
`abhinavavayaska` *of youthful age*, `an̄guṣṭhamātraka` *of thumb size*.

i\. The vowel by which the `ka` is preceded has often an irregular
character; and especially, a feminine in `ikā` is so common beside a
masculine in `aka` as to be its regular correspondent (as is the case
with the so-called primary `aka`: above, 1181). In RV. are found beside
one another only `iyattaká` and `iyattikā́`; but AV. has several
examples.

j\. Two suffixes made up of `ka` and a preceding vowel — namely, `aka`
and `ika` — are given by the grammarians as independent secondary
suffixes, requiring initial `vṛddhi`-strengthening of the primitive.
Both of them are doubtless originally made by addition of `ka` to a
final `i` or `a`, though coming to be used independently.

k\. Of `vṛddhi`-derivatives in aka no examples have been noted from the
older language (unless `māmaká` *mine* is to be so regarded); and they
are not common in the later: thus, `āvaçyaka` *necessary*, `vārddhaka`
*old age*, `rāmaṇīyaka` *delightfulness*.

l\. Of `vṛddhi`-derivatives in `ika`, the Veda furnishes a very few
cases: `vā́santika` *vernal*, `vā́rṣika` *of the rainy season*,
`hāímantika` *wintry* (none of them in RV.); AV. has `kāirātikā́` *of the
Kirātas*, apparent fem. to a masc. `kāirātaka`, which is not found till
later. Examples from a more recent period (when they become abundant)
are: `vāidika` *relating to the Vedas*, `dhārmika` *religious*, `āhnika`
*daily*, `vāinayika` *well-behaved*, `dāuvārika` *doorkeeper*,
`nāiyāyika` *versed in the Nyāya*.

m\. Before the suffix `ka`, some finals show a form which is
characteristic of external rather than internal combination. A final
sonant mute, of course, becomes surd, and an aspirate loses its
aspiration (117 a, 114): cf. -`upasatka`, -`samitka`, above, h. So also
a palatal becomes guttural (as before `t` etc.: 217): e. g. -`srukka`,
-`rukka`, -`tvakka`, `anṛkka`. A `s` remains after `ā˘`, and becomes `ṣ`
after an alterant vowel (180): e. g. `sadyaska, jyotiṣka, dirghāyuṣka`.
But the other sibilants take the form they would have in composition:
thus, `adíkka` (`diç`), `ṣaṭka, -viṭka, -tviṭka` (`ṣaṣ` etc.).
`Anāçīrka` (TS.: `āçis`) is anomalous; and so is `parutka` (Āpast.), if
it comes from `parus`.

1223\. Several suffixes, partly of rare occurrence and questionable
character, contain a न् `n` as consonantal element, and may be grouped
together here.

a\. A few derivatives in `āna` in RV. were given above (1175 a).

b\. With `ānī` (which is perhaps the corresponding feminine) are made a
small number of words, chiefly wife-names: thus, `indrāṇī́, varuṇānī́`
(these, with `uçīnárāṇī, purukútsānī, mudgā́lanī, ūrjā́nī`, are found in
RV.), `rudrāṇī, mātulānī` *maternal uncle's wife*,
`çarvāṇī, bhavānī, içānānī, çakrāṇī, upādhyāyānī, mṛḍānī, brahmāṇī`; and
`yavānī`.

c\. The feminines in `nī` and `knī` from masculine stems in `ta` have
been already noticed above (1176 d). From `páti` *master, husband* the
feminine is `pátnī`, both as independent word, *spouse*, and as final of
an adjective compound: thus, `devápatnī` *having a god for husband*,
`síndhupatnī` *having the Indus as master*. And the feminine of `paruṣá`
*rough* is in the older language sometimes `páruṣṇī`.

d\. With `īna` are made a full series of adjective derivatives from the
words with final `añc` (407 ff.); they are accented usually upon the
penult, but sometimes on the final; and the same word has sometimes both
accents: for example, `apācī́na, nīcī́na, prācī́na, arvācī́na` and
`arvācīná, pratīcī́na` and `pratīcīná, samīcīná`. Besides these, a number
of other adjectives, earlier and later: examples are `saṁvatsarī́na`
*yearly*, `prāvṛṣī́ṇa` *of the rainy season*, `viçvajanī́na` *of all
people*, `jñātakulī́na` *of known family*, `adhvanīna` *traveller*
(`ádhvan` *way*), `āçvīna` *day's journey on horseback* (`áçva`
*horse*). RV. has once `mā́kīna` *mine*.

e\. With `ena` is made `sāmidhená` (f. -`nī́`), from `samídh`, with
initial strengthening.

f\. As to a few words in `ina`, compare 1209 c.

g\. The adjectives made with simple `na` fall partly under another head
(below, 1245 f); here may be noted `çū́raṇa` *heroic* (?),
`phálguna, çmaçruṇá, dadruṇa`, and, with `vṛddhi`-strengthening,
`strāíṇa` *woman's* (its correlative, `pāuṁsna`, occurs late) and
`cyāutná` *inciting*. If `dróṇa` comes from `dru` *wood*, it has the
anomaly of a `guṇa`-strengthening.

1224\. Certain suffixes containing a म् `m` may be similarly grouped.

a\. With `ima` are made a small number of adjectives from nouns in
`tra`: thus, `khanítrima` *made by digging*, `kṛtríma` *artificial*,
`dattrima, paktrima, pūtríma`; in other finals,
`kuṭṭima, gaṇima, talima, tulima, pākima, udgārima, vyāyogima, saṁvyūhima, nirvedhima, āsan̄gima`,
all late. In `agrima` (RV.) *foremost* the `ma` has perhaps the ordinal
value.

b\. The uses of simple `ma` in forming superlatives (474) and ordinals
(487 d, e) have been already noticed, and the words thus made specified.

c. A few neuter abstracts end in `mna`: thus, `dyumná` *brightness*,
`nṛmṇá` *manliness;* and, from particles, `nimná` *depth* and `sumná`
*welfare*. The suffix comes perhaps from man with an added `a`.

d\. For the words showing a final `min`, see below, 1231.

1225\. मय `maya`. With this suffix are formed adjectives signifying
*made* or *composed* or *consisting of*, also *abounding in*, that which
is denoted by the primitive.

a\. The accent is always on the `má`, and the feminine is regularly and
usually in `máyī`. In the oldest language (V.), final `as` remains
unchanged before the suffix: thus, `manasmáya, nabhasmáya, ayasmáya`;
but `d` is treated as in external combination: thus, `mṛnmáya`; and in
the Brāhmaṇas and later, finals in general have the latter treatment: e.
g.
`tejomáya, adomáya, āpomáya, jyotirmaya, yajurmáya, etanmáya, asṝn̄maya, vān̄máya, ammaya, prāvṛṇmaya`.
RV. has `açmanmáya` (later `açmamaya`). In `hiraṇmáya` (B. and later)
the primitive (`hiraṇya`) is peculiarly mutilated. RV. has `sūmáya` *of
good make*, and `kimmáya` *made of what?*

b\. A very few examples of a feminine in `yā` occur in the later
language.

1226\. र `ra`. A few derivative adjectives are made with this suffix.
Accent and treatment of the primitive are various.

a\. With simple addition of `ra` are made, for example: `pāṅsurá`
*dusty*, -`çrīra` (also -`çlīla`) in `açrīrá` *ugly*, `dhūmrá` *dusky*
(`dhūmá` *smoke*), `madhura` (late) *sweet*. In an example or two, there
appears to be accompanying initial strengthening: thus, `ā́gnīdhra` *of
the fire-kindler* (`agnī́dh`), `çān̄kura` *stake-like* (`çan̄kú`); and in
`çekhara` (also `çikhara`), a `guṇa`-strengthening.

b\. With an inorganic vowel before the ending are made, for example,
`médhira` *wise*, `rathirá` *in a chariot;* `karmā́ra` *smith;* `dantura`
(late) *tusked;* `acchéra` (? MS.), `çrāmaṇera, saṁgamanera`.

c\. The use of `ra` in forming a few words of comparative meaning was
noticed above (474), and the words so made were given.

1227\. ल `la`. This and the preceding suffix are really but two forms of
the same. In some words they exchange with one another, and ल `la` is
usually, but not always, the later form in use.

a\. Examples are: `bahulá` *abundant*, `madhulá` (later `madhura`) and
`madhūla` *sweet*, `bhīmala` *fearful*, `jīvalá` *lively*, `açlīlá` (and
`açrīrá`) *wretched;* with `ā`, `vācāla` *talkative* (late); with `i`,
`phenila` *foamy* (late: `phéna`); with `u`, `vātula` and `vātūla`
*windy* (late: `vā́ta`); and `mātula` *maternal uncle* is a somewhat
irregular formation from `mātṛ́` *mother*.

b\. In the later language are found a few adjectives in `lu`, always
preceded by `ā`; examples are: `kṛpālu` and `dayālu` *compassionate*,
`īrṣyālu` *jealous*, `uṣṇālu` *heated*, `çayālu` and `svapnālu`
*sleepy*, `lajjālu` *modest*, `lālālu` *drooling*, `çraddhālu`
*trusting*, `krodhālu` *passionate*. One or two such derivatives having
a primary aspect were noticed at 1192 b.

1228\. व `va`. A small number of adjectives have this ending (accented,
added to an unaltered primitive).

a\. Examples are: `arṇavá` *billowy*, `keçavá` *hairy;* `rāsnāvá`
*girded;* `añjivá` *slippery*, `çantivá` *tranquillizing*, `çraddhivá`
*credible*, `amaṇiva` *jewelless*, `rājīva` *striped*.

b\. There are a very few adjectives in `vala` and `vaya` which may be
noticed here: thus, `kṛṣīvalá` *peasant* (`kṛṣi` *ploughing*),
`ūrṇāvalá` *wooly*,
`rajasvala, ūrjasvala, payasvala, çādvala, naḍvala, çikhāvala, dantāvala`;
`druváya` *wooden dish*, `caturvaya` *fourfold*.

c\. With `vya` are made two or three words from names of relationship:
thus, `pítṛvya` *paternal uncle*, `bhrā́tṛvya` *nephew, enemy*.

1229\. श `ça`. A very few adjectives appear to be made by an added
ending of this form.

a\. Thus, `romaçá` or `lomaçá` *hairy*, `étaça` (also `etaçá`)
*variegated*, `arvaçá` or `árvaça` *hasting*, `babhluçá` or `babhruçá`
and `kapiça` *brownish*, `kṛṣṇaça` *blackish*, `yuvaçá` *youthful*,
`bāliça` *childish*, `karkaça` *harsh*, `karmaça` (?) n. pr.; and
`giriça, vāriça` (?), `vṛkṣaça` are doubtless of the same character (not
containing the root `çī`). The character of `harīmaçá, káçmaça, kaláça`
is doubtful.

b\. Many of the adjective derivatives already treated have sometimes a
possessive value, the general meaning of *being concerned with, having
relation to* being specialized into that of *being in possession of*.
But there are also a few distinctively possessive suffixes; and some of
these, on account of the unlimited freedom of using them and the
frequency of their occurrence, are very conspicuous parts of the general
system of derivation. These will be next considered.

1230\. इन् `in`. Possessive adjectives of this ending may be formed
almost unlimitedly from stems in अ `a` or आ `ā`, and are sometimes (but
very rarely) made from stems with other finals.

a\. A final vowel disappears before the suffix. The accent is on the
suffix. As to the inflection of these adjectives, see above, 438 ff.
They are to be counted by hundreds in the older language, and are
equally or more numerous in the later.

b. Examples from `a`-stems are: `açvín` *possessing horses*, `dhanín`
*wealthy*, `pakṣín` *winged*, `balín` *strong*, `bhagín` *fortunate*,
`vajrín` *wielding the thunderbolt*, `çikhaṇḍín` *crested*, `hastín`
*possessing hands*, `ṣoḍaçín` *of sixteen*, `gardabhanādín` *having an
ass's voice*, `brahmavarcasín` *of eminent sanctity*, `sādhudevín`
*having luck at play*, `kūcidarthín` *having errands everywhither;* —
from `ā`-stems, `manīṣín` *wise*, `çikhín` *crested*, `ṛtāyín` *pious*.

c\. Derivatives from other stems are very few in comparison: thus, from
`i`-stems, `atithin` (?),
`abhimātín, arcín, açanin, ūrmin, kālanemin, khādín, -pāṇin, marīcin, mauñjin, māulin, -yonin, venin, saṁdhin, samṛddhin, surabhin`
(of those found only at the end of a possessive compound the character
is doubtful, since case-forms of `i`- and `in`-stems are not seldom
exchanged); from `u`-stems, `gurvin, çatagvín` (?), `veṇavin` (with
`guna` of the `u`); — from stems in `an`,
`varmín,  karmin, carmin, -chadmin, janmin, dhanvin, -dharmin, nāmin, brahmin, yakṣmin, çarmin`,
and `çvanin`; — in `as`, `retín` *rich in seed*, and probably `varcin`
n. pr.; also (perhaps through stems in -`sa`) `çavasín` and
`sahasin, manasín, -vayasín`; — isolated are `parisrajín` *garlanded*,
and `hiranín` (`hiránya`).

d\. It was pointed out above (1183) that derivatives in `in` have
assumed on a large scale the aspect and value of primary derivatives,
with the significance of present participles, especially at the end of
compounds. The properly secondary character of the whole formation is
shown, on the one hand, by the frequent use in the same manner of words
bearing an unmistakably secondary form, as
`praçnín, garbhín, jūrṇín, dhūmín, snānin, homin, matsarín, paripanthín, pravepanín, saṁgatin`;
and, on the other hand, by the occurrence of reverted palatals (216)
before the `in`, which could only be as `in` replaced `a`: thus,
`arkín, -bhan̄gín, -san̄gín, -rokín`.

e\. In a few cases, there appears before the `in` a `y` preceded by an
`ā` of inorganic character: thus,
`dhanvāyín, tantrāyín, çvetāyín, sṛkāyín, ātatāyín, pratihitāyín, marāyín, ṛtāyín, svadhāyín`
(VS.: TB. -`vín`). The `y` in all such words is evidently the inserted
`y` after `ā` (258 a), and to assume for them a suffix `yin` is quite
needless.

f\. The accentuation `pravrā́jin, prasyándin`, in the concluding part of
ÇB., is doubtless false; and the same is to be suspected for
`çā́kī, sárī, írī` (RV., each once).

g\. A very few words in `in` have not suffered the possessive
specialization. Such are `vanín` *tree, hermit*, `kapotín` *dovelike*,
`aṇḍin` *scrotum-like* (cf. 1233 f).

1231\. मिन् `min`. With this suffix are made an extremely small number
of possessive adjectives.

a\. In the old language, the words in min have the aspect of derivatives
in `in` from nouns in `ma`, although in two or three cases — `iṣmín`
and `ṛgmín` in RV., `vāgmín` in ÇB. — no such nouns are found in actual
use beside them. In the later language, `min` is used as independent
element in a very few words: thus, `gomin` *possessing cattle*, `svāmin`
(Sūtras and later) *master, lord* (`sva` *own*), `kakudmin` *humped*.

b\. The two words `ṛgmín` and `vāgmín` show not only reversion but also
sonantizing of an original palatal.

1232\. विन् `vin`. The adjectives made with this suffix are also not
numerous. They have the same meanings with those in इन् `in`. The accent
is on the suffix.

a\. The RV. has ten adjectives in `vin`; they become rather more common
later. Though for them may be suspected a similar origin to those in
`yin` and `min` (above), signs of it are much less clearly traceable.

b\. The great majority have `vin` added after as: e. g. `namasvín`
*reverential*, `tapasvín` *heated*, `tejasvín` *brilliant*, `yaçasvín`
*beautiful*, and so `retasvín, enasvín, harasvín`, etc.; and
`çatasvín, çrotrasvín, rūpasvin` have an inserted `s`, by analogy with
them. Most others have ā (sometimes, by lengthening): thus,
`glāvín, medhāvín, māyāvín, sabhāvín, aṣṭrāvín` *obedient to the goad*,
`dvayāvín` *double-minded*, `ubhayāvín` *possessing of both kinds*,
`dhanvāvin, tandrāvin, āmayāvín, ātatāvín`. More rarely, `vin` is added
after another consonant than `s`: thus,
`vāgvín, dhṛṣadvín, ātmanvín, kumudvin, sragvin, yajvin, ajvin`. The
doubtful word `vyaçnuvín` (VS., once: TB. `vyáçniya`) appears to add the
ending (or `in`, with euphonic `v`) to a present tense-stem.

c\. An external form of combination is seen only in `vāgvín` and
`dhṛṣadvín` (both Vedic), with the common reversion of a palatal in
`sragvin`.

1233\. वन्त् `vant`. Very numerous possessive adjectives are made by
this suffix, from noun-stems of every form, both in the earlier language
and in the later.

a\. The accent generally remains upon the primitive, without change; but
an accent resting on a stem-final, if this be anything but `á` or `ā́`,
is in the majority of cases thrown forward upon the suffix. As to
inflection, formation of feminine, etc., see 452 ff.

b\. A final vowel — oftenest `a`, very rarely `u` — is in many words
lengthened in the older language (247) before this ending, as in
composition. Nouns in `an` more often retain the `n`.

c\. Examples of the normal formation are: with unchanged accent,
`kéçavant` *hairy*, `putrávant` *having a son*, `prajánanavant`
*procreative*, `puṇḍárīkavant` *rich in lotuses*, `híraṇyavant` *rich in
gold*, `apūpávant` *having cakes*, `rājanyàvant` *allied with a
kshatriya;* `prajā́vant` *having progeny*, `ū́rṇāvant` *wooly*,
`dákṣiṇāvant` *rich in sacrificial gifts;* `sákhivant` *having friends*,
`saptarṣívant` *accompanied by the seven sages;* `çácīvant` *powerful*,
`táviṣīvant` *vehement*, `pátnīvant` *with spouse*, `dhī́vant` *devoted*,
`dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant` (94 b) *with heaven and earth;* `víṣṇuvant`
*accompanied by Vishnu;* `háritvant` *golden*, `āvṛ́tvant` *hither
turned*, `āçī́rvant` *mixed with milk*, `svàrvant` *splendid*,
`çarádvant` *full of years*, `púṁsvant` *having a male*, `páyasvant`
*rich*, `támasvant` *dark*, `bráhmaṇvant` *accompanied with worship*,
`rómaṇvant` *hairy* (but also `romavant, lómavant, vṛtrahavant`, etc.),
`kakúbhvant` *containing a* `kakúbh`; — with accent on the suffix,
`agnivánt` *having fire*, `rayivánt` *wealthy*, `nṛvánt` *manly*,
`padvánt` *having feet*, `nasvánt` *with nose*, `āsanvánt` *having a
mouth*, `çīrṣaṇvánt` *headed* (also `çīrṣavant`).

d\. With final stem-vowel lengthened: for example, `áçvāvant` (beside
`áçvavant`) *possessing horses*, `sutā́vant` *having soma expressed*,
`vṛ́ṣṇyāvant` *of virile force* (about thirty such cases occur in V.);
`çáktīvant` *mighty*, `svádhitīvant` *having axes*, `ghṛ́ṇīvant` *hot;*
`viṣūvánt` *dividing* (`víṣu` *apart*).

e\. Certain special irregularities are as follows: an inserted `s` in
`índrasvant, máhiṣvant`; inserted n in
`vánanvant, búdhanvant, vádhanvant, gartanvánt, māṅsanvánt`; shortening
of a final of the primitive in
`māyávant, yājyàvant, puronuvākyàvant, āmíkṣavant, sarasvativant`;
abbreviation in `hiraṇvant`; inserted `ā` in `çavasāvant, sahasāvant`,
and the odd `mahimāvant`; anomalous accent in `kṛçanā́vant` (if from
`kṛ́çana` *pearl*); derivation from particles in `antárvant` *pregnant*,
`viṣūvánt` (above, d).

f\. Instead of the specialized meaning of *possessing*, the more general
one of *like to, resembling* is seen in a number of words, especially in
the derivatives from pronominal stems, `mā́vant` *like me* etc. (517: add
`ī́vant, kī́vant`). Other examples are `índrasvant` *like Indra*,
`nīḍávant` *nestlike*, `nī́lavant` *blackish*, `nṛvánt` *manly*,
`pṛ́ṣadvant` *speckled*, `kṣāítavant` *princely;* compare the later
`paravant` *dependent*. It was pointed out above (1107) that the adverb
of comparison in `vát` is the accusative neuter of a derivative of this
class.

g\. In a few words, `vant` has the aspect of forming primary
derivatives: thus, `vivásvant` (or `vívasvant`) *shining*, also n. pr.,
`ánupadasvant, árvant, pípiṣvant` (?), `yahvánt`.

h\. For the derivatives in `vat` from prepositions, which appear to have
nothing to do with this suffix, see 1245 j.

i\. While this suffix is generally added to a primitive according to the
rules of internal combination (see examples above, c), treatment also as
in external combination begins already in RV., in `pṛ́ṣadvant` (`pṛ́ṣat`),
and becomes more common later: thus, `tapovant, tejovant, an̄girovant`
(beside `tápasvant` etc.); `vidyúdvant` (beside `vidyutvant`),
`bṛhadvant, jagadvant, sadvant`, etc.; `triṣṭubvant` (against
`kakúbhvant`), `samidvant, vimṛdvant`; `vāgvant` (against `ṛkvant`);
`svarāḍvant`; `havyavāḍvant`; `āçīrvant`.

j\. None of the suffixes beginning with `v` show in the Veda resolution
of `v` to `u`.

1234. वन् `van`. The secondary derivatives in this suffix belong to the
older language, and are a small number, of which extremely few have more
than an occurrence or two.

a\. They have the aspect of being produced under the joint influence of
primary `van` and secondary `vant`. A final short vowel is usually
lengthened before the suffix. The accent is various, but oftenest on the
penult of the stem. The feminine (like that of the derivatives in
primary `van`: 1169 f) is in `varī`.

b\. The Vedic examples are: from `a`-stems, `ṛṇāván` or `ṛṇaván, ṛtā́van`
(and f. -`varī`), `ṛ́ghāvan, dhitā́van, satyā́van, sumnāvarī`, and
`maghávan`; from `ā`-stems, `sūnṛ́tāvarī, svadhā́van` (and f. -`varī`);
from `i`-stems, `amatīván, arātīván, çruṣṭīván, muṣīván`, and `kṛṣīvan`
(only in the further derivative kā́rṣīvaṇa); dhī́van; from
consonant-stems, `átharvan, samádvan, sáhovan` (bad AV. variant to RV.
`sahā́van`); `hā́rdvan` (TA. also `hārdivan`). Somewhat anomalous are
`sahā́van, índhanvan` (for `índhanavan`?), and `sanítvan` (for
`sánitivan`?). The only words of more than sporadic occurrence are
`ṛtā́van, maghávan, átharvan`.

c\. `Sáhovan` (see b) is the only example of external combination with
this suffix.

1235\. मन्त् `mant`. This is a twin-suffix to वन्त् `vant` (above,
1233); their derivatives have the same value, and are to some extent
exchangeable with one another. But possessives in मन्त् `mant` are much
less frequent (in the older language, about a third as many), and are
only very rarely made from `a`-stems.

a\. If the accent of the primitive word is on the final, it is in the
great majority of instances (three quarters) thrown forward upon the
added suffix; otherwise, it maintains its place unchanged. A final vowel
before the suffix is in only a few cases made long. Examples are:

b\. With the accent of the primitive unchanged: `káṇvamant, yávamant`
*rich in barley*, and `vibhavamant` n. pr. (these alone from `a`-stems,
and the first only occurring once); `ávimant` *possessing sheep*,
`açánimant` *bearing the thunderbolt*, `óṣadhīmant` *rich in herbs*,
`vā́çīmant` *carrying an axe*, `vásumant` *possessing good things*,
`mádhumant` *rich in sweets*, `tváṣṭṛmant` *accompanied by Tvashtar*,
`hótṛmant` *provided with priests*, `ā́yuṣmant` *long-lived*,
`jyótiṣmant` *full of brightness;* — `ulkuṣī́mant` *accompanied with
meteors*, `pīlúmant` (?), `prasū́mant` *having young shoots*, `gómant`
*rich in kine*, `garútmant` *winged*, `vihútmant` *with libation*,
`kakúdmant` *humped*, `vidyúnmant` (with irregular assimilation of `t`:
VS. has also `kakúnmant`) *gleaming*, `virúkmant` *shining*, `havíṣmant`
*with libations*, `vipruṣmant` *with drops*.

c. With the accent thrown forward upon the ending: `asimánt` *with
knives*, `agnimánt` *having fire*, `iṣudhimánt` *with a quiver*,
`paçumánt` *possessing cattle*, `vāyumánt` *with wind*, `pitṛmánt` (AV.
`pitṛ́mant`) *accompanied by the Fathers*, `mātṛmánt` *having a mother;*
no long final vowels are found before the suffix in this division, and
only once a consonant, in `dasmát` (RV., once).

d\. Protraction of a final vowel is seen in
`tvíṣīmant, dhrájīmant, hírīmant`; in `jyótiṣīmant` is irregularly
inserted an `ī` (after the analogy of `táviṣīmant`); in
`çuciṣmant, mahiṣmant`, an `s`; `suṣumánt` (RV., once) appears to be
primary.

e\. The adverb `āçumát` appears to be related to adverbs in `vát` as the
suffix `mant` to `vant`.

f\. By the side of derivatives made with internal combination appears
`vidyúnmant` even in RV.; and other like cases occur later: thus,
`parisrúnmant, kakunmant, kṣunmant, puronún̄mant, vān̄mant, kakummant, gudaliṇmant, yaçomant`.

1236\. It has been seen above (especially in connection with the
suffixes `a` and `ya`) that the neuter of a derivative adjective is
frequently used as an abstract noun. There are, however, two suffixes
which have in the later language the specific office of making abstract
nouns from adjectives and nouns; and these are found also, more
sparingly used, in the oldest language, each having there one or two
other evidently related suffixes beside it.

a\. For derivatives of the same value made with the suffix `iman`, see
above, 1168 i–k.

1237\. ता `tā`. With this suffix are made feminine abstract nouns,
denoting *the quality of being so and so*, from both adjectives and
nouns.

a\. The form of the primitive is unchanged, and the accent is uniformly
on the syllable preceding the suffix.

b\. Examples (from the older language) are: `devátā` *divinity*,
`vīrátā` *manliness*, `puruṣátā` *human nature*, `agnítā` *firehood*,
`apaçútā` *cattle-lessness*, `bandhútā` *relationship*, `vasútā`
*wealth;* `nagnátā` *nakedness*, `suvīrátā` *wealth in retainers*,
`anapatyátā` *lack of descendants*, `agótā` *poverty in cattle*,
`abrahmátā` *lack of devotion*, `aprajástā` *absence of progeny;* also
doubtless `sūnṛ́tā` (from `sūnára`), although the word is a few times
used as an adjective (like `çaṁtāti` and `satyatāti`: see next
paragraph).

c\. Of special formation are `mamátā` *selfishness*, `trétā`
*triplicity*, `astitā` *actuality*. RV. has `avī́ratā`, with exceptional
accent. In `ekapatnitā` is seen a shortened final vowel of the
primitive. `Janátā` has acquired a concrete meaning, *people, folk;*
also `grāmatā` (once) *villages* collectively.

1238\. ताति `tāti`, तात् `tāt`. These suffixes are Vedic only, and the
latter is limited to RV. Their relationship to the preceding is
evident, but opinions are at variance as to its nature. The accent is
as in the derivatives with `tā`.

a\. The quotable examples in tāti are: `ariṣṭátāti` *uninjuredness*,
`ayakṣmátāti` *freedom from disease*, `gṛbhītátāti` *the being seized*,
`jyeṣṭhátāti` *supremacy*, `devátāti` *divinity*, `vasútāti` *wealth*,
`çáṁtāti` *good-fortune*, `sarvátāti` *completeness;* and, with
exceptional accent, `ástatāti` *home*, and `dákṣatāti` *cleverness;*
`çivatāti` and `çubhatāti` occur (once each) in the later language. Two
words in `tāti` are used adjectively (inorganically, by apposition?):
`çáṁtāti` (RV., twice; and AV. xix. 44. 1, in manuscripts), and
`satyatāti` (RV., once: voc.).

b\. The words in `tāt` (apparently made by abbreviation from `tāti`)
occur in only one or two cases-forms; they were all mentioned above (383
k. 2).

1239\. त्व `tva`. With this suffix are made neuter nouns, of the same
value as the feminines in ता `tā` (above, 1237).

a\. The neuter abstracts in `tva` are in the older language considerably
more common than the feminines in `tā`, although themselves also not
very numerous. The accent is without exception on the suffix.

b\. Examples (from the older language) are: `amṛtatvá` *immortality*,
`devatvá` *divinity*, `subhagatvá` *good-fortune*, `ahamuttaratvá`
*struggle for precedency*, `çucitvá` *purity*, `patitvá` *husbandship*,
`taraṇitvá` *energy*, `dīrghāyutvá` *long life*, `çatrutvá` *enmity*,
`bhrātṛtvá` *brotherhood*, `vṛṣatvá` *virility*, `sātmatvá`
*soulfulness*, `maghavattvá` *liberality*, `rakṣastvá` *sorcery*. In
`anāgāstvá` and -`prajāstvá` there is a lengthening of the final
syllable of the primitive; and in `sāuprajāstvá` (AV., once) this
appears to be accompanied by initial `vṛddhi` (`sāubhagatvá` is
doubtless from `sāúbhaga`, not `subhága`); and in these and
`pratyanastvá` there is an apparent insertion of `s`. In `sadhanitvá`
(RV.), `vasatīvaritvá` (TS.), `rohiṇitvá` (TB.), there is shortening of
final feminine `ī` before the suffix. Of peculiar formation are
`astitva` *actuality* and `sahatva` *union*. The apparent feminine
datives `yūthatvāyāi` and `gaṇatvāyāi` (KS.) are doubtless false forms.

c\. Besides the usual guttural reversions in `samyaktva, sayuktva`, we
have external combination in `samittva` (-`idh`-) and `pūrvavāṭtva`
(-`vah`-).

d\. In `iṣitatvátā` (RV., once) *incitedness*, and `puruṣatvátā` (RV.,
twice) *human quality*, appears to be a combination of the two
equivalent suffixes `tva` and `tā`.

e\. The `v` of `tva` is to be read in Veda as u only once (`rakṣastuá`).

1240\. त्वन `tvana`. The derivatives made with this suffix are, like
those in `tva`, neuter abstracts. They occur almost only in RV., and,
except in a single instance (`martyatvaná`), have beside them equivalent
derivatives in `tva`. The accent is on the final, and the `tva` is never
resolved into `tua`. a. The words are:
`kavitvaná, janitvaná, patitvaná` (also JB.),
`martyatvaná, mahitvaná, vasutvaná, vṛṣatvaná, sakhitvaná`.

1241\. A few suffixes make no change in the character as part of speech
of the primitive to which they are added, but either are merely formal
appendages, leaving the value of the word what it was before, or make a
change of degree, or introduce some other modification of meaning.

1242\. The suffixes of comparison and ordinal suffixes have for the most
part been treated already, and need only a reference here.

a\. तर `tara` and तम `tama` are the usual secondary suffixes of
adjective comparison: respecting their use as such, see above, 471–473;
respecting the use of `tama` as ordinal etc. suffix, see 487–8;
respecting that of their accusatives as adverbial suffixes to
prepositions etc., see 1111 e.

b\. In `vṛtratára` and `purutáma` (RV.) the, accent is anomalous; in
`mṛdayáttama`, it is drawn forward to the final of the participle, as
often in composition (1309); `çaçvattamá` (RV.) has the ordinal accent;
`saṁvatsaratamá` (ÇB.) is an ordinal; `dívātara` (RV., once: an error?)
is an ordinary adjective, *of the day;* `surabhíṣṭama` and `tuvíṣṭama`
insert a `s`; `kārotará` and `kāulitará` are probably
`vṛddhi`-derivatives in `a`. In `vatsatará` (f. -`rī́`) *weanling*,
`açvatará` *mule*, and `dhenuṣṭarī́` *cow losing her milk*, the
application of the suffix is peculiar and obscure; so also in
`rathaṁtará`, name of a certain *sāman*.

c\. र `ra` and म `ma`, like `tara` and `tama`, have a comparative and
superlative value; and the latter of them forms ordinals: see above,
474, 487.

d\. थ `tha`, like `tama` and `ma`, forms ordinals from a few numerals:
see 487 c; also (with fem. in -`thī́`) from `tati, kati, yati, iti`:
thus, `tatithá` *so-many-eth* etc.

e\. Apparently by false analogy with `tatithá` etc. (above, d), the
quasi-ordinals `tāvatitha, yāvatitha, bahutitha` are made, as if with a
suffix `titha` (also `katititha`, late, for `katithá`); and, it is said,
from other words meaning *a number or collection*, as
`gaṇa, pūga, saṁgha`; but none such are quotable.

1243\. Of diminutive suffixes there are none in Sanskrit with clearly
developed meaning and use. The occasional employment of `ka`, in a
somewhat indistinct way, to make diminutives, has been noticed above
(1222).

1244\. Of the ordinary adjective-making suffixes, given above, some
occasionally make adjectives from adjectives, with slight or
imperceptible modification of value. The only one used to any
considerable extent in this way is `ka`: as to which, see 1222.

1245. A few suffixes are used to make derivatives from certain limited
and special classes of words, as numerals and particles. Thus:

a\. तय `taya` makes a few adjectives, meaning *of so many divisions* or
*kinds* (used in the neuter as collectives), from numerals: thus,
`ékataya` (MS.), `dvitaya, tritaya, cátuṣṭaya` (AV.), `ṣaṭtaya` (KB.:
with external combination), `saptátaya` (ÇB.), `aṣṭātaya` (AB.),
`dáçataya` (RV.), `bahútaya` (TS.). Their fem. is in -`yī`.

b\. त्य `tya` makes a class of adjectives from particles: e. g. `nítya`
*own*, `níṣṭya` *foreign*, `amā́tya` *companion*, etc. As the examples
show, the accent of the primitive is retained. The fem. is in -`tyā`.

c\. The other quotable examples are
`ápatya, āvíṣṭya, sánutya, antastya, anyatastya-, tatastya, kutastya, atratya, tatratya, yatratya, kutratya, ihatya, upatya, adhitya, prātastya, dakṣiṇātya`
(instead of which, the regular form, is generally found `dākṣiṇātya`,
apparently a further `vṛddhi`-derivative from it: as if *belonging to
the southerners*), and `pāçcāttya` and `pāurastya` (of a similar
character: these three last are said by the grammarians to be accented
on the final, as is proper for `vṛddhi`-derivatives); `aptyá` and
`āptyá` perhaps contain the same suffix. In `antastya` and `prātastya`
is seen external combination.

d\. The `y` of `tya` is in RV. always to be read as `i` after a heavy
syllable.

e\. त `ta` forms `ekatá, dvitá`, and `tritá`, also `muhūrtá` *moment*,
and apparently `avatá` *well* (for water).

f\. With न `na` are made `purāṇá` *ancient*, `víṣuṇa` *various*, and
perhaps `samāná` *like*.

g\. With तन `tana` or (in a few cases) त्न `tna` are made adjectives
from adverbs, nearly always of time: e. g. `pratná` *ancient*, `nū́tana`
or `nū́tna` *present*, `sanātána` or `sanátna` *lasting*, `divātana` *of
the day*, `çvástana` *of tomorrow*, `hyastana` *of yesterday*. The
accent is various. The feminine is in `nī́`.

h\. The other quotable examples are:
`agretana, adyatana, adhunātána, idaṁtana, idānīṁtana, etarhitana, ciraṁtana, tadānīṁtana, doṣātana, purātana, prāktana, prātastána, sadātana, sāyaṁtána`;
from adverbs of place, `adhastana, arvāktana, uparitana, kutastana`; —
with `tna, parastāttna, purastāttna`. A further `vṛddhi`-derivative,
with equivalent meaning, `nāutana` (cf. above, c), occurs late. In PB.
is once found `tvattana` *belonging to thee*.

i\. Besides the obvious cases of an assimilated final `m` before this
suffix, we have external combination in `prātastána`.

j\. वत् `vat` makes from particles of direction the feminine nouns
mentioned above (383 k. 1).

k\. कट `kaṭa`, properly a noun in composition, is reckoned by the
grammarians as a suffix, in `utkaṭa, nikaṭa, prakaṭa, vikaṭa` (RV.,
once, voc.), and `saṁkaṭa` (all said to be accented on the final).

l\. A suffix `vana` is perhaps to be seen in `nivaná`, `pravaṇa`; — and
`āla` in `antarāla`.

m\. Occasional derivatives made with the ordinary suffixes of primary
and secondary derivation from numerals and particles have been noted
above: thus, see `ana` (1150 n), `ti` (1157 h), `ant` (1172 a), `u`
(1178 i), `a` (1209 i), `ka` (1222 c), `mna` (1224 c), `maya` (1225 a),
`vant` (1233 e).
