+++
title = "22 Chapter XVIII FORMATION OF COMPOUND STEMS"

+++




## CHAPTER XVIII.

  

FORMATION OF COMPOUND STEMS.

1246\. THE frequent combination of declinable stems with one another to
form compounds which then are treated as if simple, in respect to
accent, inflection, and construction, is a conspicuous feature of the
language, from its earliest period.

a\. There is, however, a marked difference between the earlier and the
later language as regards the length and intricacy of the combinations
allowed. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, it is quite rare that more than two stems
are compounded together — except that to some much used and familiar
compound, as to an integral word, a further element is sometimes added.
But the later the period, and, especially, the more elaborate the style,
the more a cumbrous and difficult aggregate of elements, abnegating the
advantages of an inflective language, takes the place of the due
syntactical union of formed words into sentences.

1247\. Sanskrit compounds fall into three principal classes:

I. a. Copulative or aggregative compounds, of which the members are
syntactically coördinate: a joining together into one of words which in
an uncompounded condition would be connected by the conjunction *and*
(rarely *or*). 

b\. Examples are: `índrāváruṇāu` *Indra and Varuna*, `satyānṛté` *truth
and falsehood*, `kṛtākṛtám` *done and undone*,
`devagandharvamānuṣoragarakṣasās` *gods and Gandharvas and men and
serpents and demons*.

c\. The members of such a compound may obviously be of any number, two
or more than two. No compound of any other class can contain more than
two members — of which, however, either or both may be compound, or
decompound (below, 1248).

II\. d. Determinative compounds, of which the former member is
syntactically dependent on the latter, as its determining or qualifying
adjunct: being either, 1. a noun (or pronoun) limiting it in a
case-relation, or, 2. an adjective or adverb describing it. And,
according as it is the one or the other, are to be distinguished the two
sub-classes: A. Dependent compounds; and B. Descriptive compounds. Their
difference is not an absolute one.

e\. Examples are: of dependent compounds, `amitrasenā́` *army of
enemies*, `pādodaka` *water for the feet*, `āyurdā́` *life-giving*,
`hástakṛta` *made with the hands*; of descriptive compounds, `maharṣí`
*great sage*, `priyasakhi` *dear friend*, `amítra` *enemy*, `súkṛta`
*well done*.

f\. These two classes are of primary value; they have undergone no
unifying modification in the process of composition; their character as
parts of speech is determined by their final member, and they are
capable of being resolved into equivalent phrases by giving the proper
independent form and formal means of connection to each member. That is
not the case with the remaining class, which accordingly is more
fundamentally distinct from them than they are from one another.

III\. g. Secondary adjective compounds, the value of which is not given
by a simple resolution into their component parts, but which, though
having as final member a noun, are themselves adjectives. These, again,
are of two sub-classes: A. Possessive compounds, which are
noun-compounds of the preceding class, with the idea of *possessing*
added, turning them from nouns into adjectives; B. Compounds in which
the second member is a noun syntactically dependent on the first:
namely, 1. Prepositional compounds, of a governing preposition and
following noun; 2. Participial compounds (only Vedic), of a present
participle and its following object.

h\. The sub-class B. is comparatively small, and its second division
(participial compounds) is hardly met with even in the later Vedic.

i\. Examples are: `vīrasena` *possessing a hero-army*, `prajākāma`
*having desire of progeny*, `tigmáçṛn̄ga` *sharphorned*, `háritasraj`
*wearing green garlands*; `atimātrá` *excessive*; `yāvayáddveṣas`
*driving away enemies*.

j\. The adjective compounds are, like simple adjectives, liable to be
used, especially in the neuter, as abstract and collective nouns, and in
the accusative as adverbs; and out of these uses have grown apparent
special classes of compounds, reckoned and named as such by the Hindu
grammarians. The relation of the classification given above to that
presented in the native grammar, and widely adopted from the latter by
the European grammars, will be made clear as we go on to treat the
classes in detail.

1248\. A compound may, like a simple word, become a member in another
compound, and this in yet another — and so on, without definite limit.
The analysis of any compound, of whatever length (unless it be a
copulative), must be made by a succession of bisections.

a\. Thus, the dependent compound `pūrvajanmakṛta` *done in a previous
existence* is first divisible into `kṛta` and the descriptive
`pūrvajanman`, then this into its elements; the dependent
`sakalanītiçāstratattvajña` *knowing the essence of all books of
behavior* has first the root-stem `jña` (for √`jñā`) *knowing* separated
from the rest, which is again dependent; then this is divided into
`tattva` *essence* and the remainder, which is descriptive; this, again,
divides into `sakala` *all* and `nītiçāstra` *books of behavior*, of
which the latter is a dependent compound and the former a possessive
(`sa` and `kalā` *having its parts together*).

1249\. a. The final of a stem is combined with the initial of another
stem in composition according to the general rules for external
combination: they have been given, with their exceptions, in chap. III.,
above.

b\. If a stem has a distinction of strong and weak forms, it regularly
enters into composition as prior member in its weak form; or, if it has
a triple distinction (311), in its middle form.

c. That is, especially, stems in `ṛ` or `ar`, `at` or `ant`, `ac` or
`añc`, etc., show in composition the forms in `ṛ, at, ac`, etc.; while
those in an and in usually (exceptions sometimes occur, as
`vṛṣaṇaçvá, vṛṣaṇvasú`) lose their final `n`, and are combined as if `a`
and `i` were their proper finals.

d\. As in secondary derivation (1203 d), so also as prior member of a
compound, a stem sometimes shortens its final long vowel (usually `ī`,
rarely `ā`): thus, in V.,
`rodasiprā́, pṛthiviṣṭhā́, pṛthiviṣád, dhā́rapūta, dhāravāká`; in B.,
`pṛthivi-dā, -bhāga, -loká, sarasvatikṛta, senānigrāmaṇyāù`; in S.,
`garbhiniprāyaçcitta, sāmidheniprāiṣtya, vasatīvaripariharaṇa, ekādaçinilin̄ga, prapharvidā, devatalakṣaṇa, devatapradhānatva`;
later,
`devakinandana, lakṣmivardhana, kumāridatta, muhūrtaja, iṣṭakacita`,
etc.

e\. Occasionally, a stem is used as prior member of a compound which
does not appear, or not in that form, as an independent word: examples
are `mahā` *great* (apparently used independently in V. in accusative),
`tuvi` *mighty* (V.), `dvi` *two*.

f\. Not infrequently, the final member of a compound assumes a special
form: see below, 1315.

1250\. But a case-form in the prior member of a compound is by no means
rare, from the earliest period of the language. Thus:

a\. Quite often, an accusative, especially before a root-stem, or a
derivative in `a` of equivalent meaning: for example, `pataṁgá` *going
by flight*, `dhanaṁjayá` *winning wealth*, `abhayaṁkará` *causing
absence of danger*, `puṣṭimbhará` *bringing prosperity*, `vācamīn̄khayá`
*inciting the voice;* but also sometimes before words of other form, as
`áçvamiṣṭi` *horse-desiring*, `çubhaṁyā́van` *going in splendor*,
`subhāgaṁkáraṇa` *making happy*, `bhayaṁkartṛ` *causer of fear*. In a
few cases, by analogy with these, a word receives an accusative form to
which it has no right: thus,
`hṛdaṁsáni, makṣúṁgama, vasuṁdhara, ātmambhari`.

b\. Much more rarely, an instrumental: for example, `girāvṛ́dh`
*increasing by praise*, `vācā́stena` *stealing by incantation*,
`krátvāmagha` *gladly bestowing*, `bhāsā́ketu` *bright with light*,
`vidmanā́pas` *active with wisdom*.

C. In a very few instances, a dative: thus, `nareṣṭhā́` *serving a man*,
`asméhiti` *errand to us*, and perhaps `kiyedhā́` and `mahevṛ́dh`.

d\. Not seldom, a locative; and this also especially with a root-stem or
`a`-derivative: for example, `agregá` *going at the head*, `divikṣít`
*dwelling in the sky*, `vaneṣáh` *prevailing in the wood*, `an̄geṣṭhā́`
*existing in the limbs*, `proṣṭheçayá` *lying on a couch*, `sutékara`
*active with the soma*, `divícara` *moving in the sky;* `āréçatru`
*having enemies far removed*, `sumnáāpi` *near in favor*, `máderaghu`
*hasting in excitement*, `yudhiṣṭhira` *firm in battle*, `antevāsin`
*dwelling near;* `apsujá` *born in the waters*, `hṛtsvás` *hurling at
hearts*.

e\. Least often, a genitive: thus, `rāyáskāma` *desirous of wealth*,
`akasyavíd` *knowing no one*. But the older language has a few examples
of the putting together of a genitive with its governing noun, each
member of the combination keeping its own accent: see below, 1267 d.

f\. Ablative forms are to be seen in `balātkāra` *violence* and
`balātkṛta`, and perhaps in `parātpriya`. And a stem in `ṛ` sometimes
appears in a copulative compound in its nominative form: thus,
`pitāputrāu` *father and son*, `hotāpotārāu` *the invoker and purifier*.
`Anyonya` *one another* is a fused phrase, of nominative and oblique
case.

g\. In a very few words, plural meaning is signified by plural form:
thus, `apsujā́` etc. (in derivation, also, `apsu` is used as a stem),
`hṛtsvás, nṝ́ṅḥpraṇetra` *conducting men*, `rujaskara` *causing pains*,
(and dual) `hanūkampa` *trembling of the two jaws*.

h\. Much more often, of words having gender-forms, the feminine is used
in composition, when the distinctive feminine sense is to be conveyed:
e. g. `gopīnātha` *master of the shepherdesses*, `dāsīputra` *son of a
female slave*, `mṛgīdṛç` *gaselle-eyed*, `praṇītāpraṇáyana` *vessel for
consecrated water*.

1251\. The accent of compounds is very various, and liable to
considerable irregularity even within the limits of the same formation;
and it must be left to be pointed out in detail below. All possible
varieties are found to occur. Thus:

a\. Each member of the compound retains its own separate accent. This is
the most anomalous and infrequent method. It appears in certain Vedic
copulative compounds chiefly composed of the names of divinities
(so-called `devatā-dvandvas`: 1255 ff.), and in a small number of
aggregations partly containing a genitive case-form as prior member
(1267 d).

b\. The accent of the compound is that of its prior member. This is
especially the case in the great class of possessive compounds; but also
in determinatives having the participle in `ta` or `na` as final member,
in those beginning with the negative `a` or `an`, and in other less
numerous and important classes.

c\. The accent of the compound is that of the final member. This is not
on so large a scale the case as the preceding; but it is nevertheless
quite common, being found in many compounds having a verbal noun or
adjective as final member, in compounds beginning with the numerals
`dvi` and `tri` or the prefixes `su` and `dus`, and elsewhere in not
infrequent exceptions.

d\. The compound takes an accent of its own, independent of that of
either of its constituents, on its final syllable (not always, of
course, to be distinguished from the preceding case). This method is
largely followed: especially, by the regular copulatives, and by the
great mass of dependent and descriptive noun-compounds, by most
possessives beginning with the negative prefix; and by others.

e\. The compound has an accent which is altered from that of one of its
members. This is everywhere an exceptional and sporadically occurring
case, and the instances of it, noted below under each formation, do not
require to be assembled here. Examples are: `medhásāti` (`médha`),
`tilámiçra` (`tíla`), `khā́dihasta` (`khādí`), `yāvayáddveṣas`
(`yāváyant`); `çakadhū́ma` (`dhūmá`), `amṛ́ta` (`mṛtá`), `suvī́ra`
(`vīrá`), `tuvigrī́va` (`grīvā́`). A few words — as `víçva, pū́rva`, and
sometimes `sárva` — take usually a changed accent as prior members of
compounds.

I. Copulative Compounds.

1252\. Two or more nouns — much less often adjectives, and, in an
instance or two, adverbs — having a coördinate construction, as if
connected by a conjunction, usually *and*, are sometimes combined into
compounds.

a\. This is the class to which the Hindu grammarians give the name of
`dvandva` *pair, couple;* a `dvandva` of adjectives, however, is not
recognized by them.

b\. Compounds in which the relation of the two members is alternative
instead of copulative, though only exceptional, are not very rare:
examples are `nyūnādhika` *defective or redundant*, `jayaparājaya`
*victory or defeat*, `krītotpanna` *purchased or on hand*,
`kāṣṭhaloṣṭasama` *like a log or clod*, `pakṣimṛgatā` *the condition of
being bird or beast*, `triṅçadviṅça` *numbering twenty or thirty*,
`catuṣpan̄cakṛtvas` *four or five times*, `dvyekāntara` *different by one
or two*. A less marked modification of the copulative idea is seen in
such instances as `priyasatya` *agreeable though true*,
`prārthitadurlabha` *sought after but hard to obtain;* or in
`çrāntāgata` *arrived weary*.

1253\. The noun-copulatives fall, as regards their inflective form, into
two classes:

1\. a. The compound has the gender and declension of its final member,
and is in number a dual or a plural, according to its logical value, as
denoting two or more than two individual things.

b\. Examples are: `prāṇāpānāú` *inspiration and expiration*,
`vrīhiyavāú` *rice and barley*, `ṛksāmé` *verse and chant*,
`kapotolukāú` *dove and owl*, `candrādityāu` *moon and sun*,
`hastyaçvāu` *the elephant and horse*, `ajāváyas` *goats and sheep*,
`devāsurā́s` *the gods and demons*, `atharvān̄girásas` *the Atharvans and
Angirases*, `sambādhatandryàs` *anxieties and fatigues*, `vidyākarmáṇī`
*knowledge and action*, `hastyaçvās` *elephants and horses;* of more
than two members (no examples quotable from the older language),
`çayyāsanabhogās` *lying, sitting, and eating*,
`brāhmaṇakṣatriyaviṭçūdrās` *a Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaiçya, and Çūdra*,
`rogaçokaparītāpabandhanavyasanāni` *disease, pain, grief, captivity,
and misfortune*.

2\. c. The compound, without regard to the number denoted, or to the
gender of its constituents, becomes a neuter singular collective.

d\. Examples are: `iṣṭāpūrtám` *what is offered and bestowed*,
`ahorātrám` *a day and night*, `kṛtākṛtám` *the done and undone*,
`bhūtabhavyám` *past and future*, `keçaçmaçrú` *hair and beard*,
`oṣadhivanaspatí` *plants and trees*, `candratārakám` *moon and stars*,
`ahinakulam` *snake and ichneumon*, `çirogrīvam` *head and neck*,
`yūkāmakṣīkamatkuṇam` *lice, flies, and bugs*.

1254\. a. That a stem in `ṛ` as prior member sometimes takes its
nominative form, in `ā`, was noticed above, 1250 f.

b\. A stem as final member is sometimes changed to an `a`-form to make a
neuter collective: thus, `chattropānaham` *an umbrella and a shoe*.

c\. The grammarians give rules as to the order of the elements composing
a copulative compound: thus, that a more important, a briefer, a
vowel-initial member should stand first; and that one ending in a should
be placed last. Violations of them all, however, are not infrequent.

1255\. In the oldest language (RV.), copulative compounds such as appear
later are quite rare, the class being chiefly represented by dual
combinations of the names of divinities and other personages, and of
personified natural objects.

a\. In these combinations, each name has regularly and usually the dual
form, and its own accent; but, in the very rare instances (only three
occurrences out of more than three hundred) in which other cases than
the nom.-acc.-voc. are formed, the final member only is inflected.

b\. Examples are:
`índrāsómā, índrāvíṣṇū, índrābṛ́haspátī, agnī́ṣómāu, turváçāyádū, dyā́vāpṛthivī́, uṣā́sānáktā`
(and, with intervening words, `náktā`...`uṣā́sā`), `sū́ryāmā́sā`. The only
plural is `indrāmarutas` (voc.). The cases of other than nominative form
are `mitrā́váruṇābhyām` and `mitrā́váruṇayos` (also `mitráyor váruṇayoḥ`),
and `índrāváruṇayos` (each once only).

c\. From `dyā́vapṛthivī́` is made the very peculiar genitive
`diváspṛthivyós` (4 times: AV. has `dyā́vāpṛthivī́bhyām` and
`dyā́vāpṛthivyós`).

d\. In one compound, `parjányavā́tā`, the first member (RV., once) does
not have the dual ending along with the double accent (`indranāsatyā`,
voc., is doubtful as to accent). In several, the double accent is
wanting, while yet the double designation of number is present: thus,
`indrāpūṣṇós` (beside `índrāpūṣáṇā`), `somāpūṣábhyām` (`somāpūṣaṇā`
occurs only as voc.), `vātāparjanyā́, sūryācandramásā`, and `indrāgnī́`
(with `indrāgníbhyām` and `indrāgnyós`): `somārudrāú` is accented only
in ÇB. And in one, `indravāyū́`, form and accent are both accordant with
the usages of the later language.

e\. Of other copulatives, like those made later, the RV. has the plural
`ajāváyas`, the duals `ṛksāmé, satyānṛté, sāçanānaçané`; also the neuter
collective `iṣṭāpūrtám`, and the substantively used neuter of a
copulative adjective, `nīlalohitám`. Further, the neuter plurals
`ahorātrā́ṇi` *nycthemera*, and `ukthārkā́` *praises and songs*, of which
the final members as independent words are not neuter. No one of these
words has more than a single occurrence.

1256\. In the later Vedic (AV.), the usage is much more nearly accordant
with that of the classical language, save that the class of neuter
singular collectives is almost wanting.

a\. The words with double dual form are only a small minority (a
quarter, instead of three quarters, as in RV.); and half of them have
only a single accent, on the final: thus, besides those in RV.,
`bhavārudrāú, bhavāçarvāú`; `agnāviṣṇū`, voc., is of anomalous form. The
whole number of copulatives is more than double that in RV.

b\. The only proper neuter collectives, composed of two nouns, are
`keçaçmaçrú` *hair and heard*, `āñjanābhyañjanám` *salve and ointment*,
and `kaçipūpabarhaṇám` *mat and pillow*, unified because of the virtual
unity of the two objects specified. Neuter singulars, used in a similar
collective way, of adjective compounds, are (besides those in RV.):
`kṛtākṛtám` *what is done and undone* (instead of *what is done and what
is undone*), `cittākūtám` *thought and desire*, `bhadrapāpám` *good and
evil*, `bhūtabhavyám` *past and future*.

1257\. Copulative compounds composed of adjectives which retain their
adjective character are made in the same manner, but are in comparison
rare.

a\. Examples are `çuklakṛṣṇa` *light and dark*, `sthalajāudaka`
*terrestrial and aquatic*, `dāntarājatasāuvarṇa` *of ivory and silver
and gold*, used distributively; and `vṛttapīna` *round and plump*,
`çāntānukūla` *tranquil and propitious*, `hṛṣitasragrajohīna` *wearing
fresh garlands and free from dust*, `niṣekādiçmaçānānta` *beginning with
conception and ending with burial*, used cumulatively; `nā ’tiçītoṣṇa`
*not over cold or hot*, used alternatively; `kṣaṇadṛṣṭanaṣṭa` *seen for
a moment and then lost*, `cintitopasthita` *at hand as soon as thought
of*, in more pregnant sense.

b\. In the Veda, the only examples noted are the cumulative `nīlalohitá`
and `iṣṭāpūrtá` etc., used in the neut. sing. as collectives (as pointed
out above), with `tāmradhūmrá` *dark tawny;* and the distributive
`dakṣiṇasavyá` *right and left*, `saptamāṣṭamá` *seventh and eighth*,
and `bhadrapāpá` *good and bad* (beside the corresponding neut.
collective). Such combinations as `satyānṛté` *truth and falsehood*,
`priyāpriyā́ṇi` *things* *agreeable and disagreeable*, where each
component is used substantively, are, of course, not to be separated
from the ordinary noun-compounds.

c\. A special case is that of the compound adjectives of direction: as
`uttarapūrva` *north-east*, `prāgdakṣiṇa` *south-east',
`dakṣiṇapaçcima`* south-west*, etc.: compare 1291 b.*

1258\. In accentuated texts, the copulative compounds have uniformly the
accent (acute) on the final of the stem.

a\. Exceptions are a case or two in AV., where doubtless the reading is
false: thus, `vātāparjanyā̀` (once: beside -`nyáyos`), `devamanuṣyā̀ s`
(once: ÇB. -`syá`), `brahmarājanyā̀ bhyām` (also VS.); further,
`vākopavākyà` (ÇB.), `açanāyā́pipāse` (ÇB.).

1259\. An example or two are met with of adverbial copulatives: thus,
`áhardivi` *day by day*, `sāyámprātar` *at evening and in the morning*.
They have the accent of their prior member. Later occur also
`bāhyantar, pratyagdakṣiṇā, pratyagudak`.

1260\. Repeated words. In all ages of the language, nouns and pronouns
and adjectives and particles are not infrequently repeated, to give an
intensive, or a distributive, or a repetitional meaning.

a\. Though these are not properly copulative compounds, there is no
better connection in which to notice them than here. They are, as the
older language shows, a sort of compound, of which the prior member has
its own independent accent, and the other is without accent: hence they
are most suitably and properly written (as in the Vedic pada-texts) as
compounds. Thus: `jahy èṣaṁ váraṁ-varam` *slay of them each beat man;*
`divé-dive` or `dyávi-dyavi` *from day to day;*
`án̄gād-an̄gāl lómno-lomnaḥ párvaṇi-parvaṇi` *from every limb, from every
hair, in each joint;* `prá-pra yajñápatiṁ tira` *make the master of the
sacrifice live on and on;* `bhū́yo-bhūyaḥ çváḥ-çvaḥ` *further and
further, tomorrow and again tomorrow;* `ékayāi-’kayā` *with in each case
one;* `vayáṁ-vayam` *our very selves*.

b\. Exceptional and rare cases are those of a personal verb-form
repeated: thus, `píbā-piba` (RV.), `yájasva-yajasva` (ÇB.), `véda-veda`
(? ÇB.); — and of two words repeated: thus, `yā́vad vā-yāvad vā` (ÇB.),
`yatamé vā-yatame vā` (ÇB.).

c\. In a few instances, a word is found used twice in succession without
that loss of accent the second time which makes the repetition a virtual
composite: thus, `nū́ nú` (RV.), `sáṁ sám` (AV.), `ihé ’há` (AV.),
`anáyā- ’náyā` (ÇB.), `stuhí stuhí` (RV., acc. to pada-text).

d\. The class of combinations here described is called by the native
grammarians `āmreḍita` *added unto* (?).

1261\. Finally may be noticed in passing the compound numerals,
`ékādaça` *11*, `dvā́viṅçati` *22*, `tríçata` *103*, `cátuḥsahasra`
*1004*, and so on (476 ff.), as a special and primitive class of
copulatives. They are accented on the prior member. 

II\. Determinative Compounds.

1262\. A noun or adjective is often combined into a compound with a
preceding determining or qualifying word — a noun, or adjective, or
adverb. Such a compound is conveniently called determinative.

1263\. This is the class of compounds which is of most general and
frequent occurrence in all branches of Indo-European language. Its two
principal divisions have been already pointed out: thus, A. Dependent
compounds, in which the prior member is a substantive word (noun or
pronoun or substantively used adjective), standing to the other member
in the relation of a case dependent on it; and B. Descriptive compounds,
in which the prior member is an adjective, or other word having the
value of an adjective, qualifying a noun; or else an adverb or its
equivalent, qualifying an adjective. Each of these divisions then falls
into two sub-divisions, according as the final member, and therefore the
whole compound, is a noun or an adjective.

a\. The whole class of determinatives is called by the Hindu grammarians
`tatpuruṣa` (the term is a specimen of the class, meaning *his man*);
and the second division, the descriptives, has the special name of
`karmadhāraya` (of obscure application: the literal sense is something
like *office-bearing*). After their example, the two divisions are in
European usage widely known by these two names respectively.

A. Dependent Compounds.

1264\. Dependent Noun-compounds. In this division, the case-relation of
the prior member to the other may be of any kind; but, in accordance
with the usual relations of one noun to another, it is oftenest
genitive, and least often accusative.

a\. Examples are: of genitive relation, `devasenā́` *army of gods*,
`yamadūtá` *Yama's messenger*, `jīvaloká` *the world of the living*, ``
`indradhanús` *Indra's bow*, `brahmagavī́` *the Brahman's cow*,
`viṣagirí` *poison-mount*, `mitralābha` *acquisition of friends*,
`mūrkhaçatāni` *hundreds of fools*, `vīrasenasuta` *Vī́rasena's son*,
`rājendra` *chief of kings*, `asmatputrās` *our sons*, `tadvacas` *his
words;* — of dative, `pādodaka` *water for the feet*, `māsanicaya`
*accumulation for a month;* — of instrumental, `ātmasādṛçya` *likeness
with self*, `dhānyārtha` *wealth acquired by grain*, `dharmapatnī`
*lawful spouse*, `pitṛbandhú` *paternal relation;* — of ablative,
`apsaraḥsambhava` *descent from a nymph*, `madviyoga` *separation from
me*, `cāurabhaya` *fear of a thief;* — of locative, `jalakrīḍā` *sport
in the water*, `grāmavāsa` *abode in the village*, `puruṣānṛta` *untruth
about a man;* — of accusative, `nagaragamana` *going to the city*.

1265\. Dependent Adjective-compounds. In this division, only a very
small proportion of the compounds have an ordinary adjective as final
member; but usually a participle, or a derivative of agency with the
value of a participle. The prior member stands in any case-relation
which is possible in the independent construction of such words.

a\. Examples are: of locative relation, `sthālīpakva` *cooked in a pot*,
`açvakovida` *knowing in horses*, `vayaḥsama` *alike in age*,
`yudhiṣṭhira` *steadfast in battle*, `tanū́çubhra` *beautiful in body;* —
of instrumental, `mātṛsadṛça` *like his mother;* — of dative, `gohita`
*good for cattle;* — of ablative, `bhavadanya` *other than you*,
`garbhāṣṭama` *eighth from birth*, `dṛçyetara` *other than visible* (i.
e. *invisible*); — of genitive, `bharataçreṣṭha` *best of the Bharatas*,
`dvijottama` *foremost of Brahmans;* — with participial words, in
accusative relation, `vedavíd` *Veda-knowing*, `annādá` *food-eating*,
`tanūpā́na` *body-protecting*, `satyavādín` *truth-speaking*,
`pattragata` *committed to paper* (lit. *gone to a leaf*); — in
instrumental, `madhupū́` *cleaning with honey*, `svayáṁkṛta` *self-made*,
`índragupta` *protected by Indra*, `vidyāhīna` *deserted by* (i. e.
*destitute of*) *knowledge;* — in locative, `hṛdayāvídh` *pierced in the
heart*, `ṛtvíj` *sacrificing in due season*, `divícara` *moving in the
sky;* — in ablative, `rājyabhraṣṭa` *fallen from the kingdom*,
`vṛkabhīta` *afraid of a wolf;* — in dative, `çaraṇāgata` *come for
refuge*.

1266\. We take up now some of the principal groups of compounds falling
under these two heads, in order to notice their specialities of
formation and use, their relative frequency, their accentuation, and so
on.

1267\. Compounds having as final member ordinary nouns (such, namely, as
do not distinctly exhibit the character of verbal nouns, of action or
agency) are quite common. They are regularly and usually accented on the
final syllable, without reference to the accent of either constituent.
Examples were given above (1264 a).

a. A principal exception with regard to accent is `páti` *master, lord*
(and its feminine `pátnī`), compounds with which usually retain the
accent of the prior member: thus,
`prajā́pati, vásupati, átithipati, gópati, gṛhápatnī`, etc. etc. (compare
the verbal nouns in `ti`, below, 1274). But in a few words `páti`
retains its own accent: thus, `viçpáti, rayipáti, paçupáti, vasupátnī`,
etc.; and the more general rule is followed in `apsarāpatí` and
`vrājapatí` (AV.), and `nadīpatí` (VS.), `citpatí` (MS.; elsewhere
`citpáti`).

b\. Other exceptions are sporadic only: for example,
`janarā́jan, devavárman, hiraṇyatéjas, pṛtanāháva, godhū́ma` and
`çakadhū́ma` (but `dhūmá`); `vācā́stena`.

c\. The appearance of a case-form in such compounds is rare: examples
are `dívodasa, vācā́stena, uccāíḥçravas, uccāírghoṣa, dūrébhās` (the
three last in possessive application).

d\. A number of compounds are accented on both members: thus,
`çácīpáti, sádaspáti, bṛ́haspáti, vánaspáti, ráthaspáti, jā́spáti` (also
`jā́spati`), `nárāçaṅsa, tánūnáptṛ, tánūnápāt` (`tanū́` as independent
word), `çúnaḥçépa`. And ÇB. has a long list of metronymics having the
anomalous accentuation `kāútsīpútra, gā́rgīpútra`, etc.

1268\. The compounds having an ordinary adjective as final member are
(as already noticed) comparatively few.

a\. So far as can be gathered from the scanty examples occurring in the
older language, they retain the accent of the prior member: thus,
`gáviṣṭhira` (AV. `gavíṣṭhira`),
`tanū́çubhra, máderaghu, yajñádhira, sā́mavipra, tilámiçra` (but `tíla`);
but `kṛṣṭapacyá` *ripening in cultivated soil*.

1269\. The adjective dependent compounds having as final member the bare
root — or, if it end in a short vowel, generally with an added `t` — are
very numerous in all periods of the language, as has been already
repeatedly noticed (thus, 383 f–h, 1147). They are accented on the root.

a\. In a very few instances, the accent of words having apparently or
conjecturally this origin is otherwise laid: thus,
`áṅsatra, ánarviç, svā́vṛj, pratyákṣadṛç, púraṁdhi, óṣadhi, áramiṣ, uçádagh, vatsápa, ábda`.

b\. Before a final root-stem appears not very seldom a case-form: for
example,
`pataṁgá, girāvṛ́dh, dhiyājúr, akṣṇayādrúh, hṛdispṛ́ç, divispṛ́ç, vanesáh, diviṣád, an̄geṣṭhā́, hṛsvás, pṛtsutúr, apsujá`.

C. The root-stem has sometimes a middle or passive value: for example,
`manoyúj` *yoked* (*yoking themselves*) *by the will*, `hṛdayāvídh`
*pierced to the heart*, `manuja` *born of Manu*.

1270\. Compounds made with verbal derivatives in `a`, both of action and
of agency, are numerous, and take the accent usually on their final
syllable (as in the case of compounds with verbal prefixes: 1148 m).

a. Examples are: `hastagrābhá` *hand-grasping*, `devavandá`
*god-praising*, `haviradá` *devouring the offering*, `bhuvanacyavá`
*shaking the world*, `vrātyabruvá` *calling one's self a* `vrātya`;
`akṣaparājayá` *failure at play*, `vaṣaṭkārá` *utterance of* `vashaṭ`,
`gopoṣá` *prosperity in cattle*, `an̄gajvará` *pain in the limbs*.

b\. In a few instances, the accent is (as in compounds with ordinary
adjectives: above, 1268) that of the prior member: thus,
`marúdvṛdha, sutékara, divícara` (and other more questionable words).
And `dúgha` *milking, yielding* is so accented as final: thus,
`madhudúgha, kāmadúgha`.

c\. Case-forms are especially frequent in the prior members of compounds
with adjective derivatives in `a` showing `guṇa`-strengthening of the
root: thus, fox example,
`abhayaṁkará, yudhiṁgamá, dhanaṁjayá, puraṁdará, viçvambhará, divākará, talpeçayá, diviṣṭambhá`.

1271\. Compounds with verbal nouns and adjectives in `ana` are very
numerous, and have the accent always on the radical syllable (as in the
case of compounds with verbal prefixes: 1150 e).

a\. Examples are: `keçavárdhana` *hair-increasing*, `āyuṣpratáraṇa`
*life-lengthening*, `tanūpā́na` *body-protecting;* `devahéḍana` *hatred
of the gods*, `puṁsúvana` *giving birth to males*.

b\. A very few apparent exceptions as regards accent are really cases
where the derivative has lost its verbal character: thus, `yamasādaná`
*Yama's realm*, `āchádvidhāna` *means of protection*.

c\. An accusative-form is sometimes found before a derivative in `ana`:
thus, `sarūpaṁkáraṇa, ayakṣmaṁkáraṇa, subhāgaṁkáraṇa, vanaṁkáraṇa`.

1272\. a. The action-nouns in `ya` (1213) are not infrequent in
composition as final member, and retain their own proper accent (as in
combination with prefixes). Sufficient examples were given above (1213).

b\. The same is true of the equivalent feminines in `ya`: see above,
1213 d.

c\. The gerundives in `ya` (1213) hardly occur in the older language in
combination with other elements than prefixes. The two `nīvibhāryà` and
`prathamavāsyà` (the latter a descriptive) have the accent of the
independent words of the same form; `balavijñayá` and `áçvabudhya` (?)
are inconsistent with these and with one another.

1273\. Compounds made with the passive participle in `ta` or `na` have
the accent of their prior member (as do the combinations of the same
words with prefixes: 1085 a).

a\. Examples are: `hástakṛta` *made with the hand*, `vīrájāta` *born of
a hero*, `ghóṣabuddha` *awakened by noise*, `prajā́patisṛṣṭa` *created by
Prajāpati*, `devátta` *given by the gods;* and, of participles combined
with prefixes, `índraprasūta` *incited by Indra*, `bṛ́haspátipraṇutta`
*driven away by Brihaspati*, `ulkā́bhihata` *struck by a thunderbolt*,
`vájravihata`, `` `saṁvatsarásammita` *commensurate with the year*. AV.
has the anomalous `apsúsaṁçita` *quickened by the waters*.

b\. A number of exceptions occur, in which the final syllable of the
compound has the accent: for example,
`agnitaptá, indrotá, pitṛvittá, rathakrītá, agnidagdhá` (beside
`agnídagdha`), `kaviçastá` (beside `kavíçasta`), `kavipraçastá`.

c\. One or two special usages may be noticed. The participle `gata`,
*gone to*, as final of a compound, is used in a loose way in the later
language to express relation of various kinds: thus, `jagatīgata`
*existing in the world*, `tvadgata` *belonging to thee*, `sakhīgata`
*relating to a friend*, `citragata` *in a picture*, `putragataṁ sneham`
*affection toward a son*, etc. The participle `bhūta` *been, become* is
used in composition with a noun as hardly more than a grammatical device
to give it an adjective form: thus, `idaṁ tamobhūtam` *this creation,
being darkness* (*existing in the condition of darkness*);
`tāṁ ratnabhūtaṁ lokasya` *her, being the pearl of the world;*
`kṣetrabhūtā smṛtā nārī bījabhūtah smrtaḥ pumān` *a woman is regarded as
a field; a man, as seed;* and so on.

d\. The other participles only seldom occur as finals of compounds:
thus, `prāsakārmukabibhrat` *bearing javelin and bow*, `açāstravidvāṅs`
*not knowing the text-books*, `arjunadarçivāṅs` *having seen Arjuna*,
`apriyaçaṅsivāṅs` *announcing what is disagreeable*, `gāutamabruvāṇá`
*calling himself Gautama*.

1274\. Compounds with derivatives in `ti` have (like combinations with
the prefixes: 1157 e) the accent of the prior member.

a\. Examples are: `dhánasāti` *winning of wealth*, `sómapīti`
*soma-drinking*, `deváhūti` *invocation of the gods*, `námaūkti`
*utterance of homage*, `havyádāti` *presentation of offerings;* and so
`tokásāti, deváhiti, rudráhūti, sūktókti, svagā́kṛti, díviṣṭi`.

b\. In `nemádhiti, medhásāti, vanádhiti` (all RV.), the accent of the
prior member is changed from penult to final.

c\. Where the verbal character of the derivative is lost, the general
rule of final accent (1267) is followed: thus, `devahetí` *weapon of the
gods*, `devasumatí` *favor of the gods*, `brahmacití` *Brahman-pile*.
Also in `sarvajyāní` *entire ruin*, the accent is that of compounds with
ordinary nouns.

1275\. Compounds with a derivative in `in` as final member have (as in
all other cases) the accent on the `ín`.

a\. Thus, `ukthaçaṅsín` *psalm-singing*, `vratacārín` *vow-performing*,
`ṛṣabhadāyín` *bullock-giving*, `satyavādín` *truth-speaking*,
`çroṇipratodín` *thigh-pounding*.

1276\. There is a group of compounds with derivatives in `i`, having the
accent on the penult or radical syllable.

a\. Thus, `pathirákṣi` *road-protecting*, `havirmáthi`
*sacrifice-disturbing*, `ātmadū́ṣi` *soul-harming*, `pathiṣádi` *sitting
in the path*, `sahobhári` ' ***strength-bearing*, `vasuváni` *winning
good-things*, `dhanasáni` *gaining wealth*, `manomúṣi` *mind-stealing*,
`phalagráhi` *setting fruit;* and, from reduplicated root, `urucákri`
*making room*. Compounds with -`sáni` and -`váni` are especially
frequent in Veda and Brāhmaṇa; as independent words, nouns, these are
accented `saní` and `vaní`. In many cases, the words are not found in
independent use. Combinations with prefixes do not occur in sufficient
numbers to establish a distinct rule, but they appear to be oftenest
accented on the suffix (1155 f).**

b\. From √`han` are made in composition -`ghni` and -`ghnī`, with accent
on the ending: thus, `sahasraghní, ahighnī́, çvaghnī́`; -`dhi` from
√`dhā`, (1155 g) has the accent in its numerous compounds: thus,
`iṣudhí, garbhadhí, pucchadhí`.

1277\. Compounds with derivatives in `van` have (like combinations with
prefixes: 1169 c) the accent of the final member: namely, on the radical
syllable.

a\. Thus, `somapā́van` *soma-drinking*, `baladā́van` *strength-giving*,
`pāpakṛ́tvan` *evil-doing*, `bahusū́van` *much-yielding*, `talpaçī́van`
*lying on a couch*, `rathayā́van` *going in a chariot*, `druṣádvan`
*sitting on a tree*, `açrétvarī` f. *going at the head*. The accent of
the obscure words `mātaríçvan` and `mātaríbhvan` is anomalous.

b\. The few compounds with final `man` appear to follow the same rule as
those with `van`: thus, `svādukṣádman` *sharing out sweets*, `āçuhéman`
*steed-impelling*.

1278\. Compounds with other derivatives, of rare or sporadic occurrence,
may be briefly noticed: thus, in `u`,
`rāṣṭradipsú, devapīyú, govindú, vanargú` (?): compare 1178 e; — in `nu`
or `tnu`, `lokakṛtnú, surūpakṛtnú`: compare 1196; — in `tṛ`,
`nṛpātṛ́, mandhātṛ́, haskartṛ́` (`vasudhā́taras`, AV., is doubtless a false
reading). The derivatives in `as` are of infrequent occurrence in
composition (as in combination with prefixes: above, 1151 k), and appear
to be treated as ordinary nouns: thus, `yajñavacás` (but `hiraṇyatéjas`,
AV.).

B. Descriptive Compounds.

1279\. In this division of the class of determinatives, the prior member
stands to the other in no distinct case-relation, but qualifies it
adjectively or adverbially, according as it (the final member) is noun
or adjective.

a\. Examples are: `nīlotpala` *blue lotus*, `sarvaguṇa` *all good
quality*, `priyasakha` *dear friend*, `maharṣí` *great-sage*,
`rajatapātrá` *silver cup;* `ájñata` *unknown*, `súkṛta` *well done*,
`duṣkṛ́t` *ill-doing*, `puruṣṭutá` *much praised*, `púnarṇava` *renewed*.

b\. The prior member is not always an adjective before a noun, or an
adverb before an adjective; other parts of speech are sometimes used
adjectively and adverbially in that position.

c\. The boundary between descriptive and dependent compounds is not an
absolute one; in certain cases it is open to question, for instance,
whether a prior noun, or adjective with noun-value, is used more in a
case-relation, or adverbially.

d\. Moreover, where the final member is a derivative having both noun
and adjective value, it is not seldom doubtful whether an adjective
compound is to be regarded as descriptive, made with final adjective, or
possessive, made with final noun. Sometimes the accent of the word
determines its character in this respect, but not always.

e\. A satisfactorily simple and perspicuous classification of the
descriptive compounds is not practicable; we cannot hold apart
throughout the compounds of noun and of adjective value, but may better
group both together, as they appear with prefixed elements of various
kinds.

1280\. The simplest case is that in which a noun as final member is
preceded by a qualifying adjective as prior member.

a\. In this combination, both noun and adjective may be of any kind,
verbal or otherwise. The accent is (as in the corresponding class of
dependent noun-compounds: 1267) on the final syllable.

b\. Thus, `ajñātayakṣmá` *unknown disease*, `mahādhaná` *great wealth*,
`kṣipraçyená` *swift hawk*, `kṛṣṇaçakuní` *black bird*, `dakṣiṇāgní`
*southern fire*, `urukṣití` *wide abode*, `adharahanú` *lower jaw*,
`itarajaná` *other folks*, `sarvātmán` *whole soul*, `ekavīrá` *sole
hero*, `saptarṣí` *seven sages*, `tṛtīyasavaná` *third libation*,
`ekonaviṅçatí` *a score diminished by one*, `jāgratsvapná` *waking
sleep*, `yāvayatsakhá` *defending friend*, `apakṣīyamāṇapakṣá` *waning
half*.

c\. There are not a few exceptions as regards accent. Especially,
compounds with `víçva` (in composition, accented `viçvá`), which itself
retains the accent: thus, `viçvádevās` *all the gods*, `viçvámānuṣa`
*every man*. For words in `ti`, see below, 1287 d. Sporadic cases are
`madhyáṁdina, vṛṣkā́pi`, both of which show an irregular shift of tone in
the prior member; and a few others.

d\. Instead of an adjective, the prior member is in a few cases a noun
used appositionally, or with a quasi-adjective value. Thus, `rājayakṣmá`
*king-disease*, `brahmarṣi` *priest-sage*, `rājarṣi` *king-sage*,
`rājadanta` *king-tooth*, `devajana` *god-folk*, `duhitṛjana`
*daughter-person*, `çamīlatā` *creeper named* `çamī`, `muṣikākhyā` *the
name "mouse"*, `jayaçabda` *the word "conquer"*, `ujhitaçabda` *the word
"deserted";* or, more figuratively, `gṛhanaraka` *house-hell* (*house
which is a hell*), `çāpāgni` *curse-fire* (*consuming curse*).

e\. This group is of consequence, inasmuch as in possessive application
it is greatly extended, and forms a numerous class of appositional
compounds: see below, 1302.

f\. This whole subdivision, of nouns with preceding qualifying
adjectives, is not uncommon; but it is greatly (in AV., for example,
more than five times) exceeded in frequency by the sub-class of
possessives of the same form: see below, 1298.

1281\. The adverbial words which are most freely and commonly used as
prior members of compounds, qualifying the final member, are the verbal
prefixes and the words of direction related with them, and the
inseparable prefixes, `a` or `an, su, dus`, etc. (1121). These are
combined not only with adjectives, but also, in quasi-adjectival value,
with nouns; and the two classes of combinations will best be treated
together.

1282\. Verbal adjectives and nouns with preceding adverbs. As the
largest and most important class under this head might properly enough
be regarded the derivatives with preceding verbal prefixes. These,
however, have been here reckoned rather as derivatives from roots
combined with prefixes (1141), and have been treated under the head of
derivation, in the preceding chapter. In taking up the others, we will
begin with the participles.

1283\. The participles belonging to the tense-systems — those in `ant`
(or `at`), `māna, āna, vāṅs` — are only rarely compounded with any other
adverbial element than the negative `a` or `an`, which then takes the
accent.

a\. Examples are:
`ánadant, ádadat, ánaçnant, ásravant, álubhyant, ádāsyant, áditsant, ádevayant; ámanyamāna, áhiṅsāna, áchidyamāna; ádadivāṅs, ábibhīvāṅs, atasthāna`;
and, with verbal prefixes,
`ánapasphurant, ánāgamiṣyant, ánabhyāgamiṣyant, ávirādhayant, ávicācalat, ápratimanyūyamāna`.

b\. Exceptions in regard to accent are very few:
`arundhatī́, ajárantī, acodánt` (RV., once: doubtless a false reading;
the simple participle is `códant`); AV. has `anipádyamāna` for RV.
`ánipadyamāna` (and the published text has `asaṁyánt`, with a part of
the manuscripts); ÇB. has `akāmáyamāna`.

c\. Of other compounds than with the negative prefix have been noted in
the Veda `-punardīyamāna` (in `ápunard-`) and `súvidvāṅs`. In
`alalābhávant` and `jañjanābhávant` (RV.), as in `astaṁyánt` and
`astameṣyánt` (AV.), we have participles of a compound conjugation
(1091), in which, as has been pointed out, the accent is as in
combinations with the verbal prefixes.

1284. The passive (or past) participle in `ta` or `na` is much more
variously compounded; and in general (as in the case of the verbal
prefixes: 1085 a) the preceding adverbial element has the accent.

a\. Thus, with the negative `a` or `an` (by far the most common case):
`ákṛta, ádabdha, áriṣṭa, ánādhṛṣṭa, áparājita, ásaṁkhyāta, ánabhyārūḍha, áparimitasamṛddha`;
— with `su, sújāta, súhuta, súsaṁçita, svàraṁkṛta`; — with
`dus, dúçcarita, dúrdhita` and `dúrhita, dúḥçṛta`; — with other
adverbial words,
`dáṅsujūta, návajata, sánaçruta, svayáṁkṛta, trípratiṣṭhita`: `áraṁkṛta`
and `kakajā́kṛta` are rather participles of a compound conjugation.

b\. Exceptions in regard to accent are: with `a` or `an`,
`anāçastá, apraçastá`, and, with the accent of the participle retracted
to the root, `amṛ́ta, adṛ́ṣṭa, acítta, ayúta` *myriad*, `atū́rta` (beside
`átūrta`), `asū́rta` (? beside `sū́rta`); — with `su` (nearly half as
numerous as the regular cases),
`subhūtá, sūktá, supraçastá, svā́kta, sukṛtá` and `sujātá` (beside
`súkṛta` and `sújāta`), and a few others; with `dus` (quite as numerous
as the regular cases), `duritá` (also `dúrita`), `duruktá, duṣkṛtá`
(also `dúṣkṛta`), `durbhūtá`; with `sa, sajātá`; with other adverbs,
`amotá, ariṣṭutá, tuvijātá, prācīnopavītá, tadānīṁdugdhá, prātardugdhá`,
etc., and the compounds with
`puru, purujātá, puruprajātá, purupraçastá, puruṣṭutá`, etc., and with
`svayam, svayaṁkṛtá` etc. The proper name `aṣāḍhá` stands beside
`áṣāḍha`; and AV. has `abhinná` for RV. `ábhinna`.

1285\. The gerundives occur almost only in combination with the negative
prefix, and have usually the accent on the final syllable.

a\. Examples are: `anāpyá, anindyá, abudhyá, asahyá, ayodhyá, amokyá`;
`adviṣeṇyá`; `ahnavāyyá`; and, along with verbal prefixes, the cases are
`asaṁkhyeyá, apramṛṣyá, anapavṛjyá, anatyudyá, anādhṛṣyá, avimokyá, anānukṛtyá`
(the accent of the simple word being `saṁkhyéya` etc.).

b\. Exceptions in regard to accent are:
`ánedya, ádābhya, ágohya, ájoṣya, áyabhya`. The two `anavadharṣyà` and
`anativyādhyà` (both AV.) belong to the `yà`-division (1213 b) of
gerundives, and have retained the accent of the simple word. And
`ághnya` and `aghnyá` occur together.

c\. The only compounds of these words with other adverbial elements in
V. are `súyabhya` (accented like its twin `áyabhya`) and `prathamavāsyà`
(which retains the final circumflex), and perhaps `ekavādyá`.

d\. The neuter nouns of the same form (1213 c: except `sadhástutya`)
retain their own accent after an adverbial prior member: thus,
`purvapā́yya, pūrvapéya, amutrabhū́ya`; and `sahaçéyya`. And the negatived
gerundives instanced above are capable of being viewed as possessive
compounds with such nouns.

e\. Some of the other verbal derivatives which have rules of their own
as to accent etc. may be next noticed.

1286. The root-stem (pure root, or with `t` added after a short final
vowel: 1147 d) is very often combined with a preceding adverbial word,
of various kinds; and in the combination it retains the accent.

a\. Examples are: with inseparable prefixes, `adrúh` *not harming*,
`asū́` *not giving birth*, `arúc` *not shining;* `sukṛ́t` *well-doing*,
`suçrút` *hearing well;* `duṣkṛ́t` *ill-doing*, `dūḍā́ç` (199 d)
*impious;* `sayúj` *joining together*, `samád` *conflict;* `sahajā́`
*born together*, `sahaváh` *carrying together;* — with other adverbs,
`amājúr` *growing old at home*, `uparispṛ́ç` *touching upward*,
`punarbhū́` *appearing again*, `prātaryúj` *harnessed early*, `sadyaḥkrī́`
*bought the same day*, `sākaṁvṛ́dh` *growing up together*, `sadaṁdí`
*ever-binding*, `viṣūvṛ́t` *turning to both sides*, `vṛthāsáh` *easily
overcoming;* — with adjectives used adverbially, `uruvyác`
*wide-spreading*, `prathamajā́` *first-born*, `raghuṣyád` *swift-moving*,
`navasū́` *newly giving birth*, `ekajá` *only born*, `çukrapíç` *brightly
adorned*, `dvijá` *twice born*, `trivṛ́t` *triple*, `svarā́j`
*self-ruling;* — with nouns used adverbially, `çambhū́` *beneficent*,
`sūryaçvít` *shining like the sun*, `īçānakṛ́t` *acting as lord*,
`svayambhū́` *self-existent;* and, with accusative case-form, `pataṁgá`
*going by flight*.

b\. When, however, a root-stem is already in composition, whether with a
verbal prefix or an element of other character, the further added
negative itself takes the accent (as in case of an ordinary adjective:
below, 1288 a): thus, for example, `ánākṣit` *not abiding*, `ánāvṛt`
*not turning back*, `ávidviṣ` *not showing hostility*, `áduṣkṛt` *not
ill-doing*, `ánaçvadā` *not giving a horse*, `ápaçuhan` *not slaying
cattle* (`anāgā́s` would be an exception, if it contained √`gā`: which is
very unlikely). Similar combinations with `su` seem to retain the
radical accent: thus, `supratúr, svābhū́, svāyúj`: `svā́vṛj` is an
unsupported exception.

c\. A few other exceptions occur, mostly of doubtful character, as
`prátiprāç, sadhástha, ádhrigu`, and the words having `añc` as final
member (407 ff.: if this element is not, after all, a suffix) compare
1269 a.

1287\. Other verbal derivatives, requiring to be treated apart from the
general body of adjectives, are few and of minor importance. Thus:

a\. The derivatives in `a` are in great part of doubtful character,
became of the possibility of their being used with substantive value to
make a possessive compound. The least ambiguous, probably, are the
derivatives from present-stems (1148 j), which have the accent on the
suffix: thus,
`asunvá, apaçyá, akṣudhyá, avidasyá, anāmṛṇá, sadāpṛṇá, punarmanyá`; and
with them belong such cases as
`stṛpá, avṛdhá, araṁgamá, urukramá, evāvadá, satrāsahá, punaḥsará, puraḥsará`;
and the nouns `sāyambhavá, sahacārá, prātaḥsāvá, mithoyodhá`.
Differently accented, on the other hand, although apparently of the same
formation, are such as `ánapasphura, ánavahvara` (compare the compounds
noticed at 1286 b),
`sadā́vṛdha, sū́bharva, nyagródha, puroḍā́ça, sadhamā́da, sudúgha, supáca, suháva`,
and others. Words like `adábha, durháṇa, sukára, suyáma`, are probably
possessives.

b. The derivatives in van keep in general the accent of the final
member, on the root (compare 1169 c, 1277): thus, `āçupátvan` and
`raghupátvan` *swift-flying*, `puroyā́van` *going in front*, `sukṛ́tvan`
*well-doing;* and `sutárman` and `suváhman` and `raghuyā́man` are
probably to be classed with them. But the negative prefix has the accent
even before these: thus, `áyajvan, árāvan, áprayutvan`; and
`satyámadvan` (if it be not possessive) has the accent of its prior
member.

c\. A few words in `i` seem to have (as in dependent compounds: 1276) he
accent on the radical syllable: thus, `durgṛ́bhi, ṛjuváni, tuviṣváṇi`.

d\. The derivatives in `ti` are variously treated: the negative prefix
has always the accent before them: as, `ácitti, ábhūti, ánāhūti`; with
`su` and `dus`, the compound is accented now on the prefix and now on
the final, and in some words on either (`súnīti` and `sunītí`, `dúṣṭuti`
and `duṣṭutí`); with other elements, the accent of the prefix prevails:
thus, `sáhuti, sadhástuti, puróhiti, pūrvápīti, pūrvyástuti`.

e\. The derivatives in `in` have, as in general, the accent on the
suffix: thus, `pūrvāsín, bahucārín, sādhudevín, savāsín, kevalādín`.
But, with the negative prefix, `ánāmin, ávitārin`.

f\. Other combinations are too various in treatment, or are represented
by too few examples in accentuated texts, to justify the setting up of
rules respecting them.

1288\. Of the remaining combinations, those made with the inseparable
prefixes form in some measure a class by themselves.

1\. a. The negative prefix `a` or `an`, when it directly negatives the
word to which it is added, has a very decided tendency to take the
accent.

b\. We have seen above (1283) that it does so even in the case of
present and perfect and future participles, although these in
combination with a verbal prefix retain their own accent (1085: but
there are exceptions, as `avadánt, apaçyánt`, etc. ÇB.); and also in the
case of a root-stem, if this be already compounded with another element
(1286 b). And the same is true of its other combinations.

c\. Thus, with various adjective words:
`átandra, ádabhra, ádāçuri, ánṛju, ádevayu, átṛṣṇaj, átavyāṅs, ánāmin, ádvayāvin, ápracetas, ánapatyavant, ánupadasvant, ápramāyuka, ámamri, áprajajñi, ávidīdhayu, ánagnidagdha, ákāmakarçana, ápaçcāddaghvan`.
Further, with nouns,
`ápati, ákumāra, ábrāhmaṇa, ávidyā, āçraddhā, ávrātya`.

d\. But there are a number of exceptions, in which the accent is on the
final syllable, without regard to the original accentuation of the final
member: thus, for example,
`acitrá, açrīrá, aviprá, ayajñiyá, anāsmāká, asthūrí, anāçú, ajarayú, anāmayitnú`;
and in `amítra` *enemy*, and `avī́ra` *unmanly*, there is a retraction of
the accent from the final syllable of the final member to its penult. 

2\. e. The prefixes `su` and `dus` have this tendency in a much less
degree, and their compounds are very variously accented, now on the
prefix, now on the final syllable, now on the accented syllable of the
final member; and occasionally on either of two syllables.

f\. Thus, for example,
`súbhadra, súvipra, súpakva, súbrāhmaṇa, súbhiṣaj`;
`sutīrthá, suvasaná, suṣārathí, supāçá, sucitrá`; `suçéva, suhótṛ`:
`suvī́ra` is like `avī́ra`; — `durmitrá, duṣvápnya`; and `ducchúnā` (168
b), with irregular retraction of accent (`çuná`).

3\. g. The compounds with `sa` are too few to furnish occasion for
separate mention; and those with the interrogative prefix in its various
forms are also extremely rare in the Veda: examples are
`kucará, katpayá, kábandha, kunannamá, kumārá, kúyava, kuṣáva`.

1289\. The verbal prefixes are sometimes used in a general adverbial
way, qualifying a following adjective or noun.

a\. Examples of such combinations are not numerous in the Veda. Their
accentuation is various, though the tone rests oftenest on the
preposition. Thus, `ádhipati` *over-lord*, `áparūpa` *mis-form*,
`prátiçatru` *opposing foe*, `prápada` *fore part of foot*, `práṇapāt`
*great-grandchild*, `vípakva` *quite done*, `sámpriya` *mutually dear;*
`upajíhvikā` *side tongue* (with retraction of the accent of `jihvā́`);
`antardeçá` *intermediate direction*, `pradív` *forward heaven*,
`prapitāmahá` (also `prápitāmaha`) *great-grandfather*, `pratijaná`
*opponent*, `vyadhvá` *midway*. These compounds are more frequent with
possessive value (below, 1305).

b\. This use of the verbal prefixes is more common later, and some of
them have a regular value in such compounds. Thus, `ati` denotes excess,
as in `atidūra` *very far*, `atibhaya` *exceeding fear*, `átipūruṣa`
(ÇB.) *chief man;* `adhi`, superiority, as in `adhidanta` *upper-tooth*,
`adhistrī` *chief woman;* `abhi` is intensive, as in `abhinamra` *much
incliving*, `abhinava` *span-new*, `abhirucira` *delightful;* `ā`
signifies *somewhat*, as in `ākuṭila` *somewhat crooked*, `ānīla`
*bluish;* `upa` denotes something accessory or secondary, as in
`upapurāṇa` *additional Purāna;* `pari`, excess, as in `paridurbala`
*very weak;* `prati`, opposition, as in `pratipakṣa` *opposing side*,
`pratipustaka` *copy;* `vi`, variation or excess, as in `vidūra` *very
far*, `vipāṇḍu` *greyish*, `vikṣudra` *respectively small;* `sam`,
completeness, as in `sampakva` *quite ripe*.

1290\. Other compounds with adverbial prior members are quite
irregularly accented.

Thus, the compounds with `puru`, on the final (compare the participles
with `puru`, 1284 b): as, `purudasmá`, `purupriyá`, `puruçcandrá`; those
with `púnar`, on the prior member, as
`púnarṇava, púnarmagha, púnaryuvan, púnarvasu` (but `punaḥsará` etc.);
those with `satás, satīná, satyá`, the same, as
`satómahant, satīnámanyu, satyámugra`; a few combinations of nouns in
`tṛ` and `ana` with adverbs akin with the prefixes, on the final
syllable, as `puraëtṛ́, puraḥsthātṛ́, upariçayaná, prātaḥsavaná`; and
miscellaneous cases are
`mithóavadyapa, háriçcandra, álpaçayu, sādhvaryá, yācchreṣṭhá` and
`yāvacchreṣṭhá, jyógāmayāvin`. 

1291\. One or two exceptional cases may be noted, as follows:

a\. An adjective is sometimes preceded by a noun standing toward it in a
quasi-adverbial relation expressive of comparison or likeness: e. g.
`çúkababhru` (VS.) *parrot-brown*, `ū́rṇāmṛdu` (TB.) *soft as wool*,
`prāṇapriya` *dear as life*, `kuçeçayarajomṛdu` *soft as lotus-pollen*,
`bakālīna` *hidden like a heron*, `mattamātan̄gagāmin` *moving like a
maddened elephant*.

b\. An adjective is now and then qualified by another adjective: e. g.
`kṛṣṇāita` *dark-gray*, `dhūmrárohita` *grayish red*: and compare the
adjectives of intermediate direction, 1257 c.

c\. The adjective `pūrva` is in the later language frequently used as
final member of a compound in which its logical value is that of an
adverb qualifying the other member (which is said to retain its own
accent). Thus, `dṛṣṭapūrva` *previously seen*, `pariṇītapūrva` *already
married*, `aparijñātapūrva` *not before known*, `somapītapūrva` *having
formerly drunk soma*, `strīpūrva` *formerly a woman*.

III\. Secondary Adjective Compounds.

1292\. a. A compound having a noun as its final member very often wins
secondarily the value of an adjective, being inflected in the three
genders to agree with the noun which it qualifies, and used in all the
constructions of an adjective.

b\. This class of compounds, as was pointed out above (1247. III.),
falls into the two divisions of A. Possessives, having their adjective
character given them by addition of the idea of *possessing*; and B.
those in which the final member is syntactically dependent on or
governed by the prior member.

A. Possessive Compounds.

1293\. The possessives are noun-compounds of the preceding class,
determinatives, of all its various subdivisions, to which is given an
adjective inflection, and which take on an adjective meaning of a kind
which is most conveniently and accurately defined by adding `having` or
`possessing` to the meaning of the determinative.

a\. Thus: the dependent `sūryatejás` *sun's brightness* becomes the
possessive `sū́ryatejas` *possessing the brightness of the sun;*
`yajñakāmá` *desire of sacrifice* becomes `yajñákāma` *having desire of
sacrifice;* the descriptive `bṛhadratha` *great chariot* becomes the
possessive `bṛhádratha` *having great chariots;* `áhasta` *not hand*
becomes `ahastá` *handless;* `durgandhi` *ill savor* becomes `durgándhi`
*of ill savor;* and so on.

b\. A copulative compound is not convertible into an adjective directly,
any more than is a simple noun, but requires, like the latter, a
possessive suffix or other means: e. g.
`vāgghastavant, doṣaguṇin, rajastamaska, açirogrīva, anṛgyajus`. A very
small number of exceptions, however, are found: thus, `somendrá` (TS.),
`stómapṛṣṭha` (VS. TS.), `hastyṛ̀ṣabha` (ÇB.), `dāsīniṣka` (ChU.), and,
later, `cakramusala, sadānanda, saccidānanda, sān̄khyayoga` (as n. pr.),
`balābala, bhūtabhāutika`.

c\. The name given by the native grammarians to the possessive compounds
is `bahuvrīhi`: the word is an example of the class, meaning *possessing
much rice*.

d\. The name "relative", instead of possessive, sometimes applied to
this class, is an utter misnomer; since, though the meaning of such a
compound (as of any attributive word) is easily cast into a relative
form, its essential character lies in the possessive verb which has
nevertheless to be added, or in the possessive case of the relative
which must be used: thus, `mahākavi` and `āyurdā`, descriptive and
dependent, are "relative" also, *who is a great poet*, and *that is
life-giving*, but `bṛhadratha`, possessive, means *who has a great
chariot*, or *whose is a great chariot*.

1294\. a. That a noun, simple or compound, should be added to another
noun, in an appositive way, with a value virtually attributive, and that
such nouns should occasionally gain by frequent association and
application an adjective form also, is natural enough, and occurs in
many languages; the peculiarity of the Sanskrit formation lies in two
things. First, that such use should have become a perfectly regular and
indefinitely extensible one in the case of compounded words, so that any
compound with noun-final may be turned without alteration into an
adjective, while to a simple noun must be added an adjective-making
suffix in order to adapt it to adjective use: for example, that while
`hasta` must become `hastin` and `bāhu` must become `bāhumant`,
`hiraṇyahasta` and `mahābāhu` change from noun to adjective value with
no added ending. And second, that the relation of the qualified noun to
the compound should have come to be so generally that of possession, not
of likeness, nor of appurtenance, nor of any other relation which is as
naturally involved in such a construction: that we may only say, for
example, `mahābāhuḥ puruṣaḥ` *man with great arms*, and not also
`mahābāhur maṇiḥ` *jewel for a great arm*, or `mahābāhavaḥ çākhāḥ`
*branches like great arms*.

b\. There are, however, in the older language a few derivative adjective
compounds which imply the relation of appurtenance rather than that of
possession, and which are with probability to be viewed as survivals of
a state of things antecedent to the specialization of the general class
as possessive (compare the similar exceptions under possessive
suffixes, 1230 g, 1233 f). Examples are: `viçvā́nara` *of or for all men,
belonging to all* (and so
`viçvákṛṣṭi, -carṣaṇi, -kṣiti, -gotra, -manus, -āyu`, and `sarvápaçu`,
`saptámānuṣa`), `viçváçārada` *of every autumn*, `vipathá` *for bad
roads*, `dvirājá` *\[battle\] of two kings*, `áçvapṛṣṭha` *carried on
horseback*, `vīrápastya` *abiding with heroes*, `pūrṇámāsa` *at full
moon*, `adévaka` *for no divinity*, `bahudevata` or -`tyà` *for many
divinities*, `aparisaṁvatsara` *not lasting a fall year*,
`ekādaçakapāla` *for eleven dishes*, `somendrá` *for Soma and Indra*.
And the compounds with final member in `ana` mentioned at 1296 b are
probably of the same character. But also in the later language, some of
the so-called `dvigu`-compounds (1312) belong with these: so `dvigu`
itself, as meaning *worth two cows*, `dvināu` *bought for two ships;*
also occasional cases like `devāsura [saṁgrāma]` *of the gods and
demons*, `narahaya` *of man and horse*, `cakramusala` *with discus and
club*, `gurutalpa` *violating the teacher's bed*.

1295\. The possessive compound is distinguished from its substrate, the
determinative, generally by a difference of accent. This difference is
not of the same nature in all the divisions of the class; but oftenest,
the possessive has as a compound the natural accent of its prior member
(as in most of the examples given above).

1296\. Possessively used dependent compounds, or possessive dependents,
are very much less common than those corresponding to the other division
of determinatives.

a\. Further examples are: `mayū́raroman` *having the plumes of peacocks*,
`agnítejas` *having the brightness of fire*, `jñatímukha` *wearing the
aspect of relatives*, `pátikāma` *desiring a husband*, `hastipāda`
*having an elephant's feet*, `rājanyàbandhu` *having kshatriyas for
relatives*.

b\. The accent is, as in the examples given, regularly that of the prior
member, and exceptions are rare and of doubtful character. A few
compounds with derivatives in `ana` have the accent of the final member:
e. g. `indrapā́na` *serving as drink for Indra*, `devasádana` *serving as
seat for the gods*, `rayisthā́na` *being source of wealth;* but they
contain no implication of possession, and are possibly in character, as
in accent, dependent (but compare 1294 b). Also a few in `as`, as
`nṛcákṣas` *men-beholding*, `nṛvā́has` *men-bearing*, `kṣetrasā́dhas`
*field-prospering*, are probably to be judged in the same way.

1297\. Possessively used descriptive compounds, or possessive
descriptives, are extremely numerous and of every variety of character;
and some kinds of combination which are rare in proper descriptive use
are very common as possessives.

a\. They will be taken up below in order, according to the character of
the prior member — whether the noun-final be preceded by a qualifying
adjective, or noun, or adverb.

1298\. Possessive compounds in which a noun is preceded by a qualifying
ordinary adjective are (as pointed out above, 1280 f) very much more
common than descriptives of the same form.

a\. They regularly and usually have the accent of their prior member:
thus, `anyárūpa` *of other form*, `ugrábāhu` *having powerful arms*,
`jīváputra` *having living sons*, `dīrgháçmaçru` *longbearded*,
`bṛhácchravas` *of great renown*, `bhū́rimūla` *many-rooted*, `mahā́vadha`
*bearing a great weapon*, `viçvárūpa` *having all forms*, `çukrávarṇa`
*of bright color*, `çivā́bhimarçana` *of propitious touch*, `satyásaṁdha`
*of true promises*, `sárvān̄ga` *whole-limbed*, `sváyaças` *having own
glory*, `háritasraj` *wearing yellow garlands*.

b\. Exceptions, however, in regard to accent are not rare (a seventh or
eighth of the whole number, perhaps). Thus, the accent is sometimes that
of the final member; especially with derivatives in as, as
`tuvirā́dhas, purupéças, pṛthupákṣas`, and others in which (as above,
1296 b) a determinative character may be suspected: thus, `urujráyas`
beside `urujrí`, `uruvyácas` beside `uruvyác`, and so on; but also with
those of other final, as `ṛjuhásta, çitikákṣa` etc.,
`kṛṣṇakárṇa, citradṛ́çika, tuviçúṣma, ṛjukrátu, pṛthupárçu, puruvártman, raghuyā́man, vīḍupátman`.
In a very few cases, the accent is retracted from the final to the first
syllable of the second member: thus,
`aṅhubhéda, tuvigrī́va, puruvī́ra, pururū́pa, çitibā́hu` (also `çitibāhú`).
The largest class is that of compounds which take the accent upon their
final syllable (in part, of course, not distinguishable from those which
retain the accent of the final member): for example,
`bahvanná, nīlanakhá, puruputrá, viçvān̄gá, svapatí, tuvipratí, pṛçiparnī́`
f., `darçataçrī́, pūtirajjú, asitajñú, pṛthugmán, bahuprajás`.

c\. The adjective `víçva` *all*, as prior member of a compound (and also
in derivation), changes its accent regularly to `viçvá`; `sárva` *whole,
all* does the same in a few cases.

1299\. Possessive compounds with a participle preceding and qualifying
the final noun-member are numerous, although such a compound with simple
descriptive value is almost unknown. The accent is, with few exceptions,
that of the prior member.

a\. The participle is oftenest the passive one, in `ta` or `na`. Thus,
`chinnápakṣa` *with severed wing*, `dhṛtárāṣṭra` *of firmly held
royalty*, `hatámātṛ` *whose mother is slain*, `iddhā́gni` *whose fire is
kindled*, `uttānáhasta` *with outstretched hand*, `práyatadakṣiṇa`
*having presented sacrificial gifts;* and, with prefixed negative,
`áriṣṭavīra` *whose men are unharmed*, `átaptatanu` *of unburned
substance*, `ánabhimlātavarṇa` *of untarnished color*. Exceptions in
regard to accent are very few: there have been noticed only
`paryastākṣá, vyastakeçī́` f., `achinnaparṇá`. 

b\. Examples occur of a present participle in the same situation. In
about half the (accentuated) instances, it gives its own accent to the
compound: thus, `dyutádyāman, dhṛṣádvarṇa` etc.,
`çucádratha, rúçadvatsa` etc., `bhrā́jajjanman` etc.,
`saṁyádvīra, stanáyadama, sā́dhadiṣṭi`; in the others, the accent is
drawn forward to the final syllable of the participle (as in the
compounds with governing participle: below, 1309): thus, `dravátpāṇi`
etc. (`dravát` also occurs as adverb),
`rapçádūdhan, svanádratha, arcáddhūma, bhandádiṣṭi, krandádiṣṭi`. With
these last agrees in form `jarádaṣṭi` *attaining old age, long-lived;*
but its make-up, in view of its meaning, is anomalous.

c\. The RV. has two compounds with the perfect middle participle as
prior member: thus, `yuyujānásapti` *with harnessed coursers* (perhaps
rather *having harnessed their coursers*), and `dadṛçānápavi` (with
regular accent, instead of `dádṛçāna`, as elsewhere irregularly in this
participle) *with conspicuous wheel-rims*.

d\. Of a nearly participial character is the prior element in
`çrútkarṇa` (RV.) *of listening ear;* and with this are perhaps
accordant `dī́dyagni` and `sthā́raçman` (RV., each once).

1300\. Possessive compounds having a numeral as prior member are very
common, and for the most part follow the same rule of accent which is
followed by compounds with other adjectives: excepted are those
beginning with `dvi` and `tri`, which accent in general the final
member.

a\. Examples with other numerals than `dvi` and `tri` are:
`ékacakra, ékaçīrṣan, ékapad, cáturan̄ga, cátuṣpakṣa, pán̄cān̄guri, pán̄cāudana, ṣáḍaçva, ṣáṭpad, saptájihva, saptámātṛ, aṣṭā́pad, aṣṭáputra, návapad, návadvāra, dáçaçākha, dáçaçīrṣan, dvā́daçāra, triṅçádara, çatáparvan, çatádant, sahásraṇāman, sahásramūla`.

b\. Exceptions in regard to accent are but few, and have the tone on the
final syllable, whatever may be that belonging originally to the final
member; they are mostly stems in final `a`, used by substitution for
others in `an`, `i`, or a consonant: thus, `caturakṣá` etc. (`akṣán` or
`ákṣi`: 431), `ṣaḍahá` etc. (`áhan` or `áhar`: 430 a), `daçavṛṣá` etc.
(`vṛ́ṣan`), `ekarātrá` etc. (`rā́tri` or `rā́trī`), `ekarcá` etc. (`ṛ́c`);
but also a few others, as
`ṣaḍyogá, aṣṭāyogá, çatārghá, sahasrārghá, ekapará` (?).

c\. The compounds with `dvi` and `tri` for the most part have the accent
of their final member: thus, for example,
`dvijánman, dvidhā́ra, dvibándhu, dvivartaní, dvipád`;
`tritántu, trinā́bhi, triçóka, trivárūtha, tricakrá, triçīrṣán, tripád`.
A number of words, however, follow the general analogy, and accent the
numeral: thus, for example,
`dvípakṣa, dvíçavas, dvyā̀sya, tríṣandhi, tryàra, tryā̀çir`, and sometimes
`dvípad` and `trípad` in AV. As in the other numeral compounds, a
substituted stem in `a` is apt to take the accent on the final: thus,
`dvivṛṣá` and `trivṛṣá`, `dvirājá, dvirātrá, tryāyuṣá, tridivá`; and a
few of other character with `tri` follow the same rule: thus,
`trikaçá, trināká, tribandhú, tryudhán, tribarhís`, etc.

d\. The neuter, or also the feminine, of numeral compounds is often used
substantively, with a collective or abstract value, and the accent is
then regularly on the final syllable: see below, 1312.

1301\. Possessive compounds having as prior member a noun which has a
quasi-adjective value in qualifying the final member are very frequent,
and show certain specialities of usage.

a\. Least peculiar is a noun of material as prior member (hardly to be
reckoned as possessive dependents, because the relation of material is
not regularly expressed by a case: 295): thus, `híraṇyahasta`
*gold-handed*, `híraṇyasraj` *with golden garlands*, `áyaḥsthūṇa`
*having brazen supports*, `rajatánābhi` *of silver navel*.

1302\. Especially common is the use of a noun as prior member to qualify
the other appositionally, or by way of equivalence (the occasional
occurrence of determinatives of this character has been noticed above,
1280 d). These may conveniently be called appositional possessives.
Their accent is that of the prior member, like the ordinary possessive
descriptives.

a\. Examples are: `áçvaparṇa` *horse-winged*, or *having horses as
wings* (said of a chariot), `bhū́migṛha` *having the earth as house*,
`índrasakhi` *having Indra for friend*, `agníhotṛ` *having Agni as
priest*, `gandharvápatnī` *having a Gandharva for spouse*, `çūráputra`
*having hero-sons*, `jarā́mṛtyu` *having old age as mode of death, living
till old age*, `agnívāsas` *fire-clad*, `tadanta` *ending with that*,
`cāracakṣus` *using spies for eyes*, `víṣṇuçarmanāman` *named
Vishnuçarman;* and, with pronoun instead of noun, `tvā́dūta` *having thee
as messenger*, `tádapas` *having this for work*. Exceptions in regard to
accent occur here, as in the more regular descriptive formation: thus,
`agnijihvá, vṛṣaṇaçvá, dhūmaçikhá, pavīnasá, asáunā́ma, tatkúla`, etc.

b\. Not infrequently, a substantively used adjective is the final member
in such a compound: thus, `índrajyeṣṭha` *having Indra as chief*,
`mánaḥṣaṣṭha` *having the mind as sixth*, `sómaçreṣṭha` *of which soma
is best*, `ekapará` *of which the ace is highest* (?), `ásthibhūyas`
*having bone as the larger part, chiefly of bone*, `abhirūpabhūyiṣṭha`
*chiefly composed of worthy persons*, `daçāvara` *having ten as the
lowest number*, `cintāpara` *having meditation as highest object or
occupation, devoted to meditation*, `niḥçvāsaparama` *much addicted to
sighing*.

c\. Certain words are of especial frequency in the compounds here
described, and have in part won a peculiar application. Thus:

d\. With `ādi` *beginning* or `ādika` or `ādya` *first* are made
compounds signifying the person or thing specified along with others,
such a person or thing *et cetera*. For example, `devā indrādayaḥ` *the
gods having Indra as first*, i. e. *the gods Indra etc.*,
`marīcyādīn munīn` *Marīci and the other* *sages*,
`svāyambhuvādyāḥ saptāi ’te manavaḥ` *those seven Manus, Svāyambhuva
etc.*, `agniṣṭomādikān` *the sacrifices Agnishtoma and so on*. Or the
qualified noun is omitted, as in `annapānendhanādīni` *food, drink,
fuel, etc.*, `dānadharmādikaṁ caratu bhavān` *let your honor practise
liberality, religious rites, and the like*. The particles `evam` and
`iti` are also sometimes used by substitution as prior members: thus,
`evamādi vacanam` *words to this and the like effect;*
`ato ‘ham bravīmi kartavyaḥ saṁcayo nityam ityādi` *hence I say
"accumulation is ever to be made" etc*.

e\. Used in much the same way, but less often, is `prabhṛti`
*beginning*: thus, `viçvāvasuprabhṛtibhir gandharvāiḥ` *with the
Gandharvas Viçvāvasu etc.;* especially adverbially, in measurements of
space and time, as `tatprabhṛti` or `tataḥprabhṛti` *thenceforward*.

f\. Words meaning *foregoer, predecessor*, and the like — namely,
`pūrva, pūrvaka, puraḥsara, puraskṛta, purogama` — are often employed in
a similar manner, and especially adverbially, but for the most part to
denote accompaniment, rather than antecedence, of that which is
designated by the prior member of the compound: e. g. `smitapūrvam`
*with a smile*, `anāmayapraçnapūrvakam` *with inquiries after health*,
`pitāmahapurogama` *accompanied by the Great Father*.

g\. The noun `mātrā` *measure* stands as final of a compound which is
used adjectively or in the substantive neuter to signify a limit that is
not exceeded, and obtains thus the virtual value of *mere, only:* thus,
`jalamātreṇa vartayan` *living by water only* (lit. *by that which has
water for its measure* or *limit*), `garbhacyutimātreṇa` *by merely
issuing from the womb*, `prāṇāyātrikamātraḥ syāt` *let him be one
possessing what does not exceed the preservation of life;*
`uktamātre tu vacane` *but the words being merely uttered*.

h\. The noun `artha` *object, purpose* is used at the end of a compound,
in the adverbial accusative neuter, to signify *for the take of* or the
like: thus, `yajñasiddhyartham` *in order to the accomplishment of the
sacrifice* (lit. *in a manner having the accomplishment of the sacrifice
as its object*), `damayantyartham` *for Damayantī's sake* (*with
Damayantī as object*).

i\. Other examples are `ābhā, kalpa`, in the sense of *like,
approaching:* thus, `hemābha` *gold-like*, mṛtakalpa *nearly dead*,
`pratipannakalpa` *almost accomplished;* — `vidhā`, in the sense of
*kind, sort:* thus, `tvadvidha` *of thy sort*, `púruṣavidha` *of human
kind;* — `prāya`, in the sense of *mostly, often*, and the like: thus,
`duḥkhaprāya` *full of pain*, `tṛṇaprāya` *abounding in grass*,
`nirgamanaprāya` *often going out;* — `antara` (in substantive neuter),
in the sense of *other:* thus, `deçāntara` *another region* (lit. *that
which has a difference of region*), `janmāntarāṇi` *other existences*,
`çākhāntare` *in another text*.

1303\. In appositional possessive compounds, the second member, if it
designates a part of the body, sometimes logically signifies that part
to which what is designated by the prior member belongs, that on or in
which it is. 

a\. Thus, `ghṛtápṛṣṭha` *butter-backed*, `mádhujihva` *honey-tongued*,
niṣkágrīva and maṇigrīva *necklace-necked*, `pā́trahasta`
*vessel-handed*, `vájrabahu` *lightning-armed*, `ásṛn̄mukha`
*blood-faced*, `kīlā́lodhan` *mead-uddered*, `vā́jajaṭhara`
*sacrifice-bellied*, `vāṣpakaṇvha` *with tears in the throat*,
`çraddhā́manas` *with faith in the heart;* with irregular accent,
`dhūmākṣī́` f. *smoke-eyed*, `açrumukhī́` f. *tear-faced;* and
`khā́dihasta` *ring-handed* (`khādí`). In the later language, such
compounds are not infrequent with words meaning *hand:* thus,
`çastrapāṇi` *having a sword in the hand*, `laguḍahasta` *carrying a
staff*.

1304\. Of possessive compounds having an adverbial element as prior
member, the most numerous by far are those made with the inseparable
prefixes. Their accent is various. Thus:

a\. In compounds with the negative prefix `a` or `an` (in which the
latter logically negatives the imported idea of possession), the accent
is prevailingly on the final syllable, without regard to the original
accent of the final member. For example: `anantá` *having no end*,
`abalá` *not possessing strength*, `arathá` *without chariot*,
`açraddhá` *faithless*, `amaṇí` *without ornament*, `açatrú` *without a
foe*, `avarmán` *not cuirassed*, `adánt` *toothless*, `apád` *footless*,
`atejás` *without brightness*, anārambhaṇá *not to be gotten hold of*,
`apratimāná` *incomparable*, `aducchuná` *bringing no harm*,
`apakṣapucchá` *without sides or tail*.

b\. But a number of examples (few in proportion to those already
instanced) have the prefix accented (like the simple descriptives: 1288
a): thus, `ákṣiti` *indestructible*, `águ` *kineless*, `ágopā` *without
shepherd*, `ájīvana` *lifeless*, `ánāpi` *without friends*, `áçiçvī` f.
*without young*, `ámṛtyu` *deathless*, `ábrahman` *without priest*,
`ávyacas` *without extension*, `áhavis` *without oblation*, and a few
others; AV. has `áprajas`, but ÇB. `aprajás`. A very few have the accent
on the penult: namely, `açéṣas, ajā́ni`, and `avī́ra` (with retraction,
from `vīrá`), `apútra` (do., from `putrá`); and AV. has `abhrā́tṛ`, but
RV. `abhrātṛ́`.

c\. In compounds with the prefixes of praise and dispraise, `su` and
`dus`, the accent is in the great majority of cases that of the final
member: thus, `sukálpa` *of easy make*, `subhága` *well portioned*,
`sunákṣatra` *of propitious star*, `suputrá` *having excellent sons*,
`sugopā́` *well-shepherded*, `sukīrtí` *of good fame*, `sugándhi`
*fragrant*, `subāhú` *well-armed*, `suyáṁtu` *of easy control*,
`sukrátu` *of good capacity*, `suhā́rd` *good-hearted*, `susráj`
*well-garlanded*, `suvárman` *well-cuirassed*, `suvā́sas` *well-clad*,
`supráṇīti` *well guiding;* `durbhága` *ill-portioned*, `durdṛ́çīka` *of
evil aspect*, `durdhára` *hard to restrain*, `durgándhi` *ill-savored*,
`durādhī́` *of evil designs*, `durdhártu` *hard to restrain*, `duṣṭárītu`
*hard to excel*, `duratyétu` *hard to cross*, `durdhúr` *ill-yoked*,
`durṇā́man` *ill-named*, `durvā́sas` *ill-clad*.

d\. There are, however, a not inconsiderable number of instances in
which the accent of these compounds is upon the final syllable: thus,
`suçiprá` *well-lipped*, `svapatyá` *of good progeny*, `susaṁkāçá` *of
good aspect*, `svan̄gurí` *well-fingered*, `sviṣú` *having good arrows*,
`supīvás` *well fatted;* and compounds with derivatives in `ana`, as
`suvijñaná` *of easy discernment*, `sūpasarpaṇá` *of easy approach*,
`duçcyavaná` *hard to shake;* and AV. has `suphalá` and `subandhú`
against RV. `suphála` and `subándhu`. Like `avī́ra`, `suvī́ra` shows
retraction of accent. Only `dúrāçir` has the tone on the prefix.

e\. On the whole, the distinction by accent of possessive from
determinative is less clearly shown in the words made with `su` and
`dus` than in any other body of compounds.

f\. The associative prefix `sa` or (less often) `sahá` is treated like
an adjective element, and itself takes the accent in a possessive
compound: thus, `sákratu` *of joint will*, `sánāman` *of like name*,
`sárūpa` *of similar form*, `sáyoni` *having a common origin*, `sávācas`
*of assenting words*, `sátoka` *having progeny along, with one's
progeny*, `sábrāhmaṇa` *together with the Brahmans*, `sámūla` *with the
root*, `sā́ntardeça` *with the intermediate directions;* `sahágopa` *with
the shepherd*, `sahávatsa` *accompanied by one's young*, `sahápatnī`
*having her husband with her*, `sahápūruṣa` *along with our men*.

g\. In RV. (save in a doubtful case or two), only `saha` in such
compounds gives the meaning of *having with one, accompanied by;* and,
since `saha` governs the instrumental, the words beginning with it might
be of the prepositional class (below, 1310). But in AV. both `sa` and
`saha` have this value (as illustrated by examples given above); and in
the later language, the combinations with `sa` are much the more
numerous.

h\. There are a few exceptions, in which the accent is that of the final
member: thus, `sajóṣa, sajóṣas, sadṛ́ça, sapráthas, sabā́dhas, samanyú`
and AV. shows the accent on the final syllable in `sān̄gá` (ÇB. `sā́n̄ga`)
and the substantivized (1312) `savidyutá`.

i\. Possessive compounds with the exclamatory prefixes `ka` etc. are too
few in the older language to furnish ground for any rule as to accent:
`kábandha` is perhaps an example of such.

1305\. Possessive compounds in which a verbal prefix is used as prior
member with adjective value, qualifying a noun as final member, are
found even in the oldest language, and are rather more common later
(compare the descriptive compounds, above, 1289; and the prepositional,
below, 1310). They usually have the accent of the prefix.

a\. Most common are those made with `pra`, `vi`, and `sam`; thus, for
example, `prámahas` *having exceeding might*, `práçravas` *widely
famed;* `vígrāva` *of wry neck*, `vyàn̄ga` *having limbs away or gone,
limbless*, `víjāni` *wifeless*, `víparva` and `víparus` *jointless*,
`vyàdhvan` *of wide ways*, `vímanas` both *of wide mind* and *mindless*,
`vívācas` *of discordant speech;* `sámpatnī` *having one's husband
along*, `sámmanas` *of accordant mind*, `sáṁsahasra` *accompanied by a
thousand*, `sámokas` *of joint abode*. Examples of others are: `átyūrmi`
*surging over*, `ádhivastra` *having a garment on*, `ádhyardha` *with a
half over*, `ádhyakṣa` *overseer*, `ápodaka` *without water*, `abhírūpa`
*of adapted character*, `ávatoka` *that has aborted*, `ā́manas` *of
favorable mind*, `údojas` *of exalted power*, `nímanyu` *of assuaged
fury*, `nírmāya` *free from guile*, `nírhasta` *handless*.

b\. In a comparatively small number of cases, the accent is otherwise,
and generally on the final: thus, `avakeçá, upamanyú, viçaphá, viçikhá`
(AV. `víçikha`), `vikarṇá, saṁmātṛ́`, etc.; in an instance or two, that
of the final member: thus, `samçíçvarī` *having a common young*.

1306\. Possessive compounds with an ordinary adverb as prior member are
also found in every period of the language. They usually have the accent
which belongs to the adverb as independent word.

a\. Examples are: `ántyūti` *bringing near help*, `avódeva` *calling
down the gods*, `itáūti` *helping on this side*, `ihácitta` *with mind
directed hither*, `dakṣiṇatáskaparda` *wearing the braid on the right
side*, `nā́nādharman` *of various character*, `purudhápratīka` *of
manifold aspect*, `viçvátomukha` *with faces on all sides*, `sadyáūti`
*of immediate aid*, `víṣurūpa` *of various form*, `smádūdhan` *with
udder*, `adhástāllakṣman` *with mark below*, `ekatomukha` *with face on
one side*, `táthāvidha` *of such sort*.

b\. An instance or two of irregular accent are met with: thus,
`purorathá` *whose chariot is foremost*, `evaṁkratú` *so-minded*.

1307\. a. It was pointed out in the preceding chapter (1222 h) that the
indifferent suffix `ka` is often added to a pure possessive compound, to
help the conversion of the compounded stem into an adjective;
especially, where the final of the stem is less usual or manageable in
adjective inflection.

b\. Also, the compound possessive stem occasionally takes further a
possessive-making suffix: thus,
`yaçobhagín, suçiprin, varavarṇin, dīrghasūtrin, puṇyavāgbuddhikarmin, sutásomavant, tādṛgrūpavant, trayodaçadvīpavant, nārakapālakuṇḍalavant, amṛtabuddhimant`.

c\. The frequent changes which are undergone by the final of a stem
occurring at the end of a compound are noticed further on (1315).

1308\. The possessive compounds are not always used in the later
language with the simple value of qualifying adjective; often they have
a pregnant sense, and become the equivalents of dependent clauses; or
the *having* which is implied in them obtains virtually the value of our
*having* as sign of past time.

a\. Thus, for example, `prāptayāuvana` *possessing attained
adolescence*, i.e. *having arrived at adolescence;* `anadhigataçāstra`
*with unstudied books*, i. e. *who has neglected study;* `kṛtaprayatna`
*possessing performed effort*, i. e. *on whom effort is expended;*
`an̄gulīyakadarçanāvasāna` *having the sight of the ring as termination*,
i. e. *destined to end on sight of the ring;* `uddhṛtaviṣādaçalyaḥ`
*having an extracted despair-arrow*, i. e. *when I shall have extracted
the barb of despair;* `çrutavistāraḥ kriyatām` *let him be made with
heard details*, i. e. *let him be informed of the details;*
`dṛṣṭavīryo me rāmaḥ` *Rāma has seen my prowess*,
`bhagnabhāṇḍo dvijo yathā` *like* *the Brahman that broke the pots*,
`ukhānṛtam ṛṣiṁ yathā` *like a sage that has spoken falsely*.

B. Compounds with Governed Final Member.

1309\. Participial Compounds. This group of compounds, in which the
prior member is a present participle and the final member its object, is
a small one (toward thirty examples), and exclusively Vedic — indeed,
almost limited to the oldest Vedic (of the Rig-Veda). The accent is on
the final syllable of the participle, whatever may have been the
latter's accent as an independent word.

a\. Examples are: `vidádvasu` *winning good things*, `kṣayádvīra`
*governing* (`kṣáyant`) *heroes*, `taráddvevas` *overcoming* (`tárant`)
*foes*, `ābharádvasu` *bringing good things*, `codayánmati` *inciting*
(`codáyant`) *devotion*, `mandayátsakha` *rejoicing friends*,
`dhārayátkavi` *sustaining sages*, `maṅhayádrayi` *bestowing wealth*.

b\. In `sādádyoni` *sitting in the lap* (`sādat` quite anomalously for
`sīdat` or `sadat`), and `spṛhayádvarṇa` *emulous of color*, the
case-relation of the final member is other than accusative. In
`patayán mandayátsakham` (RV. i. 4. 7), `patayát`, with accent changed
accordingly, represents `patayátsakham`, the final member being
understood from the following word. `Vidádaçva` is to be inferred from
its derivative vāídadaçvi. Of this formation appear to be
`jamádagni, pratádvasu` (`prathád`?), and `trasádasyu` (for
`trasáddasyu`?). It was noticed above (1299 c) that `yuyujānásapti` is
capable of being understood as a unique compound of like character, with
a perfect instead of present participle; `sā́dhadiṣṭi`, on account of its
accent, is probably possessive.

1310\. Prepositional Compounds. By this name may be conveniently called
those combinations in which the prior member is a particle having true
prepositional value, and the final member is a noun governed by it. Such
combinations, though few in number as compared with other classes of
compounds, are not rare, either in the earlier language or in the later.
Their accent is so various that no rule can be set up respecting it.

a\. Examples are: `átyavi` *passing through the wool*, `atirātrá`
*overnight*, `atimātrá` *exceeding measure;* `ádhiratha` *lying on the
chariot*, `adhigavá` *belonging to the cow;* `adhaspadá` *under the
feet*, `adhoakṣa` *below the axle;* `ánupatha` *following the road*,
`anupūrvá` *following the one preceding, one after another*, `anuṣatyá`
*in accordance with truth*, `anukū́la` *down stream*, etc.; `ántaspatha`
(with anomalously changed accent of `antár`), *within the way*,
`antardāvá` *within the flame (?)*, `antarhastá` *in the hand;*
`ántigṛha` *near the house;* `apiprā́ṇa` *accompanying the breath*
(`prāṇá`), `ápivrata` *concerned with the ceremony*, `apiçarvará`
*bordering on night*, `apikarṇá` *next the ear;* `abhijñú` *reaching to
the knee*, `abhívīra` and `abhísatvan` *overcoming heroes;* `ā́pathi` *on
the road*, `ā́deva` *going to the gods*, `ājarasá` *reaching old age*,
`ādvādaçá` *up to twelve;* `upakakṣá` *reaching to the armpits*,
`upottamá` *next to last, penultimate;* `upáribudhna` *above the
bottom*, `upárimartya` *rising above mortals;* `tirojaná` *beyond
people;* `niḥsālá` *cut of the house;* `paripád` *(about the feet)
snare*, `parihastá` *about the hand, bracelet;* `parókṣa` *out of
sight*, `parómātra` *beyond measure*, `parogavyūtí` *beyond the fields*,
`paraḥsahasrá` (`páraḥsahasra`, ÇB.) *above a thousand;* `purokṣá` *in
front of the eyes;* `pratidosá` *toward evening*, `pratilomá` *against
the grain*, `pratikū́la` *up stream*, `pratyákṣa` *before the eyes;*
`bahiḥparidhí` *outside the enclosure;* `vípathi` *outside the road;*
`samakṣá` *close to the eyes, in sight*.

b\. Compounds of this character are in the later language especially
common with `adhi`: thus, `adhyātma` *relating to the soul or self*,
`adhiyajña` *relating to the sacrifice*, etc.

c\. A suffixal `a` is sometimes added to a final consonant, as in
`upānasá` *on the wagon*, `āvyuṣá` *until daybreak*. In a few instances,
the suffix `ya` is taken (see above, 1212 m); and in one word the suffix
`in:` thus, `paripantín` *besetting the path*.

d\. The prepositional compounds are especially liable to adverbial use:
see below, 1313 b.

Adjective Compounds as Nouns and as Adverbs.

1311\. Compound adjectives, like simple ones, are freely used
substantively as abstracts and collectives, especially in the neuter,
less often in the feminine; and they are also much used adverbially,
especially in the accusative neuter.

a\. The matter is entitled to special notice only because certain forms
of combination have become of special frequency in these uses, and
because the Hindu grammarians have made out of them distinct classes of
compounds, with separate names. There is nothing in the older language
which by its own merits would call for particular remark under this
head.

1312\. The substantively used compounds having a numeral as prior
member, along with, in part, the adjective compounds themselves, are
treated by the Hindus as a separate class, called `dvigu`.

a\. The name is a sample of the class, and means *of two cows*, said to
be used in the sense of *worth two cows;* as also `pañcagu` *bought for
five cows*, `dvināu` *worth two ships*, `páñcakapāla` *made in five
cups*, and so on.

b\. Vedic examples of numeral abstracts and collectives are: `dvirājá`
*\[combat\] of two kings*, `triyugá` *three ages*, `triyojaná` *space of
three leagues*, `tridivá` *the triple heaven*, `pañcayojaná` *space of
five leagues*, `ṣaḍahá` *six days' time*, `daçān̄gulá` *ten fingers'
breadth;* and, with suffix `ya`, `sahasrāhṇyá` *thousand days' journey*.
Others, not numeral, but essentially of the same character, are, for
example: `anamitrá` *freedom from enemies*, `nikilbiṣá` *freedom from
guilt*, `savidyutá` *thunderstorm*, `víhṛdaya` *heartlessness*, and
`sáhṛdaya` *heartiness*, `sudivá` *prosperity by day*, `sumṛgá` and
`suçakuná` *prosperity with beasts and birds*. Feminines of like use are
not quotable from RV. or AV.; later occur such as `triçatī` *three
hundred* (481), `trilokī` *the three worlds*, `pañcamūlī` *aggregate of
five roots*.

c\. As the examples show, the accent of words thus used is various; but
it is more prevailingly on the final syllable than in the adjective
compounds in their ordinary use.

1313\. Those adverbially used accusatives of secondary adjective
compounds which have an indeclinable or particle as prior member are
reckoned by the Hindu grammarians as a separate class of compounds, and
called by the name `avyayībhāva`.

a\. This term is a derivative from the compound verb (1094) made up of
`avyaya` *uninflected* and √`bhū`, and means *conversion to an
indeclinable*.

b\. The prepositional compounds (1310) are especially frequent in this
use: thus, for example, `anuṣvadhám` *by one's own will*, `abhipūrvám`
and `parovarám` *in succession*, `ādvādaçám` *up to twelve*,
`pratidoṣám` *at evening*, `samakṣám` *in sight*. Instances given by the
grammarians are: `adhihari` *upon Hari*, `uparājam` *with the king*,
`upanadam` or `upanadi` *near the river*, `pratyagni` *toward the fire*,
`pratiniçam` *every night*, `nirmakṣikam` *with freedom from flies*.

c\. A large and important class is made up of words having a relative
adverb, especially `yathā`, as prior member. Thus, for example,
`yathāvaçám` *as one chooses* (`váça` *will*), `yathākṛtám` *as done
\[before\], according to usage*, `yathānāmá` *by name*, `yathābhāgám`
*according to several portion*, `yathān̄gám` and `yathāparú` *limb by
limb*, `yatrakā́mam` *whither one will*, `yāvanmātrám` *in some measure*,
`yāvajjīvám` *as long as one lives*, `yāvatsábandhu` *according to the
number of relations*.

d\. These compounds are not common in the old language; RV. has with
`yathā` only four of them, AV. only ten; and no such compound is used
adjectively except `yācchreṣṭha` RV., `yāvacchreṣṭhá` AV. *as good as
possible*. ÇB. has `yathākārín, yathācārín, yáthākāma, yáthākratu` as
adjectives (followed in each case by a correlative `táthā`). The
adjective use in the later language also is quite rare as compared with
the adverbial.

e\. Other cases than the accusative occasionally occur: thus,
instrumental, as
`yathāsaṁkhyena, yathāçaktyā, yathepsayā, yathāpratiguṇāis`; and
ablative, as `yathāucityāt`.

f\. A class of adverbs of frequent occurrence is made with `sa`: e. g.
`sakopam` *angrily*, `sādaram` *respectfully*, `sasmitam` *with a
smile*, `saviçeṣam` *especially*.

g\. Other adverbial compounds of equivalent character occur earlier, and
are common later: for example, `ṛtekarmám` *without work*, `nānārathám`
*on different chariots*, `ubhayadyús` *two days in succession*,
`citrapadakramam` *with wonderful progress*, `pradānapūrvam` *with
accompaniment of a gift;* etc. 

Anomalous Compounds.

1314\. As in every language, compounds are now and then met with which
are of anomalous character, as exhibiting combinations of elements not
usually put together, or not after such a method, or for such a purpose.
Some of these, especially of those occurring in the old language, may
well be noticed here.

a\. Compounds having a particle as final member: as, `apratí` *having no
equal*, `tuvipratí` *mightily opposing*, `átathā` *refusing*, `vitatha`
*false*, `yathātathá` *as it really is*, `súsaha` *prosperity in
companionship*, `aniha` and `anamutra` *having no here* and *no yonder*,
etc.

b\. Agglomerations of two or more elements out of phrases: thus,
`ahampūrvá` *eager to be first*, `ahamuttará` *contest for preeminence*,
`mamasatyá` *contest for possession*, `itihāsá` *legend* (`iti hā ”sa`
*thus, indeed, it was*), `naghamārá` and `naghāriṣá` *not, surely,
dying* or *coming to harm*, `kuvítsa` *some unknown person*,
`tadídartha` *having just that as aim*, `kūcidarthín` *having errands in
every direction*, `kācitkará` *doing all sorts of things*, `kuhacidvíd`
*wherever found*, `akutaçcidbhaya` *out of all danger*, `yadbhaviṣya`
*What-is-to-be*, etc.

c\. Agglomerations in which the prior member retains a syntactic form:
as, `anyonya` and `paraspara` *one another*, `avaraspara` *inverted*.

d\. Aggregations with the natural order inverted: e. g. `pitāmahá` and
`tatāmahá` *grandfather*, `putrahata` *with his sons slain*, `jānvākná`
and -`jānvakta` *with bended knee*, `dantajāta` *provided with teeth*,
`somāpahṛtá` *deprived of soma*, `pan̄ktírādhas` *having groups of
gifts*, `gojara` *old bull*, `agrajihvá, agranāsikā`, etc. *tip of the
tongue*, *of the nose*, etc. Compare also 1291 c.

e\. Aggregations of particles were pointed out above (1111 a); also
(1122 e) cases in which `ná` and `mā́` are used in composition.

f\. In late Sanskrit (perhaps after the false analogy of combinations
like `tad anu`, viewed as `tadanu`, with tad as stem instead of neuter
accusative), a preposition is sometimes compounded as final member with
the noun governed by it: e. g. `vṛkṣādhas` or `vṛkṣādhastāt` *under the
tree*, `dantāntaḥ` *between the teeth*, `bhavanopari` *on top of the
house*, `satyavinā` *without truth*.

Stem-finals altered in Composition.

1315\. Transfers to an `a`-form of declension from other less common
finals, which are not rare in independent use, are especially common in
the final members of compounds. Thus:

a\. A stem in an often drops its final consonant (compare 429 a, 437):
examples are
`akṣa, adhva, arva, astha, aha, takṣa, brahma, mūrdha, rāja, loma, vṛṣa, çva, saktha, sāma`.


b\. An `i` or `ī` is changed to `a`: examples are
`an̄gula, an̄jala, açra, kukṣa, khāra, nada, nābha, bhūma, rātra, sakha`.

c\. An `a` is added after a final consonant, and sometimes after an
`u`-vowel or a diphthong (compare 399): examples are `ṛca, tvaca`;
`uda, pada, çarada`; `apa`; `dhura, pura`; `ahna, açmana, ūdhna, rājña`;
`anasa, ayasa, āyuṣa, urasa, enasa, tamasa, manasa, yajuṣa, rajasa, rahasa, varcasa, vedasa, çreyasa, sarasa`;
`bhruva, diva, gava, gāva, nāva`.

d\. More sporadic and anomalous cases are such as: `apanna-da`
(-`dant`), `pañca-ṣa` (-`ṣaṣ`), `ajāika-pa` (-`pad`), `çata-bhiṣā`
(-`bhiṣāj`), `vipaç-ci` (-`cit`), `yathā-pura` (-`puras`).

Loose Construction with Compounds.

1316\. In the looseness of unlimited and fortuitous combination,
especially in the later language, it is by no means rare that a word in
composition has an independent word in the sentence depending upon or
qualifying it alone, rather than the compound of which it forms a part.

a\. Examples are: `rāyáskāmo viçvāpsnyasya` (RV.) *desirous of
all-enjoyable wealth;* `aṇhór urucákriḥ` (RV.) *causing relief from
distress;* `mahādhané árbhe` (RV.) *in great contest and in small;*
`svāhāṁ çrāiṣṭhyakāmaḥ` (AÇS.) *desiring superiority over his fellows;*
`brāhmaṇāñ chrutaçīlavṛttasampannān ekena vā` (AGS.) *Brahmans endowed
with learning, character, and behavior, or with one \[of the three\];*
`cittapramāthinī bālā devānām api` (MBh.) *a girl disturbing the minds
even of the gods;* `vasiṣṭhavacanād ṛṣyaçṛn̄gasya co ’bhayoḥ` (R.) *at
the words of both Vasishtha and Rishyaçringa*,
`sītādravyāpaharaṇe çastrāṇām āuṣadhasya ca` (M.) *in case of stealing
ploughing implements or weapons or medicament;* `jyotiṣām madhyacārī`
(H.) *moving in the midst of the stars;* `dārupātraṁ ca mṛnmayam` (M.)
*a wooden and an earthen vessel;* `syandane dattadṛṣṭiḥ` (Ç.) *with eye
fixed on the chariot;* `tasminn ullambitamṛtaḥ` (KSS.) *dead and hanging
upon it*.

