+++
title = "With the other pakSha"

+++
The third hero advanced with a large force to defend his turf. His men
watched with mixed feelings– some where excited, others were confused,
yet others were sad because their own people were dying. We were roaming
like a khaDga in the grasslands of yore (we were reminded of the
statement made by R1’s father that in our proverbial last janma we were
a khadga), when our clansman called on us to bring the march of the
third hero to our attention. We also heard from him that he was marching
with his own detachment having scored a direct hit on the bhrAtR^ivya
and asked us to join his march. We however pointed out the mistakes in
his mantra prayoga and warned him of its consequence. We expressed our
inability to do so due to lack of troops at this point as we were mired
in the khANDavan war that sat on us like the vetAla on vikrama in the
mahAshmashAna. We then continued our wanderings — we saw the descendant
of Fourier of maNgala-grAma lying prone on the battle field struck by a
shara of the third vIra. That person called to us — and we stopped to
talk in that field. That field reminded me of the days when the third
vIra and I were in a shmashAna surrounded by skeletal remains from long
gone pretas.

The fallen descendant of Fourier spoke of the battle in which they were
arrayed against the 3rd vIra to settle the scores ensuing from the
hostilities that occurred after he came face to face with the wall of
the crane. The third vIra’s horse and ratha had been smashed by the
Fouriers and their chera magician allies. By the Fourier’s he had been
bound in a cave and atop a hill where the muni had saved him. But he was
a surly warrior who had fought many more battles than any of us. He
received from his large network of spies the intelligence that he will
be aided by the suparNa at the opportune moment, just as the shAktya in
the quest for his girl. In a diplomatic manipulation he aligned the
virile taittirIyaka and his party against the Fouriers. He attacked the
Fouriers as they forded a pass in the madhya-yuga. They deployed the
action of brahma and kShatra and a fierce battle followed. But the 3rd
hero over came them because the suparNa came to his aid, like gAyatrI
bearing the soma for the gods. The Fouriers were routed and the
descendant of Fourier of maNgala-grama lay pierced. That person said:
“With that the third hero has settled the past issues. With our
destruction the chapter of the war initiated by Fourier of mangala-grAma
has be closed. The third hero and the virile taittirIyaka are the
victors and with that the kR^ityA powers of Fourier have all dried up
like a pond in summer. If we remain in this loka we will take sannyasa
from all this, if we join the pitR^is we will be remembered as a brave
warrior who died on the field.”

We continuing to wander like a vrAtya; we felt like Zarathushtra
reciting the Gayam Urvan, or more aptly like atharvan approaching father
varuNa inquiring about the 4th foot that lies in the parorajasaH. We
looked to the unblinking asura who gazes with his numerous eyes to be
released from the pAsha-s. The mantra “yA vAM indrAvaruNa … came to
mind”
