+++
title = "The fall of asura prahlAda"

+++
prahlAda, the demoniac son of hiraNyakashipu, ascended the throne of the
asuras after his father had been slain by nR^isimha. Spreading fear and
havoc in the in the worlds due to his pride and immense strength he
caused much anxiety to the gods. It was then that the young kumAra, the
commander of the deva army, filled with youthful pride decided to
display his sports. He threw his shakti and pierced the earth with it.
He then posed a challenge to the universe by stating:

“If there be any being that is superior to me in might or protects the
brahmins better than me, or protects the veda and the brahman better
than me or is possessed of energy like me, let him draw up this spear or
at least shake \!”

viShNu noticed that the devas, yakShas, asuras and rAkShasas were filled
with consternation at this challenge. viShNu, himself unable to bear the
challenge with respect to moving the shakti looked at the son of agni
and stepped forward. The mighty viShNu seizing that blazing shakti with
his left hand began to shake it. When the missile was thus shaken by
trivikrama of great energy the earth shook violently. There were
upheavals in the sea, the mountains quaked, and the huge forests
trembled and fell. viShNu then turning to the asurapati prahlAda said:
“*I have shown my might by shaking the spear and stopped for the good
of the earth. Behold the might of kumAra. None else in the universe can
raise this shakti.*” Unable to bear the challenge the fierce asura
seized with all his hands and tried to shaken it. But he was unable to
move it and swooning from his exertions fell head long on the himAlAyas.
Thus was the fall and the defeat of the daitya prahlAda.  
shalya-parvan 328
