+++
title = "The dispatch from the slopes of Mount Kearsarge"

+++
We circumambulated the large lake at the base of Mount Kearsarge with
mlechCha adventurer M. We were separated from the bandhas of samsAra at
that point. We saw the old va\~nga chieftain at the end of it. The
va\~nga had battled our old foe for a long time and outwitted him much
as we had. He enquired about R1, R2, R3, K1, K2 and S. These brought
very painful memories to our mind. It was as though we had fallen like
yayAti. We had mentioned earlier how we fell like yayAti after sporting
in the groves of the pAShaNDa’s hill in the daNDaka region. Then we
bored even deeper into pAtAla and then escaped the terrible guillotine
which we alluded to earlier. But after escaping the guillotine, we had
fallen into this new trap from which we were not sure there was a way
out. The va\~nga reminded us of it. He asked me the pathway that led to
R. We illustrated it thus:

K1–\>K2–\>S–\>R3–\>R1 (now known as R). R3 was from a clan of great
brAhmaNas from gavalakuNDa, who had originally hailed from Nepal. In the
lore of guhyakAli and the many authentic sections of the mahAkAla
saMhita they were masters. They were masters of the vedA\~Nga jyotisha,
and nakShatra vidyA. When we were famished in gavalakuNDa R3 had helped
us with food much as uShasti chAkrAyana was helped, knowing that my
ancestors were brahmas at their shrauta rites. R3 had two suitors:
shveta va\~Nga, the other bold va\~Nga chieftain who had been demolished
by the mlechChas, and dharmadR^iDha vAtavyAdi, who was a friend of the
mean biDAla-smashru. Shveta va\~Nga of the sAvarNa branch of bhArgavas
won the battle for R3. But R3 after that was struck by a terrible
affliction from, which it was almost certain that there was no return.
But R3’s clansmen using their mighty vidyA’s just redeemed the amR^ita
of R3 to reincarnate her and save themselves. R3 had a friend A, who
also came from a clan of great brAhmaNas who had distinguished
themselves in their R^igvedic learning and in the heroic defense of the
karnATa country battling against the turushka Randulla Khan. A had also
fed me in the times of dire straits in gavalakuNDa and even directed the
aforesaid va\~Nga chieftain to provide me food. Both in R3 and A the
glory of their brahminical ancestors shone like the cashed check we
alluded to. A was one day narrating the exploits of the pro-Dravidian
George Hart, when suddenly she paused and asked me if I was doing the
right things. A said how she upheld the paurANic ideals to the highest
level and even the dharma shAstras would have offered her a less
stringent path. She told me that in the days of kali such adherence was
not common and having told me of the dangers in the path prophesied that
trouble may be coming my way. The va\~nga confirmed it had come too soon
and that the main warriors in my camp might even sense the empire’s
cracks.
