+++
title = "Turning of the Turkic wheel"

+++
In 914 CE, Nasr ibn Ahmed II raised the Samanid Moslems to their peak.
They were the first Iranians who had been converted to Sunnism and
pursued their zealous Jihad on central Asia with a large army of Iranian
Moslems and Arab mercenaries to convert Turkic pagans, the Hindu Vijayas
and Iranian fire worshipers to Islam. Nasr converted to Shi’aism and
this sparked off a rebellion in the Samanid kingdom, as the Sunni and
Shia factions went to war on each other. The Shias were aided by the
Buyids another dynasty of Iranian Shia warlords and there were pitched
battles fought around the Tehran region. Nasr was succeeded by his son
Sultan Noah ibn Nasr, who converted back to Sunnism and led a Jihad
agains the Buyids in 943 CE. He also led a great Jihad on the pagan
Turks in the Steppes north of Khorasan. In this battle the shamanist
Turkic tribes of Cuman and Qarluq clans were beaten by the ghazis and
taken as slaves in the condition they would forefeit their foreskins. A
young boy captured in this raid, Alptegin was converted to Islam and
sold to the Buyids as a slave. After serving as a water jug carrier he
was promoted to the palace guards. Then he was given a horse and made a
cavalry soldier due to his military skills. He started organizing other
Turkic slaves into a personal Turkic army. During the reign of the next
Samanid Sultan Abd al Maliq, Alptegin declared himself governor of
Khurasan and tried to place a puppet on the Samanid throne. But the
Samanids grouping under Mansur-ibn-Noah attacked him. He was defeated
and with his Turkic band retreated to Balkh. There again he was defeated
by the Samanids and retreated to Ghazni. There he was let in with his
army by the Hindus. He soon ethnically cleansed the Hindus and made
himself Sultan of Ghazni. He raised a Turkic army from the Turkic slaves
there, which was largely islamized due to the early age at which they
were captured. In 963 Alptegin died and was succeeded by his son Abu
Ishaq. Abu Ishaq was a homosexual and his lover was Sebuqtegin. Ishaq
accepted the Samanids as his nominal overlords and entrenched himself in
Ghazna. However not all Turk slaves amongst them accepted Islam. Another
faction of turks under pagan Turk Bilge Tegin wanted to restore the old
shamanist religion and sent emissaries to make common cause with the
Hindu Kings of Kabul and Khotan, Trilochanapala and the Vijayan, and the
Khitan Mongol Khan who had conquered northern China. On the death of
Ishaq, Blige Tegin organized his pagan faction and tried to oust the
Islamic faction. The latter were defeated initially and were driven into
the fort of Gardiz in near Konduz. The Vijayans cutoff the supply line
for the Moslem faction from the Samanids. But the Samanids made a
vigorous counter assault directly on the Vijayans and sent another army
to help Gardiz. Bilge Tegin was shot by an arrow aimed from the fort
just as he was about to storm it and killed. He was succeeded by the
Qara Tegin and Bori Tegin who continued the struggle aided by the Hindus
from Kabul. The Moslem faction was defeated and dispersed but they
regrouped under Sebuktegin, a virulent Islamist. He called for a great
Jihad on the pagan Turks as well as the Hindus. He routed the army of
Bori Tegin after cutting off the Hindu supplies and beheaded the
shamanist. He then outflanked the Hindus by seizing Kandahar in the
990s.

In the meantime, the Qarakhanids were another band of Turks of the Toquz
Oghuz (the same clan that gave rise to the later Ottomans) who had been
converted to Islam by Mullahs sent into their kingdom by the Samanids
for subversion. The Qarakhanids in steppes of Kashgaria had entrenched
themselves and raised and army to threaten the Samanids. Sure enough in
992 the Qarakhanid sultan, Bughra Khan Harun invaded Bokhara. The
Samanid Sultan Noah II ran to Sebuktegin for aid, who promptly protected
the Samanid but in turn seized Khorasan for himself. The Sebuqtegin died
and was succeeded by his wild son Mahmud. Mahmud and the Qara Khanid
Sultan Arslan Ilek Nasr made a common cause against the Samanids: Turks
against the Iranians. Mahmud struck first in 999 and destroyed the
Samanid army in the battle of Merv. From the north Ilek Nasr struck and
conquered Bokhara after capturing the last Samanid sultan. The two
sultans then sealed their alliance as Mahmud gave his daughter to Ilek
Nasr’s son. With that the Turkic character of central Asia had been
brought into the Islamic world.
