---
title: NOTES OF CLASS TALKS

---
<div>

[←](../writings_poems/no_one_to_blame.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](man_the_maker.htm)

  

## NOTES OF CLASS TALKS

WHEN WILL CHRIST COME AGAIN?

I never take much notice of these things. I have come to deal with
principles. I have only to preach that God comes again and again, and
that He came in India as Krishna, Râma, and Buddha, and that He will
come again. It can almost be demonstrated that after each 500 years the
world sinks, and a tremendous spiritual wave comes, and on the top of
the wave is a Christ.

There is a great change now coming all over the world, and this is a
cycle. Men are finding that they are losing hold of life; which way will
they turn, down or up? Up, certainly. How can it be down? Plunge into
the breach; fill up the breach with your body, your life. How should you
allow the world to go down when you are living?

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MAN AND CHRIST

There is much difference in manifested beings. As a manifested being you
will never be Christ. Out of clay, manufacture a clay elephant, out of
the same clay, manufacture a clay mouse. Soak them in water, they become
one. As clay, they are eternally one; as fashioned things, they are
eternally different. The Absolute is the material of both God and man.
As Absolute, Omnipresent Being, we are all one; and as personal beings,
God is the eternal master, and we are the eternal servants.

You have three things in you: (1) the body, (2) the mind, (3) the
spirit. The spirit is intangible, the mind comes to birth and death, and
so does the body. You are that spirit, but often you think you are the
body. When a man says, "I am here", he thinks of the body. Then comes
another moment when you are on the highest plane; you do not say, "I am
here". But if a man abuses you or curses you and you do not resent it,
you are the spirit. "When I think I am the mind, I am one spark of that
eternal fire which Thou art; and when I feel that I am the spirit, Thou
and I are one" — so says a devotee to the Lord. Is the mind in advance
of the spirit?

God does not reason; why should you reason if you knew? It is a sign of
weakness that we have to go on crawling like worms to get a few facts
and build generalisations, and then the whole thing tumbles down again.
The spirit is reflected in the mind and everything. It is the light of
the spirit that makes the mind sensate. Everything is an expression of
the spirit; the minds are so many mirrors. What you call love and fear,
hatred, virtue, and vice are all reflections of the spirit; only when
the reflector is base the reflection is bad.

ARE CHRIST AND BUDDHA IDENTICAL?

It is my particular fancy that the same Buddha became Christ. Buddha
prophesied, "I will come again in five hundred years", and Christ came
here in five hundred years. These are the two Lights of the whole human
nature. Two men have been produced, Buddha and Christ; these are the two
giants, huge gigantic personalities, two Gods. Between them they divide
the whole world. Wherever there is the least knowledge in the world,
people bow down either to Buddha or Christ. It would be very hard to
produce more like them, but I hope there will be. Mohammed came five
hundred years after, five hundred years after came Luther with his
Protestant wave, and this is five hundred years after that again. It is
a great thing in a few thousand years to produce two such men as Jesus
and Buddha. Are not two such enough? Christ and Buddha were Gods, the
others were prophets. Study the life of these two and see the
manifestation of power in them — calm and non-resisting, poor beggars
owning nothing, without a cent in their pockets, despised all their
lives, called heretic and fool — and think of the immense spiritual
power they have wielded over humanity.

SALVATION FROM SIN

We are to be saved from sin by being saved from ignorance. Ignorance is
the cause of which sin is the result.

COMING BACK TO THE DIVINE MOTHER

When a nurse takes a baby out into the garden and plays with the baby,
the Mother may send a word to the baby to come indoors. The baby is
absorbed in play, and says, "I won't come; I don't want to eat." After a
while the baby becomes tired with his play and says, "I will go to
Mother." The nurse says, "Here is a new doll", but the baby says, "I
don't care for dolls any more. I will go to Mother", and he weeps until
he goes. We are all babies. The Mother is God. We are absorbed in
seeking for money, wealth, and all these things; but the time will come
when we will awaken; and then this nature will try to give us more
dolls, and we will say, "No, I have had enough; I will go to God."

NO INDIVIDUALITY APART FROM GOD

If we are inseparable from God, and always one, have we no
individuality? Oh yes; that is God. Our individuality is God. This is
not real individuality which you have now. You are coming towards that
true one. Individuality means what cannot be divided. How can you call
this state — we are now — individuality? One hour you are thinking one
way, and the next hour another way, and two hours after another way.
Individuality is that which changes not. It would be tremendously
dangerous for the present state to remain in eternity, then the thief
would always remain a thief, and the blackguard, a blackguard. If a baby
died, it would have to remain a baby. The real individuality is that
which never changes, and will never change; and that is God within us.

</div>
