---
title: MAN THE MAKER OF HIS DESTINY

---
<div>

[←](notes_of_class_talks.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](god_personal_and_impersonal.htm)

  

## MAN THE MAKER OF HIS DESTINY

There was a very powerful dynasty in Southern India. They made it a rule
to take the horoscope of all the prominent men living from time to time,
calculated from the time of their birth. In this way they got a record
of leading facts predicted, and compared them afterwards with events as
they happened. This was done for a thousand years, until they found
certain agreements; these were generalised and recorded and made into a
huge book. The dynasty died out, but the family of astrologers lived and
had the book in their possession. It seems possible that this is how
astrology came into existence. Excessive attention to the minutiae of
astrology is one of the superstitions which has hurt the Hindus very
much.

I think the Greeks first took astrology to India and took from the
Hindus the science of astronomy and carried it back with them from
Europe. Because in India you will find old altars made according to a
certain geometrical plan, and certain things had to be done when the
stars were in certain positions, therefore I think the Greeks gave the
Hindus astrology, and the Hindus gave them astronomy.

I have seen some astrologers who predicted wonderful things; but I have
no reason to believe they predicted them only from the stars, or
anything of the sort. In many cases it is simply mind-reading. Sometimes
wonderful predictions are made, but in many cases it is arrant trash.

In London, a young man used to come to me and ask me, "What will become
of me next year?" I asked him why he asked me so. "I have lost all my
money and have become very, very poor." Money is the only God of many
beings. Weak men, when they lose everything and feel themselves weak,
try all sorts of uncanny methods of making money, and come to astrology
and all these things. "It is the coward and the fool who says, 'This is
fate'" — so says the Sanskrit proverb. But it is the strong man who
stands up and says, "I will make my fate." It is people who are getting
old who talk of fate. Young men generally do not come to astrology. We
*may* be under planetary influence, but it should not matter much to us.
Buddha says, "Those that get a living by calculation of the stars by
such art and other lying tricks are to be avoided"; and he ought to
know, because he was the greatest Hindu ever born. Let stars come, what
harm is there? If a star disturbs my life, it would not be worth a cent.
You will find that astrology and all these mystical things are generally
signs of a weak mind; therefore as soon as they are becoming prominent
in our minds, we should see a physician, take good food and rest.

If you can get an explanation of a phenomenon from within its nature, it
is nonsense to look for an explanation from outside. If the world
explains itself, it is nonsense to go outside for an explanation. Have
you found any phenomena in the life of a man that you have ever seen
which cannot be explained by the power of the man himself? So what is
the use of going to the stars or anything else in the world? My own
Karma is sufficient explanation of my present state. So in the case of
Jesus himself. We know that his father was only a carpenter. We need not
go to anybody else to find an explanation of his power. He was the
outcome of his own past, all of which was a preparation for that Jesus.
Buddha goes back and back to animal bodies and tells us how he
ultimately became Buddha. So what is the use of going to stars for
explanation? They may have a little influence; but it is our duty to
ignore them rather than hearken to them and make ourselves nervous. This
I lay down as the first essential in all I teach: anything that brings
spiritual, mental, or physical weakness, touch it not with the toes of
your feet. Religion is the manifestation of the natural strength that is
in man. A spring of infinite power is coiled up and is inside this
little body, and that spring is spreading itself. And as it goes on
spreading, body after body is found insufficient; it throws them off and
takes higher bodies. This is the history of man, of religion,
civilisation, or progress. That giant Prometheus, who is bound, is
getting himself unbound. It is always a manifestation of strength, and
all these ideas such as astrology, although there may be a grain of
truth in them, should be avoided.

There is an old story of an astrologer who came to a king and said, "You
are going to die in six months." The king was frightened out of his wits
and was almost about to die then and there from fear. But his minister
was a clever man, and this man told the king that these astrologers were
fools. The king would not believe him. So the minister saw no other way
to make the king see that they were fools but to invite the astrologer
to the palace again. There he asked him if his calculations were
correct. The astrologer said that there could not be a mistake, but to
satisfy him he went through the whole of the calculations again and then
said that they were perfectly correct. The king's face became livid. The
minister said to the astrologer, "And when do you think that you will
die?" "In twelve years", was the reply. The minister quickly drew his
sword and separated the astrologer's head from the body and said to the
king, "Do you see this liar? He is dead this moment."

If you want your nation to live, keep away from all these things. The
only test of good things is that they make us strong. Good is life, evil
is death. These superstitious ideas are springing like mushrooms in your
country, and women wanting in logical analysis of things are ready to
believe them. It is because women are striving for liberation, and women
have not yet established themselves intellectually. One gets by heart a
few lines of poetry from the top of a novel and says she knows the whole
of Browning. Another attends a course of three lectures and then thinks
she knows everything in the world. The difficulty is that they are
unable to throw off the natural superstition of women. They have a lot
of money and some intellectual learning, but when they have passed
through this transition stage and get on firm ground, they will be all
right. But they are played upon by charlatans. Do not be sorry; I do not
mean to hurt anyone, but I have to tell the truth. Do you not see how
open you are to these things? Do you not see how sincere these women
are, how that divinity latent in all never dies? It is only to know how
to appeal to the Divine.

The more I live, the more I become convinced every day that every human
being is divine. In no man or woman, however vile, does that divinity
die. Only he or she does not know how to reach it and is waiting for the
Truth. And wicked people are trying to deceive him or her with all sorts
of fooleries. If one man cheats another for money, you say he is a fool
and a blackguard. How much greater is the iniquity of one who wants to
fool others spiritually! This is too bad. It is the one test, that truth
must make you strong and put you above superstition. The duty of the
philosopher is to raise you above superstition. Even this world, this
body and mind are superstitions; what infinite souls you are! And to be
tricked by twinkling stars! It is a shameful condition. You are
divinities; the twinkling stars owe their existence to you.

I was once travelling in the Himalayas, and the long road stretched
before us. We poor monks cannot get any one to carry us, so we had to
make all the way on foot. There was an old man with us. The way goes up
and down for hundreds of miles, and when that old monk saw what was
before him, he said, "Oh sir, how to cross it; I cannot walk any more;
my chest will break." I said to him, "Look down at your feet." He did
so, and I said, "The road that is under your feet is the road that you
have passed over and is the same road that you see before you; it will
soon be under your feet." The highest things are under your feet,
because you are Divine Stars; all these things are under your feet. You
can swallow the stars by the handful if you want; such is your real
nature. Be strong, get beyond all superstitions, and be free.

</div>
