---
title: 'GOD: PERSONAL AND IMPERSONAL'

---
<div>

[←](man_the_maker.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_divine_incarnation.htm)

  

## GOD: PERSONAL AND IMPERSONAL

My idea is that what you call a Personal God is the same as the
Impersonal Being, a Personal and Impersonal God at the same time. We are
personalised impersonal beings. If you use the word in the absolute
sense, we are impersonal; but if you use it in a relative meaning, we
are personal. Each one of you is a universal being, each one is
omnipresent. It may seem staggering at first, but I am as sure of this
as that I stand before you. How can the spirit help being omnipresent?
It has neither length, nor breadth, nor thickness, nor any material
attribute whatsoever; and if we are all spirits we cannot be limited by
space. Space only limits space, matter matter. If we were limited to
this body we would be a material something. Body and soul and everything
would be material, and such words as "living in the body", "embodying
the soul" would be only words used for convenience; beyond that they
would have no meaning. Many of you remember the definition I gave of the
soul; that each soul is a circle whose centre is in one point and
circumference nowhere. The centre is where the body is, and the activity
is manifested there. You are omnipresent; only you have the
consciousness of being concentrated in one point. That point has taken
up particles of matter, and formed them into a machine to express
itself. That through which it expresses itself is called the body. So
you are everywhere; when one body or machine fails, you, the centre,
move on and take up other particles of matter, finer or grosser, and
work through that. This is man. And what is God? God is a circle with
its circumference nowhere and centre everywhere. Every point in that
circle is living, conscious, active, and equally working; with us
limited souls, only one point is conscious, and that point moves forward
and backward. As the body has a very infinitesimal existence in
comparison with that of the universe, so the whole universe, in
comparison with God, is nothing. When we talk of God speaking, we say He
speaks through His universe; and when we speak of Him beyond all
limitations of time and space, we say He is an Impersonal Being. Yet He
is the same Being.

To give an illustration: We stand here and see the sun. Suppose you want
to go towards the sun. After you get a few thousand miles nearer, you
will see another sun, much bigger. Supposing you proceed much closer,
you will see a much bigger sun. At last you will see the real sun,
millions and millions of miles big. Suppose you divide this journey into
so many stages, and take photographs from each stage, and after you have
taken the real sun, come back and compare them; they will all appear to
be different, because the first view was a little red ball, and the real
sun was millions of miles bigger; yet it was the same sun. It is the
same with God: the Infinite Being we see from different standpoints,
from different planes of mind. The lowest man sees Him as an ancestor;
as his vision gets higher, as the Governor of the planet; still higher
as the Governor of the universe, and the highest man sees Him as
himself. It was the same God, and the different realisations were only
degrees and differences of vision.

</div>
