---
title: THE LOVE OF GOD - I

---
<div>

[←](congress_of_religious_unity.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_love_of_god_ii.htm)

  

## THE LOVE OF GOD - I

(*Report of a lecture in the* Chicago Herald, *September 25, 1893*)

An audience that filled the auditorium of the Third Unitarian Church at
Laflin and Monroe streets heard Swami Vivekananda preach yesterday
morning. The subject of his sermon was the love of God, and his
treatment of the theme was eloquent and unique. He said that God was
worshipped in all parts of the world, but by different names and in
different ways. It is natural for men, he said, to worship the grand and
the beautiful, and that religion was a portion of their nature. The need
of God was felt by all, and His love prompted them to deeds of charity,
mercy, and justice. All men loved God because He was love itself. The
speaker had heard since coming to Chicago a great deal about the
brotherhood of man. He believed that a still stronger tie connected
them, in that all are the offsprings of the love of God. The brotherhood
of man was the logical sequence of God as the Father of all. The speaker
said he had travelled in the forests of India and slept in caves, and
from his observation of nature he had drawn the belief that there was
something above the natural law that kept men from wrong, and that, he
concluded, was the love of God. If God had spoken to Christ, Mohammed,
and the Rishis of the Vedas, why did He not speak also to him, one of
his children?

"Indeed, he does speak to me", the Swami continued, "and to all His
children. We see Him all around us and are impressed continually by the
boundlessness of His love, and from that love we draw the inspiration
for our well-being and well-doing."

</div>
