---
title: INDIA

---
<div>

[←](the_love_of_god_ii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](hindus_and_christians.htm)

  

## INDIA

(*Report of a lecture delivered at Detroit on Thursday, February 15,
1894, with  
the editorial comments of the* Detroit Free Press)

An audience that filled the Unitarian Church heard the renowned monk,
Swami Vivekananda, deliver a lecture last night on the manners and
customs of his country. His eloquent and graceful manner pleased his
listeners, who followed him from beginning to end with the closest
attention, showing approval from time to time by outbursts of applause.
While his lecture was more popular in character than the celebrated
Address before the religious congress in Chicago, it was highly
entertaining, especially where the speaker diverted from the instructive
portions and was led to an eloquent narration of certain spiritual
conditions of his own people. It is upon matters religious and
philosophic (and necessarily spiritual) that the Eastern brother is most
impressive, and, while outlining the duties that follow the
conscientious consideration of the great moral law of nature, his softly
modulated tones, a peculiarity of his people, and his thrilling manner
are almost prophetic. He speaks with marked deliberation, except when
placing before his listeners some moral truth, and then his eloquence is
of the highest kind.

It seemed somewhat singular that the Eastern monk, who is so outspoken
in his disapproval of missionary labour on the part of the Christian
church in India (where, he affirms, the morality is the highest in the
world), should have been introduced by Bishop Ninde who in June will
depart for China in the interest of foreign Christian missions. The
Bishop expects to remain away until December; but if he should stay
longer he will go to India. The Bishop referred to the wonders of India
and the intelligence of the educated classes there, introducing
Vivekananda in a happy manner. When that dusky gentleman arose, dressed
in his turban and bright gown, with handsome face and bright,
intelligent eyes, he presented an impressive figure. He returned thanks
to the Bishop for his words and proceeded to explain race divisions in
his own country, the manners of the people, and the different languages.
Principally there are four northern tongues and four southern, but there
is one common religion. Four-fifths of the population of 300 million
people are Hindus and the Hindu is a peculiar person. He does everything
in a religious manner. He eats religiously; he sleeps religiously; he
rises in the morning religiously; he does good things religiously; and
he also does bad things religiously. At this point the lecturer struck
the great moral keynote of his discourse, stating that with his people
it was the belief that all non-self is good and all self is bad. This
point was emphasised throughout the evening and might be termed the text
of the address. To build a home is selfish, argues the Hindu; so he
builds it for the worship of God and for the entertainment of guests. To
cook food is selfish, so he cooks for the poor; he will serve himself
last if any hungry stranger applies, and this feeling extends throughout
the length and breadth of the land. Any man can ask for food and
shelter, and any house will be opened to him.

The caste system has nothing to do with religion. A man's occupation is
hereditary: a carpenter is born a carpenter; a goldsmith, a goldsmith; a
workman, a workman; and a priest, a priest. But this is a comparatively
modern social evil, since it has existed only about 1,000 years. This
period of time does not seem so great in India as in this and other
countries. Two gifts are especially appreciated — the gift of learning
and the gift of life. But the gift of learning takes precedence. One may
save a man's life, and that is excellent; one may impart to another
knowledge, and that is better. To instruct for money is an evil, and to
do this would bring opprobrium on the head of the man who barters
learning for gold, as though it were an article of trade. The government
makes gifts from time to time to the instructors, and the moral effect
is better than it would be if the conditions were the same as exist in
certain alleged civilised countries. The speaker had asked through the
length and breadth of the land what was the definition of civilisation,
and he had asked the question in many countries. Sometimes the reply had
been given: What we are, that is civilisation. He begged to differ in
the definition of the word. A nation may control the elements, develop
utilitarian problems of life seemingly to the limit, and yet not realise
that in the individual the highest type of civilisation is found in him
who has learnt to conquer self. This condition is found in India more
than in any country on earth, for there the material conditions are
subservient to the spiritual, and the individual looks for the soul
manifestations in everything that has life, studying nature to this end.
Hence that gentle disposition to endure with indomitable patience the
flings of what appears unkind fortune, the while there is a full
consciousness of a spiritual strength and knowledge greater than those
possessed by any other people; hence the existence of a country and a
people from which flows an unending stream that attracts the attention
of thinkers far and near to approach and throw from their shoulders an
oppressive earthly burden. The early king, who in 260 B.C. commanded
that there should be no more bloodshed, no more wars, and who sent forth
instead of soldiers an army of instructors, acted wisely, although in
material things the land has suffered. But though in bondage to brutal
nations who conquer by force, the Indian's spirituality endures for
ever, and nothing can take it away from him. There is something
Christlike in the humility of the people to endure the stings and arrows
of outraged fortune, the while the soul is advancing towards the
brighter goal. Such a country has no need of Christian missionaries to
"preach ideas", for theirs is a religion that makes men gentle, sweet,
considerate, and affectionate towards all God's creatures, whether man
or beast. Morally, said the speaker, India is head and shoulders above
the United States or any other country on the globe. Missionaries would
do well to come there and drink of the pure waters, and see what a
beautiful influence upon a great community have the lives of the
multitude of holy men.

Then marriage condition was described; and the privileges extended to
women in ancient times when the system of co-education flourished. In
the records of the saints in India there is the unique figure of the
prophetess. In the Christian creed they are all prophets, while in India
the holy women occupy a conspicuous place in the holy books. The
householder has five objects for worship. One of them is learning and
teaching. Another is worship of dumb creatures. It is hard for Americans
to understand the last worship, and it is difficult for Europeans to
appreciate the sentiment. Other nations kill animals by wholesale and
kill one another; they exist in a sea of blood. A European said that the
reason why in India animals were not killed was because it was supposed
that they contained the spirits of ancestors. This reason was worthy of
a savage nation who are not many steps from the brute. The fact was that
the statement was made by a set of atheists in India who thus carped at
the Vedic idea of non-killing and transmigration of souls. It was never
a religious doctrine, it was an idea of a materialistic creed. The
worship of dumb animals was pictured in a vivid manner. The hospitable
spirit — the Indian golden rule, was illustrated by a story. A Brâhmin,
his wife, his son, and his son's wife had not tasted food for some time
on account of a famine. The head of the house went out and after a
search found a small quantity of barley. He brought this home and
divided it into four portions, and the small family was about to eat,
when a knock was heard at the door. It was a guest. The different
portions were set before him, and he departed with his hunger satisfied,
while the quartette who had entertained him perished. This story is told
in India to illustrate what is expected in the sacred name of
hospitality.

The speaker concluded in an eloquent manner. Throughout, his speech was
simple; but whenever he indulged in imagery, it was delightfully poetic,
showing that the Eastern brother has been a close and attentive observer
of the beauties of nature. His excessive spirituality is a quality which
makes itself felt with his auditors, for it manifests itself in the love
for animate and inanimate things and in the keen insight into the
mysterious workings of the divine law of harmony and kindly intentions.

</div>
