---
title: CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA

---
<div>

[←](hindus_and_christians.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_religion_of_love.htm)

  

## CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA

(*A lecture delivered at Detroit on March 11, 1894 and reported  
in the* Detroit Free Press)

"Vive Kananda spoke to a crowded audience at the Detroit Opera House
last night. He was given an extremely cordial reception and delivered
his most eloquent address here. He spoke for two hours and a half.

Hon. T. W. Palmer, in introducing the distinguished visitor, referred to
the old tale of the shield that was copper on one side and silver on the
other and the contest which ensued. If we look on both sides of a
question there would be less dispute. It is possible for all men to
agree. The matter of foreign missions has been dear to the religious
heart. Vive Kananda, from the Christian standpoint, said Mr. Palmer, was
a pagan. It would be pleasant to hear from a gentleman who spoke about
the copper side of the shield.

Vive Kananda was received with great applause." . . .

I do not know much about missionaries in Japan and China, but I am well
posted about India. The people of this country look upon India as a vast
waste, with many jungles and a few civilised Englishmen. India is half
as large as the United States, and there are three hundred million
people. Many stories are related, and I have become tired of denying
these. The first invaders of India, the Aryans, did not try to
exterminate the population of India as the Christians did when they went
into a new land, but the endeavour was made to elevate persons of
brutish habits. The Spaniards came to Ceylon with Christianity. The
Spaniards thought that their God commanded them to kill and murder and
to tear down heathen temples. The Buddhists had a tooth a foot long,
which belonged to their Prophet, and the Spaniards threw it into the
sea, killed a few thousand persons, and converted a few scores. The
Portuguese came to Western India. The Hindus have a belief in the
Trinity and had a temple dedicated to their sacred belief. The invaders
looked at the temple and said it was a creation of the devil; and so
they brought their cannon to bear upon the wonderful structure and
destroyed a portion of it. But the invaders were driven out of the
country by the enraged population. The early missionaries tried to get
hold of the land, and in their effort to secure a foothold by force,
they killed many people and converted a number. Some of them became
Christians to save their lives. Ninety-nine percent of the Christians
converted by the Portuguese sword were compelled to be so, and they
said, "We do not believe in Christianity, but we are forced to call
ourselves Christians." But Catholic Christianity soon relapsed.

The East India Company got possession of a part of India with the idea
of making hay while the sun shone. They kept the missionaries away. The
Hindus were the first to welcome the missionaries, not the Englishmen,
who were engaged in trade. I have great admiration for some of the first
missionaries of the later period, who were true servants of Jesus and
did not vilify the people or spread vile falsehoods about them. They
were gentle, kindly men. When Englishmen became masters of India, the
missionary enterprise began to become stagnant, a condition which
characterises the missionary efforts in India today. Dr. Long, an early
missionary, stood by the people. He translated a Hindu drama describing
the evils perpetuated in India by indigo-planters, and what was the
result? He was placed in jail by the English. Such missionaries were of
benefit to the country, but they have passed away. The Suez Canal opened
up a number of evils.

Now goes the missionary, a married man, who is hampered because he is
married. The missionary knows nothing about the people, he cannot speak
the language, so he invariably settles in the little white colony. He is
forced to do this because he is married. Were he not married, he could
go among the people and sleep on the ground if necessary. So he goes to
India to seek company for his wife and children. He stays among the
English-speaking people. The great heart of India is today absolutely
untouched by missionary effort. Most of the missionaries are
incompetent. I have not met a single missionary who understands
Sanskrit. How can a man absolutely ignorant of the people and their
traditions, get into sympathy with them? I do not mean any offense, but
Christians send men as missionaries, who are not persons of ability. It
is sad to see money spent to make converts when no real results of a
satisfactory nature are reached.

Those who are converted, are the few who make a sort of living by
hanging round the missionaries. The converts who are not kept in service
in India, cease to be converts. That is about the entire matter in a
nutshell. As to the way of converting, it is absolutely absurd. The
money the missionaries bring is accepted. The colleges founded by
missionaries are all right, so far as the education is concerned. But
with religion it is different. The Hindu is acute; he takes the bait but
avoids the hook! It is wonderful how tolerant the people are. A
missionary once said, "That is the worst of the whole business. People
who are self-complacent can never be converted."

As regards the lady missionaries, they go into certain houses, get four
shillings a month, teach them something of the Bible, and show them how
to knit. The girls of India will never be converted. Atheism and
skepticism at home is what is pushing the missionary into other lands.
When I came into this country I was surprised to meet so many liberal
men and women. But after the Parliament of Religions a great
Presbyterian paper came out and gave me the benefit of a seething
article. This the editor called enthusiasm. The missionaries do not and
cannot throw off nationality — they are not broad enough — and so they
accomplish nothing in the way of converting, although they may have a
nice sociable time among themselves. India requires help from Christ,
but not from the antichrist; these men are not Christlike. They do not
act like Christ; they are married and come over and settle down
comfortably and make a fair livelihood. Christ and his disciples would
accomplish much good in India, just as many of the Hindu saints do; but
these men are not of that sacred character. The Hindus would welcome the
Christ of the Christians gladly, because his life was holy and
beautiful; but they cannot and will not receive the narrow utterances of
the ignorant, hypocritical or self-deceiving men.

Men are different. If they were not, the mentality of the world would be
degraded. If there were not different religions, no religion would
survive. The Christian requires his religion; the Hindu needs his own
creed. All religions have struggled against one another for years. Those
which were founded on a book, still stand. Why could not the Christians
convert the Jews? Why could they not make the Persians Christians? Why
could they not convert Mohammedans? Why cannot any impression be made
upon China or Japan? Buddhism, the first missionary religion, numbers
double the number of converts of any other religion, and they did not
use the sword. The Mohammedans used the greatest violence. They number
the least of the three great missionary religions. The Mohammedans have
had their day. Every day you read of Christian nations acquiring land by
bloodshed. What missionaries preach against this? Why should the most
blood-thirsty nation exalt an alleged religion which is not the religion
of Christ? The Jews and the Arabs were the fathers of Christianity, and
how they have been persecuted by the Christians! The Christians have
been weighed in the balance in India and have been found wanting. I do
not mean to be unkind, but I want to show the Christians how they look
in others' eyes. The missionaries who preach the burning pit are
regarded with horror. The Mohammedans rolled wave after wave over India
waving the sword, and today where are they?

The furthest that all religions can see is the existence of a spiritual
entity. So no religion can teach beyond that point. In every religion
there is the essential truth and the non-essential casket in which this
jewel lies. Believing in the Jewish book or in the Hindu book is
non-essential. Circumstances change; the receptacle is different; but
the central truth remains. The essentials being the same, the educated
people of every community retain the essentials. If you ask a Christian
what his essentials are, he should reply, "The teachings of Lord Jesus."
Much of the rest is nonsense. But the nonsensical part is right; it
forms the receptacle. The shell of the oyster is not attractive, but the
pearl is within it. The Hindu will never attack the life of Jesus; he
reverences the Sermon on the Mount. But how many Christians know or have
heard of the teachings of the Hindu holy men? They remain in a fool's
paradise. Before a small fraction of the world was converted,
Christianity was divided into many creeds. That is the law of nature.
Why take a single instrument from the great religious orchestra of the
earth? Let the grand symphony go on. Be pure. Give up superstition and
see the wonderful harmony of nature. Superstition gets the better of
religion. All the religions are good, since the essentials are the same.
Each man should have the perfect exercise of his individuality, but
these individualities form a perfect whole. This marvelous condition is
already in existence. Each creed has something to add to the wonderful
structure.

I pity the Hindu who does not see the beauty in Jesus Christ's
character. I pity the Christian who does not reverence the Hindu Christ.
The more a man sees of himself, the less he sees of his neighbors. Those
that go about converting, who are very busy saving the souls of others,
in many instances forget their own souls. I was asked by a lady why the
women of India were not more elevated. It is in a great degree owing to
the barbarous invaders through different ages; it is partly due to the
people in India themselves. But our women are any day better than the
ladies of this country who are devotees of novels and balls. Where is
the spirituality one would expect in a country which is so boastful of
its civilisation? I have not found it. "Here" and "here-after" are words
to frighten children. It is all "here". To live and move in God — even
here, even in this body! All self should go out; all superstition should
be banished. Such men live in India. Where are such in this country?
Your preachers speak against "dreamers". The people of this country
would be better off if there were more "dreamers". If a man here
followed literally the instruction of his Lord, he would be called a
fanatic. There is a good deal of difference between dreaming and the
brag of the nineteenth century. The bees look for the flowers. Open the
lotus! The whole world is full of God and not of sin. Let us help each
other. Let us love each other. A beautiful prayer of the Buddhist is: I
bow down to all the saints; I bow down to all the prophets; I bow down
to all the holy men and women all over the world!

</div>
