---
title: JNANA AND KARMA

---
<div>

[←](the_religion_of_love.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_claims_of_vedanta.htm)

  

## JNANA AND KARMA

(*Notes of a lecture delivered in London, on November 23, 1895*)

The greatest force is derived from the power of thought. *The finer the
element, the more powerful it is*. The silent power of thought
influences people even at a distance, because mind is one as well as
many. The universe is a cobweb; minds are spiders.

The universe equals the phenomena of one Universal Being. He, seen
through our senses, is the universe. This is Maya. So the world is
illusion, that is, the imperfect vision of the Real, a semi-revelation,
even as the sun in the morning is a red ball. Thus all evils and
wickedness are but weakness, the i*mperfect vision of goodness*.

A straight line projected infinitely becomes a circle. The search for
good comes back to Self. I am the whole mystery, God. I am a body, the
lower self; and I am the Lord of the universe.

Why should a man be moral and pure? Because this strengthens his will.
Everything that strengthens the will by revealing the real nature is
moral. Everything that does the reverse is immoral. The standard varies
from country to country, from individual to individual. Man must recover
from his state of slavery to laws, to words, and so on. We have no
freedom of the will now, but we shall have when we are free.
Renunciation is this giving up of the world. Through the senses, anger
comes, and sorrow comes. As long as renunciation is not *there*, self
and the passion animating it are different. At last they become
identified, and the man is an animal at once. Become possessed with the
feeling of renunciation.

I once had a body, was born, struggled and died: What awful
hallucinations! To think that one was cramped in a body, weeping for
salvation!

But does renunciation demand that we all become ascetics? Who then is to
help others? Renunciation is not asceticism. Are all beggars Christ?
Poverty is not a synonym for holiness; often the reverse. Renunciation
is of the mind. How does it come? In a desert, when I was thirsty, I saw
a lake. It was in the midst of a beautiful landscape. There were trees
surrounding it, and their reflections could be seen in the water, upside
down. But the whole thing proved to be a mirage. Then I knew that every
day for a month I had seen this; and only that day, being thirsty, I had
learnt it to be unreal. Every day for a month I should see it again. But
I should never take it to be real. So, when we reach God, the idea of
the universe, the body and so on, will vanish. It will return
afterwards. But next time we shall know it to be unreal.

The history of the world is the history of persons like Buddha and
Jesus. The passionless and unattached do most for the world. Picture
Jesus in the slums. He sees beyond the misery, "You, my brethren, are
all divine." His work is calm. He removes causes. You will be able to
work for the good of the world when you know for a fact that this work
is all illusion. The more unconscious this work, the better, because it
is then the more superconscious. Our search is not for good or evil; but
happiness and good are nearer to truth than their opposites. A man ran a
thorn into his finger, and with another thorn took it out. The first
thorn is Evil. The second thorn is Good. The Self is that Peace which
passeth beyond both evil and good. The universe is melting down: man
draws nearer to God. For one moment he is real — God. He is
re-differentiated — a prophet. Before him, now, the world trembles. A
fool sleeps and wakes a fool-a man unconscious; and superconscious, he
returns with infinite power, purity, and love — the God-Man. This is the
use of the superconscious state.

Wisdom can be practised even on a battlefield. The Gitâ was preached so.
There are three states of mind: the active, the passive, and the serene.
The passive state is characterised by slow vibrations; the active by
quick vibrations, and the serene by the most intense vibrations of all.
Know that the soul is sitting in the chariot. The body is the chariot;
the outer senses are the horses; and the mind the reins; and the
intellect the charioteer. So man crosses the ocean of Maya. He goes
beyond. He reaches God. When a man is under the control of his senses,
he is of this world. When he has controlled the senses, he has
renounced.

Even forgiveness, if weak and passive, is not true: fight is better.
*Forgive* when you could bring legions of angels to the victory.
Krishna, the charioteer of Arjuna, hears him say, "Let us forgive our
enemies", and answers, "You speak the words of wise men, but you are not
a wise man, but a coward". As a lotus-leaf, living in the water yet
untouched by it, so should the soul be in the world. This is a
battlefield, fight your way out. Life in this world is an attempt to see
God. Make your life a manifestation of will strengthened by
renunciation.

We must learn to control all our brain-centres consciously. The first
step is the joy of living. Asceticism is fiendish. To laugh is better
than to pray. Sing. Get rid of misery. Do not for heaven's sake infect
others with it. Never think God sells a little happiness and a little
unhappiness. Surround yourself with flowers and pictures and incense.
The saints went to the mountain tops to enjoy nature.

The second step is purity.

The third is full training of the mind. Reason out what is true from
what is untrue. See that God alone is true. If for a moment you think
you are not God, great terror will seize you. As soon as you think "*I
am He*", great peace and joy will come to you. Control the senses. If a
man curses me, I should still see in him God, whom through my weakness I
see as a curser. The poor man to whom you do good is extending a
privilege to you. He allows you, through His mercy, to worship Him thus.

The history of the world is the history of a few men who had faith in
themselves. That faith calls out the divinity within. You can do
anything. You fail only when you do not strive sufficiently to manifest
infinite power. As soon as a man or a nation loses faith, death comes.

There is a divine within that cannot be overcome either by church dogmas
or by blackguardism. A handful of Greeks speak wherever there is
civilisation. Some mistakes there must always be. Do not grieve. Have
great insight. Do *not* think, "What is done is done. Oh, that 'twere
done better!" If man had not been God, humanity would by this time have
become insane, with its litanies and its penitence.

None will be left, none destroyed. All will in the end be made perfect.
Say, day and night, "Come up, my brothers! You are the infinite ocean of
purity! Be God! Manifest as God!"

What is civilisation? It is the feeling of the divine within. When you
find time, repeat these ideas to yourself and desire freedom. That is
all. Deny everything that is not God. Assert everything that is God.
Mentally assert this, day and night. So the veil grows thinner:

"I am neither man nor angel. I have no sex nor limit. I am knowledge
itself. I am He. I have neither anger nor hatred. I have neither pain
nor pleasure. Death or birth I never had. For I am Knowledge Absolute,
and Bliss Absolute. I am He, my soul, I am He!"

Find yourself bodiless. You never had a body. It was all superstition.
Give back the divine consciousness to all the poor, the downtrodden, the
oppressed, and the sick.

Apparently, every five hundred years or so, a wave of this thought comes
over the world. Little waves arise in many directions: but one swallows
up all the others and sweeps over society. That wave does this which has
most character at its back.

Confucius, Moses, and Pythagoras; Buddha, Christ, Mohammed; Luther,
Calvin, and the Sikhs; Theosophy, Spiritualism, and the like; all these
mean only the preaching of the Divine-in-Man.

Never say man is weak. Wisdom-Yoga is no better than the others. Love is
the ideal and requires no object. Love is God. So even through devotion
we reach the subjective God. I am He! How can one work, unless one loves
city, country, animals, the universe? Reason leads to the finding of
unity in variety. Let the atheist and the agnostic work for the social
good. So God comes.

But this you must guard against: Do not disturb the faith of any. For
you must know that religion is not in doctrines. Religion lies in being
and becoming, in realisation. All men are born idolaters. The lowest man
is an animal. The highest man is perfect. And between these two, all
have to think in sound and colour, in doctrine and ritual.

The test of having ceased to be an idolater is: "When you say 'I', does
the body come into your thought or not? If it does, then you are still a
worshipper of idols." Religion is not intellectual jargon at all, but
realisation. If you *think* about God, you are only a fool. The ignorant
man, by prayer and devotion, can reach beyond the philosopher. To know
God, no philosophy is necessary. Our duty is not to disturb the faith of
others. Religion is experience. Above all and in all, be sincere;
identification brings misery, because it brings desire. Thus the poor
man sees gold, and identifies himself with the need of gold. Be the
witness. *Learn never to react*.

</div>
