---
title: THE CLAIMS OF VEDANTA ON THE MODERN WORLD

---
<div>

[←](jnana_and_karma.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_laws_of_life_and_death.htm)

  

## THE CLAIMS OF VEDANTA ON THE MODERN WORLD

(*Report of a lecture delivered in Oakland on Sunday, February 25, 1900,
with  
editorial comments of the* Oakland Enquirer)

The announcement that Swami Vivekananda, a distinguished savant of the
East, would expound the philosophy of Vedanta in the Parliament of
Religions at the Unitarian Church last evening, attracted an immense
throng. The main auditorium and ante-rooms were packed, the annexed
auditorium of Wendte Hall was thrown open, and this was also filled to
overflowing, and it is estimated that fully 500 persons, who could not
obtain seats or standing room where they could hear conveniently, were
turned away.

The Swami created a marked impression. Frequently he received applause
during the lecture, and upon concluding, held a levee of enthusiastic
admirers. He said in part, under the subject of "The Claims of Vedanta
on the Modern World":

Vedanta demands the consideration of the modern world. The largest
number of the human race is under its influence. Again and again,
millions upon millions have swept down on its adherents in India,
crushing them with their great force, and yet the religion lives.

In all the nations of the world, can such a system be found? Others have
risen to come under its shadow. Born like mushrooms, today they are
alive and flourishing, and tomorrow they are gone. Is this not the
survival of the fittest?

It is a system not yet complete. It has been growing for thousands of
years and is still growing. So I can give you but an idea of all I would
say in one brief hour.

First, to tell you of the history of the rise of Vedanta. When it arose,
India had already perfected a religion. Its crystallisation had been
going on many years. Already there were elaborate ceremonies; already
there had been perfected a system of morals for the different stages of
life. But there came a rebellion against the mummeries and mockeries
that enter into many religions in time, and great men came forth to
proclaim through the Vedas the true religion. Hindus received their
religion from the revelation of these Vedas. They were told that the
Vedas were without beginning and without end. It may sound ludicrous to
this audience — how a book can be without beginning or end; but by the
Vedas no books are meant. They mean the accumulated treasury of
spiritual laws discovered by different persons in different times.

Before these men came, the popular ideas of a God ruling the universe,
and that man was immortal, were in existence. But there they stopped. It
was thought that nothing more could be known. Here came the daring of
the expounders of Vedanta. They knew that religion meant for children is
not good for thinking men; that there is something more to man and God.

The moral agnostic knows only the external dead nature. From that he
would form the law of the universe. He might as well cut off my nose and
claim to form an idea of my whole body, as argue thus. He must look
within. The stars that sweep through the heavens, even the universe is
but a drop in the bucket. Your agnostic sees not the greatest, and he is
frightened at the universe.

The world of spirit is greater than all — the God of the universe who
rules — our Father, our Mother. What is this heathen mummery we call the
world? There is misery everywhere. The child is born with a cry upon its
lips; it is its first utterance. This child becomes a man, and so well
used to misery that the pang of the heart is hidden by a smile on the
lips.

Where is the solution of this world? Those who look outside will never
find it; they must turn their eyes inward and find truth. Religion lives
inside.

One man preaches, if you chop your head off, you get salvation. But does
he get any one to follow him? Your own Jesus says, "Give all to the poor
and follow me." How many of you have done this? You have not followed
out this command, and yet Jesus was the great teacher of your religion.
Every one of you is practical in his own life, and you find this would
be impracticable.

But Vedanta offers you nothing that is impracticable. Every science must
have its own matter to work upon. Everyone needs certain conditions and
much of training and learning; but any Jack in the street can tell you
all about religion. You may want to follow religion and follow an
expert, but you may only care to converse with Jack, for he can talk it.

You must do with religion as with science, come in direct contact with
facts, and on that foundation build a marvellous structure.

To have a true religion you must have instruments. Belief is not in
question; of faith you can make nothing, for you can believe anything.

We know that in science as we increase the velocity, the mass decreases;
and as we increase the mass, the velocity decreases. Thus we have matter
and force. The matter, we do not know how, disappears into force, and
force into matter. Therefore there is something which is neither force
nor matter, as these two may not disappear into each other. This is what
we call mind — the universal mind.

Your body and my body are separate, you say. I am but a little whirlpool
in the universal ocean of mankind. A whirlpool, it is true, but a part
of the great ocean.

You stand by moving water where every particle is changing, and yet you
call it a stream. The water is changing, it is true, but the banks
remain the same. The mind is not changing, but the body — how quick its
growth! I was a baby, a boy, a man, and soon I will be an old man,
stooped and aged. The body is changing, and you say, is the mind not
changing also? When I was a child, I was thinking, I have become larger,
because my mind is a sea of impressions.

There is behind nature a universal mind. The spirit is simply a unit and
it is not matter. For man is a spirit. The question, "Where does the
soul go after death?" should be answered like the boy when he asked,
"Why does not the earth fall down?" The questions are alike, and their
solutions alike; for where could the soul go to?

To you who talk of immortality I would ask when you go home to endeavour
to imagine you are dead. Stand by and touch your dead body. You cannot,
for you cannot get out of yourself. The question is not concerning
immortality, but as to whether Jack will meet his Jenny after death.

The one great secret of religion is to know for yourself that you are a
spirit. Do not cry out, "I am a worm, I am nobody!" As the poet says, "I
am Existence, Knowledge, and Truth." No man can do any good in the world
by crying out, "I am one of its evils." The more perfect, the less
imperfections you see.

</div>
