---
title: THE PEOPLE OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](way_to_salvation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](i_am_that_i_am.htm)

  

## THE PEOPLE OF INDIA

(*Report of a lecture delivered in Oakland on Monday, March 19, 1900,
with  
editorial comments of the* Oakland Enquirer)

The lecture which the Swami Vivekananda gave Monday night in his new
course on "The People of India", was interesting, not only for what he
had to relate of the people of that country, but for the insight into
their mental attitude and prejudices which the speaker gave without
really meaning it. It is apparent that the Swami, educated and
intellectual man that he is, is no admirer of Western civilisation. He
has evidently been a good deal embittered by the talk about child
widows, the oppression of women, and other barbarisms alleged against
the people of India, and is somewhat inclined to resort to the *tu
quoque* in reply.

In commencing his talk, he gave his hearers an idea of the racial
characteristics of the people. He said that the bond of unity in India,
as in other countries of Asia, is not language or race, but religion. In
Europe the race makes the nation, but in Asia people of diverse origin
and different tongues become one nation if they have the same religion.
The people of Northern India are divided into four great classes, while
in Southern India the languages are so entirely different from those of
Northern India that there is no kinship whatever. The people of Northern
India belong to the great Aryan race, to which all of the people of
Europe, except the Basques in the Pyrennees, and the Finns, are supposed
to belong. The Southern India people belong to the same race as the
ancient Egyptians and the Semites. To illustrate the difficulties of
learning one another's languages in India, the Swami said that when he
had occasion to go into Southern India, he always talked with the native
people in English, unless they belonged to the select few who could
speak Sanskrit.

A good deal of the lecture was taken up in a discussion of the caste
system which the Swami characterised by saying that it had its bad side,
but that its benefits outweighed its disadvantages. In brief, this caste
system had grown by the practice of the son always following the
business of the father. In course of time the community came thus to be
divided into a series of classes, each held rigidly within its own
boundaries. But while this divided the people, it also united them,
because all the members of a caste were bound to help their fellows in
case of need. And as no man could rise out of his caste, the Hindus have
no such struggles for social or personal supremacy as embitter the
people of other countries.

The worst feature of the caste is that is suppresses competition, and
the checking of competition has really been the cause of the political
downfall of India and its conquest by foreign races.

Respecting the much-discussed subject of marriage, the Hindus are
socialistic and see nothing good in matches being made by a couple of
young people who might be attached to one another, without regard to the
welfare of the community, which is more important than that of any two
persons. "Because I love Jennie and Jennie loves me", said the Swami,
"is no reason why we should be married."

He denied that the condition of the child widows is as bad as has been
represented, saying that in India the position of widows in general is
one of a great deal of influence, because a large part of the property
in the country is held by widows. In fact, so enviable is the position
of widows that a woman or a man either might almost pray to be made a
widow.

The child widows, or women who have been betrothed to children who died
before marriage, might be pitied if a marriage were the only real object
in life, but, according to the Hindu way of thinking, marriage is rather
a duty than a privilege, and the denial of the right of child widows to
marry is no particular hardship.

</div>
