---
title: THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](the_worship_of_the_divine_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](../sayings_and_utterances.htm)

  

## THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION

(*Report of a lecture delivered in America*)

In France the "rights of man" was long a watchword of the race; in
America the rights of women still beseech the public ear; in India we
have concerned ourselves always with the rights of Gods.

The Vedanta includes all sects. We have a peculiar idea in India.
Suppose I had a child; I should not teach him any religion, but the
practice of concentrating his mind; and just one line of prayer — not
prayer in your sense, but this: "I meditate on Him who is the Creator of
the universe; may He enlighten my mind." Then, when old enough, he goes
about hearing the different philosophies and teachings, till he finds
that which seems the truth to him. He then becomes the Shishya or
disciple of the Guru (teacher) who is teaching this truth. He may choose
to worship Christ or Buddha or Mohammed: we recognise the rights of each
of these, and the right of all souls to their own Ishta or chosen way.
It is, therefore, quite possible for my son to be a Buddhist, my wife to
be a Christian, and myself a Mohammedan at one and the same time with
absolute freedom from friction.

We are all glad to remember that all roads lead to God; and that the
reformation of the world does not depend upon all seeing God through our
eyes. Our fundamental idea is that your doctrine cannot be mine, nor
mine yours. I am my own sect. It is true that we have created a system
of religion in India which we believe to be the only rational religious
system extant; but our belief in its rationality rests upon its
all-inclusion of the searchers after God; its absolute charity towards
all forms of worship, and its eternal receptivity of those ideas
trending towards the evolution of God in the universe. We admit the
imperfection of our system, because the reality must be beyond all
system; and in this admission lies the portent and promise of an eternal
growth. Sects, ceremonies, and books, so far as they are the means of a
man's realising his own nature, are all right; when he has realised
that, he gives up everything. "I reject the Vedas!" is the last word of
the Vedanta philosophy. Ritual, hymns, and scriptures, through which he
has travelled to freedom, vanish for him. "So'ham, So'ham" — I am He, I
am He — bursts from his lips, and to say "Thou" to God is blasphemy, for
he is "one with the Father".

Personally, I take as much of the Vedas as agree with reason. Parts of
the Vedas are apparently contradictory. They are not considered as
inspired in the Western sense of the word, but as the sum total of the
knowledge of God, omniscience, which we possess. But to say that only
those books which we call the Vedas contain this knowledge is mere
sophistry. We know it is shared in varying degrees by the scriptures of
all sects. Manu says, that part only of the Vedas which agrees with
reason is Vedas; and many of our philosophers have taken this view. Of
all the scriptures of the world, it is the Vedas alone which declare
that the study of the Vedas is secondary.

The real study is that "by which we realise the Unchangeable", and that
is neither by reading, nor believing, nor reasoning, but by
superconscious perception and Samâdhi. When a man has reached that
perfect state, he is of the same nature as the Personal God: "I and my
Father are one." He knows himself one with Brahman, the Absolute, and
projects himself as does the Personal God. The Personal God is the
Absolute looked at through the haze of Mâyâ — ignorance.

When we approach Him with the five senses, we can only see Him as the
Personal God. The idea is that the Self cannot be objectified. How can
the knower know himself? But he can cast a shadow, as it were, and the
highest form of that shadow, that attempt of objectifying one's Self is
the Personal God. The Self is the eternal subject, and we are eternally
struggling to objectify that Self, and out of that struggle has come
this phenomenon of the universe: that which we call matter. But these
are weak attempts, and the highest objectification of the Self, possible
to us, is the Personal God.

"An honest God's the noblest work of man", said one of your Western
thinkers. God is as man is. No man can see God but through these human
manifestations. Talk as you may, try as you may, you cannot think of God
but as a man; and as you are, He is. An ignorant man was asked to make
an image of the God Shiva; and after many days of hard struggle he
succeeded only in manufacturing the image of a monkey! So, when we try
to think of God as He is in His absolute perfection, we meet with
miserable failure, because we are limited and bound by our present
constitution to see God as man. If the buffaloes desire to worship God,
they, in keeping with their own nature, will see Him as a huge buffalo;
if a fish wishes to worship God, its concept of Him would inevitably be
a big fish; and man must think of Him as man. Suppose man, the buffalo,
and the fish represent so many different vessels; that these vessels all
go to the sea of God to be filled, each according to its shape and
capacity. In man the water takes the shape of man; in the buffalo the
shape of the buffalo; and in the fish the shape of the fish; but in each
of these vessels is the same water of the sea of God.

Two kinds of mind do not worship God as man — the human brute who has no
religion, and the Paramahamsa who has transcended the limits of his own
human nature. To him all nature has become his own Self; he alone can
worship God as He is. The human brute does not worship because of his
ignorance, and the Jivanmuktas (free souls) do not worship because they
have realised God in themselves. "So'ham, So'ham" — I am He, I am He —
they say; and how shall they worship themselves?

I will tell you a little story. There was once a baby lion left by its
dying mother among some sheep. The sheep fed it and gave it shelter. The
lion grew apace and said "Ba-a-a" when the sheep said "Ba-a-a". One day
another lion came by. "What do you do here?" said the second lion in
astonishment: for he heard the sheep-lion bleating with the rest.
"Ba-a-a," said the other. "I am a little sheep, I am a little sheep, I
am frightened." "Nonsense!" roared the first lion, "come with me; I will
show you." And he took him to the side of a smooth stream and showed him
that which was reflected therein. "You are a lion; look at me, look at
the sheep, look at yourself." And the sheep-lion looked, and then he
said, "Ba-a-a, I do not look like the sheep — it is true, I am a lion!"
and with that he roared a roar that shook the hills to their depths.

That is it. We are lions in sheep's clothing of habit, we are hypnotised
into weakness by our surroundings. And the province of Vedanta is the
self-dehypnotisation. The goal to be reached is freedom. I disagree with
the idea that freedom is obedience to the laws of nature. I do not
understand what that means. According to the history of human progress,
it is disobedience to nature that has constituted that progress. It may
be said that the conquest of lower laws was through the higher, but even
there the conquering mind was still seeking freedom; as soon as it found
the struggle was through law, it wished to conquer that also. So the
ideal is always freedom. The trees never disobey law. I never saw a cow
steal. An oyster never told a lie. Yet these are not greater than man.

Obedience to law, in the last issue, would make of us simply matter —
either in society, or in politics, or religion. This life is a
tremendous assertion of freedom; excess of laws means death. No nation
possesses so many laws as the Hindus, and the result is the national
death. But the Hindus had one peculiar idea — they never made any
doctrines or dogmas in religion; and the latter has had the greatest
growth. Therein are we practical — wherein you are impractical — in our
religion.

A few men come together in America and say, "We will have a stock
company"; in five minutes it is done. In India twenty men may discuss a
stock company for as many weeks, and it may not be formed; but if one
believes that by holding up his hands in air for forty years he will
attain wisdom, it will be done! So we are practical in ours, you in your
way.

But the way of all ways to realisation is love. When one loves the Lord,
the whole universe becomes dear to one, because it is all His.
"Everything is His, and He is my Lover; I love Him", says the Bhakta. In
this way everything becomes sacred to the Bhakta, because all things are
His. How, then, may we hurt any one? How, then, may we not love another?
With the love of God will come, as its effect, the love of every one in
the long run. The nearer we approach God, the more do we begin to see
that all things abide in Him, our heart will become a perennial fountain
of love. Man is transformed in the presence of this Light of Love and
realises at last the beautiful and inspiring truth that Love, Lover, and
the Beloved are really one.

</div>
